Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Summary   This  report
summarizes recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) concerning the use of certain
 immunizing
agents in health-care workers (HCWs) in the United States. It was
 prepared
in consultation with the Hospital Infection Control Practices
 Advisory
Committee (HICPAC) and is consistent with current HICPAC guidelines
 for
infection control in health-care personnel. These recommendations
 can
assist hospital administrators, infection control practitioners,
 employee
health physicians, and HCWs in optimizing infection prevention and
 control
programs. Background information for each vaccine-preventable
 disease and
specific recommendations for use of each vaccine are presented. The
diseases are grouped into three categories: a) those for which
 active
immunization is strongly recommended because of special risks for
 HCWs; b)
those for which immunoprophylaxis is or may be indicated in certain
circumstances; and c) those for which protection of all adults is
recommended. This report reflects current ACIP recommendations at
 the time
of publication. ACIP statements on individual vaccines and disease
 updates
in MMWR should be consulted for more details regarding the
 epidemiology of
the diseases, immunization schedules, vaccine doses, and the safety
 and
efficacy  of  the  vaccines.   INTRODUCTION   Because  of  their  contact  with  patients  or
infective material
 from
patients, many health-care workers (HCWs)(e.g., physicians, nurses,
emergency medical personnel, dental professionals and students,
 medical and
nursing students, laboratory technicians, hospital volunteers, and
administrative staff) are at risk for exposure to and possible
 transmission
of vaccine-preventable diseases. Maintenance of immunity is
 therefore an
essential part of prevention and infection control programs for
 HCWs.
Optimal use of immunizing agents safeguards the health of workers
 and
protects patients from becoming infected through exposure to
 infected
workers (Table_1) (1-15). Consistent immunization programs
 could
substantially reduce both the number of susceptible HCWs in
 hospitals and
health departments and the attendant risks for transmission of
vaccine-preventable diseases to other workers and patients (16). In
addition to HCWs in hospitals and health departments, these
 recommendations
apply to those in private physicians' offices, nursing homes,
 schools, and
laboratories,  and  to  first  responders.   Any  medical  facility  or  health  department  that
provides direct
 patient
care is encouraged to formulate a comprehensive immunization policy
 for all
HCWs. The American Hospital Association has endorsed the concept of
immunization programs for both hospital personnel and patients
 (17). The
following recommendations concerning vaccines of importance to HCWs
 should
be considered during policy development (Table_2).  BACKGROUND  Diseases for Which
Immunization  Is  Strongly  Recommended   On  the  basis  of  documented  nosocomial
transmission, HCWs are
 considered
to be at significant risk for acquiring or transmitting hepatitis
 B,
influenza, measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella. All of these
 diseases
are  vaccine-preventable.   Hepatitis  B   Hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  infection  is  the  major
infectious
 hazard for
health-care personnel. During 1993, an estimated 1,450 workers
 became
infected through exposure to blood and serum-derived body fluids, a
 90%
decrease from the number estimated to have been thus infected
 during 1985
(18-20). Data indicate that 5%-10% of HBV-infected workers become
chronically infected. Persons with chronic HBV infection are at
 risk for
chronic liver disease (i.e., chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis,
 and
primary hepatocellular carcinoma) and are potentially infectious
 throughout
their lifetimes. An estimated 100-200 health-care personnel have
 died
annually during the past decade because of the chronic consequences
 of HBV
infection  (CDC,  unpublished  data).   The  risk  for  acquiring  HBV  infection  from
occupational
 exposures is
dependent on the frequency of percutaneous and permucosal exposures
 to
blood or body fluids containing blood (21-25). Depending on the
 tasks he or
she performs, any health-care or public safety worker may be at
 high risk
for HBV exposure. Workers performing tasks involving exposure to
 blood or
blood-contaminated body fluids should be vaccinated. For public
 safety
workers whose exposure to blood is infrequent, timely postexposure
prophylaxis may be considered, rather than routine preexposure
 vaccination.  In 1987, the Departments of Labor and Health and Human Services
 issued
a Joint Advisory Notice regarding protection of employees against
 workplace
exposure to HBV and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and began
 the
process of rulemaking to regulate such exposures (26). The Federal
 Standard
issued in December, 1991 under the Occupational Safety and Health
 Act
mandates that hepatitis B vaccine be made available at the
 employer's
expense to all health-care personnel who are occupationally exposed
 to
blood or other potentially infectious materials (27). Occupational
 exposure
is defined as "...reasonably anticipated skin, eye, mucous
 membrane, or
parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious
 materials
that may result from the performance of an employee's duties (27)."
 The
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) follows
 current ACIP
recommendations for its immunization practices requirements (e.g.,
preexposure and postexposure antibody testing). These regulations
 have
accelerated and broadened the use of hepatitis B vaccine in HCWs
 and have
ensured  maximal  efforts  to  prevent  this  occupational  disease  (23).   Prevaccination
serologic screening for prior infection is not
 indicated
for persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk.
 Postvaccination
testing for antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs)
 response is
indicated for HCWs who have blood or patient contact and are at
 ongoing
risk for injuries with sharp instruments or needlesticks (e.g.,
 physicians,
nurses, dentists, phlebotomists, medical technicians and students
 of these
professions). Knowledge of antibody response aids in determining
appropriate  postexposure  prophylaxis.   Vaccine-induced  antibodies  to  HBV  decline
gradually over time,
 and less
than or equal to 60% of persons who initially respond to
 vaccination will
lose detectable antibodies over 12 years (28; CDC, unpublished
 data).
Studies among adults have demonstrated that, despite declining
 serum levels
of antibody, vaccine-induced immunity continues to prevent clinical
 disease
or detectable viremic HBV infection (29). Therefore, booster doses
 are not
considered necessary (1). Periodic serologic testing to monitor
 antibody
concentrations after completion of the three-dose series is not
recommended. The possible need for booster doses will be assessed
 as
additional data become available.  Asymptomatic HBV infections have been detected in
vaccinated
 persons by
means of serologic testing for antibody to hepatitis B core antigen
(anti-HBc) (1). However, these infections also provide lasting
 immunity and
are not associated with HBV-related chronic liver disease.  Influenza  During community
influenza outbreaks, admitting patients
 infected with
influenza to hospitals has led to nosocomial transmission of the
 disease
(30,31), including transmission from staff to patients (32).
 Transmission
of influenza among medical staff causes absenteeism and
 considerable
disruption of health care (33-36; CDC, unpublished data). In
 addition,
influenza outbreaks have caused morbidity and mortality in nursing
 homes
(36-41). In a recent study of long-term care facilities with
 uniformly high
patient influenza vaccination levels, patients in facilities in
 which
greater than 60% of the staff had been vaccinated against influenza
experienced less influenza-related mortality and illness, compared
 with
patients  in  facilities  with  no  influenza-vaccinated  staff  (42).   Measles,  Mumps,  and
Rubella  Measles. Nosocomial measles transmission has been documented in
 the
offices of private physicians, in emergency rooms, and on hospital
 wards
(43-49). Although only 3.5% of all cases of measles reported during
 1985-
1989 occurred in medical settings, the risk for measles infection
 in
medical personnel is estimated to be thirteenfold that for the
 general
population (45,49-52). During 1990-1991, 1,788 of 37,429 (4.8%)
 measles
cases were reported to have been acquired in medical settings. Of
 these,
668 (37.4%) occurred among HCWs, 561 (84%) of whom were
 unvaccinated; 187
(28%) of these HCWs were hospitalized with measles and three died
 (CDC,
unpublished data). Of the 3,659 measles cases reported during
 1992-1995,
the setting of transmission was known for 2,765; 385 (13.9%) of
 these cases
occurred  in  medical  settings  (CDC,  unpublished  data).   Although  birth  before  1957  is
generally considered acceptable
 evidence
of measles immunity, serologic studies of hospital workers indicate
 that
5%-9% of those born before 1957 are not immune to measles (53,54).
 During
1985-1992, 27% of all measles cases among HCWs occurred in persons
 born
before 1957 (CDC, unpublished data).  Mumps. In recent years, a substantial proportion
of reported
 mumps has
occurred among unvaccinated adolescents and young adults on college
campuses and in the workplace (55-58). Outbreaks of mumps in highly
vaccinated populations have been attributed to primary vaccine
 failure
(59,60). During recent years, the overall incidence of mumps has
 fluctuated
only minimally but an increasing proportion of cases has been
 reported in
persons aged greater than or equal to 15 years (61). Mumps
 transmission in
medical settings has been reported nationwide (62, CDC, unpublished
 data).
Programs to ensure that medical personnel are immune to mumps are
 prudent
and are easily linked with measles and rubella control programs
 (5).  Rubella. Nosocomial rubella outbreaks involving both HCWs and
 patients
have been reported (63). Although vaccination has decreased the
 overall
risk for rubella transmission in all age groups in the United
 States by
greater than or equal to 95%, the potential for transmission in
 hospital
and similar settings persists because 10%-15% of young adults are
 still
susceptible (6,64-67). In an ongoing study of rubella vaccination
 in a
health maintenance organization, 7,890 of 92,070 (8.6%) women aged
 greater
than or equal to 29 years were susceptible to rubella (CDC,
 unpublished
data). Although not as infectious as measles, rubella can be
 transmitted
effectively by both males and females. Transmission can occur
 whenever many
susceptible persons congregate in one place. Aggressive rubella
 vaccination
of susceptible men and women with trivalent measles-mumps-rubella
 (MMR)
vaccine can eliminate rubella (as well as measles) transmission
 (68).  Persons born before 1957 generally are considered to be immune
 to
rubella. However, findings of seroepidemiologic studies indicate
 that about
6% of HCWs (including persons born in 1957 or earlier) do not have
detectable  rubella  antibody  (CDC,  unpublished  data).   Varicella   Nosocomial
transmission of varicella zoster virus (VZV) is well
recognized (69-80). Sources for nosocomial exposure of patients and
 staff
have included patients, hospital staff, and visitors (e.g., the
 children of
hospital employees) who are infected with either varicella or
 zoster. In
hospitals, airborne transmission of VZV from persons who had
 varicella or
zoster to susceptible persons who had no direct contact with the
 index
case-patient has occurred (81-85). Although all susceptible
 hospitalized
adults are at risk for severe varicella disease and complications,
 certain
patients are at increased risk: pregnant women, premature infants
 born to
susceptible mothers, infants born at less than 28 weeks' gestation
 or who
weigh less than or equal to 1000 grams regardless of maternal
 immune
status, and immunocompromised persons of all ages (including
 persons who
are undergoing immunosuppressive therapy, have malignant disease,
 or are
immunodeficient).  Varicella Control Strategies  Strategies for managing clusters of VZV
infections in hospitals
 include
(16,86-94):  
    isolating patients who have varicella and other susceptible
    patients who are exposed to VZV;  
    controlling air flow;  
    using rapid serologic testing to determine susceptibility;  
    furloughing exposed susceptible personnel or screening
 these
    persons daily for skin lesions, fever, and systemic
 symptoms; and  
    temporarily reassigning varicella-susceptible personnel to
    locations  remote  from  patient-care  areas.   Appropriate  isolation  of  hospitalized
patients who have confirmed
 or
suspected VZV infection can reduce the risk for transmission to
 personnel
(95).  Identification of the few persons who are susceptible to
 varicella when
they begin employment that involves patient contact is recommended.
 Only
personnel who are immune to varicella should care for patients who
 have
confirmed or suspected varicella or zoster.  A reliable history of chickenpox is a valid
measure of VZV
 immunity.
Serologic tests have been used to assess the accuracy of reported
 histories
of chickenpox (76,80,93,95-97). Among adults, 97% to 99% of persons
 with a
positive history of varicella are seropositive. In addition, the
 majority
of adults with negative or uncertain histories are seropositive
 (range:
71%-93%). Persons who do not have a history of varicella or whose
 history
is uncertain can be considered susceptible, or tested serologically
 to
determine their immune status. In health-care institutions,
 serologic
screening of personnel who have a negative or uncertain history of
varicella is likely to be cost effective (8).  If susceptible HCWs are exposed to varicella,
they are
 potentially
infective 10-21 days after exposure. They must often be furloughed
 during
this period, usually at substantial cost. Persons in whom varicella
develops are infective until all lesions dry and crust
 (16,35,96-98) (see
Other Considerations in Vaccination of Health-Care Workers -- Work
Restrictions for Susceptible Workers After Exposure).  Administration of varicella zoster
immune globulin (VZIG) after
exposure can be costly. VZIG does not necessarily prevent
 varicella, and
may prolong the incubation period by a week or more, thus extending
 the
time during which personnel should not work.  Breakthrough Infection and Transmission
of Vaccine Virus to
 Contacts  Varicella virus vaccine protects approximately 70%-90% of
 recipients
against infection and 95% of recipients against severe disease for
 at least
7-10 years after vaccination. Significant protection is
 long-lasting.
Breakthrough infections (i.e., cases of varicella) have occurred
 among
vaccinees after exposure to natural varicella virus. Data from all
 trials
in which vaccinees of all ages were actively followed for up to 9
 years
indicated that varicella developed in 1%-4.4% of vaccinees per
 year,
depending on vaccine lot and time interval since vaccination (Merck
 and
Company, Inc., unpublished data). Unvaccinated persons who contract
varicella generally are febrile and have several hundred vesicular
 lesions.
Among vaccinees who developed varicella, in contrast, the median
 number of
skin lesions was less than 50 and lesions were less apt to be
 vesicular.
Most vaccinated persons who contracted varicella were afebrile, and
 the
duration of illness was shorter (Merck and Company, Inc.,
 unpublished data;
99,100).  The rate of transmission of disease from vaccinees who contract
varicella is low for vaccinated children, but has not been studied
 in
adults. Ten different trials conducted during 1981-1989 involved
 2,141
vaccinated children. Breakthrough infections occurred in 78
 children during
the 1-8 year follow-up period of active surveillance, resulting in
secondary cases in 11 of 90 (12.2%) vaccinated siblings. Among both
 index
and secondary case-patients, illness was mild. Transmission to a
susceptible mother from a vaccinated child in whom breakthrough
 disease
occurred also has been reported (Merck and Company, Inc.,
 unpublished data;
101).  Estimates of vaccine efficacy and persistence of antibody in
 vaccinees
are based on research conducted before widespread use of varicella
 vaccine
began to influence the prevalence of natural VZV infection. Thus,
 the
extent to which boosting from exposure to natural virus increases
 the
protection provided by vaccination remains unclear. Whether
 longer-term
immunity may wane as the circulation of natural VZV decreases also
 is
unknown.  Risk for transmission of vaccine virus was assessed in placebo
recipients who were siblings of vaccinated children and among
 healthy
siblings of vaccinated leukemic children (102,103). The findings of
 these
studies indicate that healthy vaccinated persons have a minimal
 risk
(estimated to be less than 1%) for transmitting vaccine virus to
 their
contacts. This risk may be increased in vaccinees in whom a
 varicella-like
rash develops after vaccination. Tertiary transmission of vaccine
 virus to
a second healthy sibling of a vaccinated leukemic child also has
 occurred
(103).  Several options for managing vaccinated HCWs who may be exposed
 to
varicella are available. Routine serologic testing for varicella
 immunity
after administration of two doses of vaccine is not considered
 necessary
because 99% of persons become seropositive after the second dose.
Seroconversion, however, does not always result in full protection
 against
disease. Institutional guidelines are needed for management of
 exposed
vaccinees who do not have detectable antibody and for those who
 develop
clinical varicella. A potentially effective strategy to identify
 persons
who remain at risk for varicella is to test vaccinated persons for
serologic evidence of immunity immediately after they are exposed
 to VZV.
Prompt, sensitive, and specific serologic results can be obtained
 at
reasonable cost with a commercially available latex agglutination
 (LA)
test. Many other methods also have been used to detect antibody to
 VZV (8).
The LA test, which uses latex particles coated with VZV
 glycoprotein
antigens, can be completed in 15 minutes (104,105). Persons with
 detectable
antibody are unlikely to become infected with varicella. Persons
 who do not
have detectable antibody can be retested in 5-6 days. If an
 anamnestic
response is present, these persons are unlikely to contract the
 disease.
HCWs who do not have antibody when retested may be furloughed.
Alternatively, the clinical status of these persons may be
 monitored daily
and they can be furloughed at the onset of manifestations of
 varicella.  More information is needed concerning risk for transmission of
 vaccine
virus from vaccinees with and without varicella-like rash after
vaccination. The risk appears to be minimal, and the benefits of
vaccinating susceptible HCWs outweigh this potential risk. As a
 safeguard,
institutions may wish to consider precautions for personnel in whom
 a rash
develops after vaccination and for other vaccinated personnel who
 will have
contact with susceptible persons at high risk for serious
 complications.  Vaccination should be considered for unvaccinated HCWs who lack
documented immunity if they are exposed to varicella. However,
 because the
effectiveness of postexposure vaccination is unknown, persons
 vaccinated
after an exposure should be managed in the manner recommended for
unvaccinated  persons.   Tuberculosis  and  Bacille-Calmette-Guerin  Vaccination   In  the
United States, Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine has
 not
been recommended for general use because the population risk for
 infection
with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) is low and the protective
 efficacy of
BCG vaccine uncertain. The immune response to BCG vaccine also
 interferes
with use of the tuberculin skin test to detect M. tuberculosis
 infection
(7). TB prevention and control efforts are focused on interrupting
transmission from patients who have active infectious TB, skin
 testing
those at high risk for TB, and administering preventive therapy
 when
appropriate. However, in certain situations, BCG vaccination may
 contribute
to the prevention and control of TB when other strategies are
 inadequate.  Control of TB  The fundamental strategies for the prevention and control
of TB
include:  
    Early detection and effective treatment of patients with
 active
    communicable TB (106).  
    Preventive therapy for infected persons. Identifying and
 treating
    persons who are infected with M. tuberculosis can prevent
 the
    progression of latent infection to active infectious
 disease (107).  
    Prevention of institutional transmission. The transmission
 of TB is
    a recognized risk in health-care settings and is of
 particular
    concern in settings where HIV-infected persons work,
 volunteer,
    visit, or receive care (108). Effective TB
 infection-control
    programs should be implemented in health-care facilities
 and other
    institutional settings, (e.g., shelters for homeless
 persons and
    correctional  facilities)  (16,109,110).   Role  of  BCG  Vaccination  in  Prevention  of  TB
Among HCWs  In a few geographic areas of the United States, increased risks
 for TB
transmission in health-care facilities (compared with risks
 observed in
health-care facilities in other parts of the United States) occur
 together
with an elevated prevalence among TB patients of M. tuberculosis
 strains
that are resistant to both isoniazid and rifampin (111-116). Even
 in such
situations, comprehensive application of infection control
 practices should
be the primary strategy used to protect HCWs and others in the
 facility
from infection with M. tuberculosis. BCG vaccination of HCWs should
 not be
used as a primary TB control strategy because a) the protective
 efficacy of
the vaccine in HCWs is uncertain; b) even if BCG vaccination is
 effective
for a particular HCW, other persons in the health-care facility
 (e.g.,
patients, visitors, and other HCWs) are not protected against
 possible
exposure to and infection with drug-resistant strains of M.
 tuberculosis;
and c) BCG vaccination may complicate preventive therapy because of
difficulties in distinguishing tuberculin skin test responses
 caused by
infection with M. tuberculosis from those caused by the immune
 response to
vaccination.  Hepatitis C and Other Parenterally Transmitted Non-A, Non-B
 Hepatitis  Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the etiologic agent in most cases of
parenterally transmitted non-A, non-B hepatitis in the United
 States
(117,118). CDC estimates that the annual number of newly acquired
 HCV
infections has ranged from 180,000 in 1984 to 28,000 in 1995. Of
 these, an
estimated 2%-4% occurred among health-care personnel who were
occupationally exposed to blood. At least 85% of persons who
 contract HCV
infection become chronically infected, and chronic hepatitis
 develops in an
average of 70% of all HCV-infected persons (117-119). Up to 10% of
parenterally transmitted non-A, non-B hepatitis may be caused by
 other
bloodborne viral agents not yet characterized (non-ABCDE hepatitis)
(117,120).  Serologic enzyme immunoassays (EIA) licensed for the detection
 of
antibody to HCV (anti-HCV) have evolved since their introduction in
 1990
and a third version is now available which detects anti-HCV in
 greater than
or equal to 95% of patients with HCV infection. Interpretation of
 EIA
results is limited by several factors. These assays do not detect
 anti-HCV
in all infected persons and do not distinguish among acute,
 chronic, or
resolved infection. In 80% to 90% of HCV-infected persons,
 seroconversion
occurs an average of 10-12 weeks after exposure to HCV. These
 screening
assays also yield a high proportion (up to 50%) of falsely positive
 results
when they are used in populations with a low prevalence of HCV
 infection
(118,121). Although no true confirmatory test has been developed,
supplemental tests for specificity are available (such as the
 licensed
Recombinant Immunoblot Assay {RIBATM}), and should always be used
 to verify
repeatedly  reactive  results  obtained  with  screening  assays.   The  diagnosis  of  HCV
infection also is possible by detecting
 HCV RNA
with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques. Although PCR
 assays for
HCV RNA are available from several commercial laboratories on a
research-use basis, results vary considerably between laboratories.
 In a
recent study in which a reference panel containing known HCV
 RNA-positive
and -negative sera was provided to 86 laboratories worldwide (122),
 only
50% were considered to have performed adequately (i.e., by failing
 to
detect one weak positive sample), and only 16% reported faultless
 results.
Both false-positive and false-negative results can occur from
 improper
collection, handling, and storage of the test samples. In addition,
 because
HCV RNA may be detectable only intermittently during the course of
infection, a single negative PCR test result should not be regarded
 as
conclusive. Tests also have been developed to quantitate HCV RNA in
 serum;
however, the applicability of these tests in the clinical setting
 has not
been determined.  Most HCV transmission is associated with direct percutaneous
 exposure
to blood, and HCWs are at occupational risk for acquiring this
 viral
infection (123-131). The prevalence of anti-HCV among
 hospital-based HCWs
and surgeons is about 1%(125-128) and 2% among oral surgeons
 (129,130). In
follow-up studies of HCWs who sustained percutaneous exposures to
 blood
from anti-HCV positive patients through unintentional needlesticks
 or
sharps injuries, the average incidence of anti-HCV seroconversion
 was 1.8%
(range: 0%-7%) (132-137). In the only study that used PCR to
 measure HCV
infection by detecting HCV RNA, the incidence of postinjury
 infection was
10% (136). Although these follow-up studies have not documented
transmission associated with mucous membrane or nonintact skin
 exposures,
one case report describes the transmission of HCV from a blood
 splash to
the conjunctiva (138).  Several studies have examined the effectiveness of prophylaxis
 with
immune globulins (IGs) in preventing posttransfusion non-A, non-B
 hepatitis
(139-141). The findings of these studies are difficult to compare
 and
interpret, because of lack of uniformity in diagnostic criteria,
 mixed
sources of donors (volunteer and commercial), and differing study
 designs
(some studies lacked blinding and placebo controls). In some of
 these
studies, IGs appeared to reduce the rate of clinical disease but
 not
overall infection rates. In one study, data indicated that chronic
hepatitis was less likely to develop in patients who received IG
 (139).
None of these data have been reanalyzed since anti-HCV testing
 became
available. In only one study was the first dose of IG administered
 after,
rather than before, the exposure; the value of IG for postexposure
prophylaxis is thus difficult to assess. The heterogeneous nature
 of HCV
and its ability to undergo rapid mutation, however, appear to
 prevent
development of an effective neutralizing immune response (142),
 suggesting
that postexposure prophylaxis using IG is likely to be ineffective.
Furthermore, IG is now manufactured from plasma that has been
 screened for
anti-HCV. In an experimental study in which IG manufactured from
 anti-HCV
negative plasma was administered to chimpanzees one hour after
 exposure to
HCV, the IG did not prevent infection or disease (143).  The prevention of HCV infection
with antiviral agents (e.g.,
 alpha
interferon) has not been studied. Although alpha interferon therapy
 is safe
and effective for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C (144), the
mechanisms of the effect are poorly understood. Interferon may be
 effective
only in the presence of an established infection (145). Interferon
 must be
administered by injection and may cause side effects. Based on
 these
considerations, antiviral agents are not recommended for
 postexposure
prophylaxis of HCV infection.  In the absence of effective prophylaxis, persons who have
been
 exposed
to HCV may benefit from knowing their infection status so they can
 seek
evaluation for chronic liver disease and treatment. Sustained
 response
rates to alpha interferon therapy generally are low (10%-20% in the
 United
States). The occurrence of mild to moderate side effects in most
 patients
has required discontinuation of therapy in up to 15% of patients.
 No
clinical, demographic, serum biochemical, serologic, or histologic
 features
have been identified that reliably predict which patients will
 sustain a
long-term remission in response to alpha interferon therapy.  Several studies indicate
that interferon treatment begun early
 in the
course of HCV infection is associated with an increased rate of
 resolved
infection. Onset of HCV infection among HCWs after exposure could
 be
detected earlier by using PCR to detect HCV RNA than by using EIA
 to
measure anti-HCV. However, PCR is not a licensed assay and its
 accuracy is
highly variable. In addition, no data are available which indicate
 that
treatment begun early in the course of chronic HCV infection is
 less
effective than treatment begun during the acute phase of infection.
Furthermore, alpha interferon is approved for the treatment of
 chronic
hepatitis C only.  IG or antiviral agents are not recommended for postexposure
 prophylaxis
of hepatitis C. No vaccine against hepatitis C is available.
 Health-care
institutions should consider implementing policies and procedures
 to
monitor HCWs for HCV infection after percutaneous or permucosal
 exposures
to blood (146). At a minimum, such policies should include:  
    For the source, baseline serologic testing for anti-HCV;  
    For the person exposed to an anti-HCV positive source,
 baseline and
    follow-up (e.g., 6 months) serologic testing for anti-HCV
 and
    alanine aminotransferase activity;  
    Confirmation by supplemental anti-HCV testing of all
 anti-HCV
    results reported as repeatedly reactive by EIA;  
    Education of HCWs about the risk for and prevention of
 occupational
    transmission of all blood borne pathogens, including
 hepatitis C,
    using up-to-date and accurate information.  Other Diseases for Which Immunization
of Health-Care Workers Is
or May Be Indicated  Diseases are included in this section for one of the following
 reasons:  
    Nosocomial transmission occurs, but HCWs are not at
 increased risk
    as a result of occupational exposure (i.e., hepatitis A),  
    Occupational risk may be high, but protection via active or
 passive
    immunization is not available (i.e., pertussis), or  
    Vaccines are available but are not routinely recommended
 for all
    HCWs or are recommended only in certain situations (i.e.,
 vaccinia
    and meningococcal vaccines).  Hepatitis A  Occupational exposure generally does not
increase HCWs' risk
 for
hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection. When proper infection control
 practices
are followed, nosocomial HAV transmission is rare. Outbreaks caused
 by
transmission of HAV to neonatal intensive care unit staff by
 infants
infected through transfused blood have occasionally been observed
(147-149). Transmission of HAV from adult patients to HCWs is
 usually
associated with fecal incontinence in the patients. However, most
 patients
hospitalized with hepatitis A are admitted after onset of jaundice,
 when
they are beyond the point of peak infectivity (150). Serologic
 surveys
among many types of HCWs have not identified an elevated prevalence
 of HAV
infection  compared  with  other  occupational  populations  (151-153).   Two  specific
prophylactic measures are available for protection
 against
hepatitis A -- administration of immune globulin (IG) and hepatitis
 A
vaccine. When administered within 2 weeks after an exposure, IG is
 greater
than 85% effective in preventing hepatitis A (2). Two inactivated
 hepatitis
A vaccines, which can provide long-term preexposure protection,
 were
recently licensed in the United States: HAVRIX (R) (manufactured by
SmithKline Beecham Biologicals) and VAQTA (R) (manufactured by
 Merck &
Company, Inc.) (2). The efficacy of these vaccines in preventing
 clinical
disease ranges from 94% to 100%. Data indicate that the duration of
clinical protection conferred by VAQTA (R) is at least 3 years, and
 that
conferred by HAVRIX (R) at least 4 years. Mathematical models of
 antibody
decay indicate that protection conferred by vaccination may last up
 to 20
years (2).  Meningococcal Disease  Nosocomial transmission of Neisseria meningitidis is
uncommon.
 In rare
instances, direct contact with respiratory secretions of infected
 persons
(e.g., during mouth-to-mouth resuscitation) has resulted in
 transmission
from patients with meningococcemia or meningococcal meningitis to
 HCWs.
Although meningococcal lower respiratory infections are rare, HCWs
 may be
at increased risk for meningococcal infection if exposed to N.
meningitidis-infected patients with active productive coughs. HCWs
 can
decrease the risk for infection by adhering to precautions to
 prevent
exposure  to  respiratory  droplets  (16,95).   Postexposure  prophylaxis  is  advised  for
persons who have had
 intensive,
unprotected contact (i.e., without wearing a mask) with infected
 patients
(e.g., intubating, resuscitating, or closely examining the
 oropharynx of
patients)(16). Antimicrobial prophylaxis can eradicate carriage of
 N.
meningitidis and prevent infections in persons who have unprotected
exposure to patients with meningococcal infections (9). Rifampin is
effective in eradicating nasopharyngeal carriage of N.
 meningitidis, but is
not recommended for pregnant women, because the drug is teratogenic
 in
laboratory animals. Ciprofloxacin and ceftriaxone in single-dose
 regimens
are also effective in reducing nasopharyngeal carriage of N.
 meningitidis,
and are reasonable alternatives to the multidose rifampin regimen
 (9).
Ceftriaxone  also  can  be  used  during  pregnancy.   Although  useful  for  controlling
outbreaks of serogroup C
 meningococcal
disease, administration of quadrivalent A,C,Y,W-135 meningococcal
polysaccharide vaccines is of little benefit for postexposure
 prophylaxis
(9). The serogroups A and C vaccines, which have demonstrated
 estimated
efficacies of 85%-100% in older children and adults, are useful for
 control
of epidemics (9). The decision to implement mass vaccination to
 prevent
serogroup C meningococcal disease depends on whether the occurrence
 of more
than one case of the disease represents an outbreak or an unusual
clustering of endemic meningococcal disease. Surveillance for
 serogroup C
disease and calculation of attack rates can be used to identify
 outbreaks
and determine whether use of meningococcal vaccine is warranted.
Recommendations for evaluating and managing suspected serogroup C
meningococcal  disease  outbreaks  have  been  published  (9).   Pertussis   Pertussis  is
highly contagious. Secondary attack rates among
susceptible household contacts exceed 80% (154,155). Transmission
 occurs by
direct contact with respiratory secretions or large aerosol
 droplets from
the respiratory tract of infected persons. The incubation period is
generally 7-10 days. The period of communicability starts with the
 onset of
the catarrhal stage and extends into the paroxysmal stage.
 Vaccinated
adolescents and adults, whose immunity wanes 5-10 years after the
 last dose
of vaccine (usually administered at age 4-6 years), are an
 important source
of pertussis infection for susceptible infants. The disease can be
transmitted from adult patients to close contacts, especially
 unvaccinated
children.  Such  transmission  may  occur  in  households  and  hospitals.   Transmission  of
pertussis in hospital settings has been
 documented in
several reports (156-159). Transmission has occurred from a
 hospital
visitor, from hospital staff to patients, and from patients to
 hospital
staff. Although of limited size (range: 2-17 patients and 5-13
 staff),
documented outbreaks were costly and disruptive. In each outbreak,
 larger
numbers of staff were evaluated for cough illness and required
nasopharyngeal cultures, serologic tests, prophylactic antibiotics,
 and
exclusion from work.  During outbreaks that occur in hospitals, the risk for
 contracting
pertussis among patients or staff is often difficult to quantify
 because
exposure is not well defined. Serologic studies conducted among
 hospital
staff during two outbreaks indicate that exposure to pertussis is
 much more
frequent than the attack rates of clinical disease indicate
 (154,156-159).
Seroprevalence of pertussis agglutinating antibodies correlated
 with the
degree of patient contact and was highest among pediatric house
 staff (82%)
and ward nurses (71%), lowest among nurses with administrative
responsibilities  (35%)  (158).   Prevention  of  pertussis  transmission  in  health-care
settings
 involves
diagnosis and early treatment of clinical cases, respiratory
 isolation of
infectious patients who are hospitalized, exclusion from work of
 staff who
are infectious, and postexposure prophylaxis. Early diagnosis of
 pertussis,
before secondary transmission occurs, is difficult because the
 disease is
highly communicable during the catarrhal stage, when symptoms are
 still
nonspecific. Pertussis should be one of the differential diagnoses
 for any
patient with an acute cough illness of greater than or equal to 7
 days
duration without another apparent cause, particularly if
 characterized by
paroxysms of coughing, posttussive vomiting, whoop, or apnea.
Nasopharyngeal  cultures  should  be  obtained  if  possible.   Precautions  to  prevent
respiratory droplet transmission or
 spread by
close or direct contact should be employed in the care of patients
 admitted
to hospital with suspected or confirmed pertussis (95). These
 precautions
should remain in effect until patients are clinically improved and
 have
completed at least 5 days of appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
 HCWs in
whom symptoms (i.e., unexplained rhinitis or acute cough) develop
 after
known pertussis exposure may be at risk for transmitting pertussis
 and
should be excluded from work (16)(see Other Considerations in
 Vaccination
of Health-Care Workers -- Work Restrictions for Susceptible Workers
 After
Exposure).  One acellular pertussis vaccine is immunogenic in adults, but
 does not
increase risk for adverse events when administered with tetanus and
diphtheria (Td) toxoids, as compared with administration of Td
 alone (160).
Recommendations for use of licensed diphtheria and tetanus toxoids
 and
acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccines among infants and young
 children have
been published (161). If acellular pertussis vaccines are licensed
 for use
in adults in the future, booster doses of adult formulations of
 acellular
pertussis vaccines may be recommended to prevent the occurrence and
 spread
of the disease in adults, including HCWs. However, acellular
 pertussis
vaccines combined with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids (DTaP) will
 need to
be reformulated for use in adults, because all infant formulations
 contain
more diphtheria toxoid than is recommended for persons aged greater
 than or
equal to 7 years. Recommendations regarding routine vaccination of
 adults
will require additional studies (e.g., studies of the incidence,
 severity,
and cost of pertussis among adults; studies of the efficacy and
 safety of
adult formulations of DTaP; and studies of the effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of a strategy of adult vaccination, particularly
 for
HCWs).  Typhoid  The incidence of typhoid fever declined steadily in the United
 States
from 1900 to 1960 and has remained at a low level. During
 1985-1994, the
average number of cases reported annually was 441 (CDC, unpublished
 data).
The median age of persons with cases of typhoid was 24 years; 53%
 were
male. Nearly three quarters of patients infected with Salmonella
 typhi
reported foreign travel during the 30 days before onset of
 symptoms. During
this ten year period, several cases of laboratory-acquired typhoid
 fever
were reported among microbiology laboratory workers, only one of
 whom had
been vaccinated (162). S. typhi and other enteric pathogens may be
nosocomially transmitted via the hands of personnel who are
 infected.
Generally, personal hygiene, particularly hand washing before and
 after all
patient contacts, will minimize risk for transmitting enteric
 pathogens to
patients. If HCWs contract an acute diarrheal illness accompanied
 by fever,
cramps, or bloody stools, they are likely to be excreting large
 numbers of
infective organisms in their feces. Excluding these workers from
 care of
patients until the illness has been evaluated and treated will
 prevent
transmission  (16).   Vaccinia   Vaccinia  (smallpox)  vaccine  is  a  highly  effective
immunizing
 agent that
brought about the global eradication of smallpox. In 1976, routine
 vaccinia
vaccination of HCWs in the United States was discontinued. More
 recently,
ACIP recommended use of vaccinia vaccine to protect laboratory
 workers from
orthopoxvirus infection (10). Because studies of recombinant
 vaccinia virus
vaccines have advanced to the stage of clinical trials, some
 physicians and
nurses may now be exposed to vaccinia and recombinant vaccinia
 viruses.
Vaccinia vaccination of these persons should be considered in
 selected
instances (e.g., for HCWs who have direct contact with contaminated
dressings or other infectious material).  Other Vaccine-Preventable Diseases  HCWs are
not at greater risk for diphtheria, tetanus, and
 pneumococcal
disease than the general population. ACIP recommends that all
 adults be
protected against diphtheria and tetanus, and recommends
 pneumococcal
vaccination of all persons aged greater than or equal to 65 years
 and of
younger persons who have certain medical conditions (see
 Recommendations).   Immunizing  Immunocompromised  Health-Care  Workers   A
physician must assess the degree to which an individual
 health-care
worker is immunocompromised. Severe immunosuppression can be the
 result of
congenital immunodeficiency; HIV infection; leukemia; lymphoma;
 generalized
malignancy; or therapy with alkylating agents, antimetabolites,
 radiation,
or large amounts of corticosteroids. All persons affected by some
 of these
conditions are severely immunocompromised, whereas for other
 conditions
(e.g., HIV infection), disease progression or treatment stage
 determine the
degree of immunocompromise. A determination that an HCW is severely
immunocompromised ultimately must be made by his or her physician.
Immunocompromised HCWs and their physicians should consider the
 risk for
exposure to a vaccine-preventable disease together with the risks
 and
benefits  of  vaccination.   Corticosteroid  Therapy   The  exact  amount  of  systemically
absorbed corticosteroids and
 the
duration of administration needed to suppress the immune system of
 an
otherwise healthy person are not well defined. Most experts agree
 that
steroid therapy usually does not contraindicate administration of
 live
virus vaccines such as MMR and its component vaccines when therapy
 is a)
short term (i.e., less than 14 days) low to moderate dose; b) low
 to
moderate dose administered daily or on alternate days; c) long-term
alternate day treatment with short-acting preparations; d)
 maintenance
physiologic doses (replacement therapy); or e) administered
 topically (skin
or eyes), by aerosol, or by intra-articular, bursal, or tendon
 injection.
Although the immunosuppressive effects of steroid treatment vary,
 many
clinicians consider a steroid dose that is equivalent to or greater
 than a
prednisone dose of 20 mg per day sufficiently immunosuppressive to
 cause
concern about the safety of administering live virus vaccines.
 Persons who
have received systemic corticosteroids in excess of this dose daily
 or on
alternate days for an interval of greater than or equal to 14 days
 should
avoid vaccination with MMR and its component vaccines for at least
 1 month
after cessation of steroid therapy. Persons who have received
 prolonged or
extensive topical, aerosol, or other local corticosteroid therapy
 that
causes clinical or laboratory evidence of systemic
 immunosuppression also
should not receive MMR, its component vaccines, and varicella
 vaccine for
at least 1 month after cessation of therapy. Persons who receive
corticosteroid doses equivalent to greater than or equal to 20 mg
 per day
or prednisone during an interval of less than 14 days generally can
 receive
MMR or its component vaccines immediately after cessation of
 treatment,
although some experts prefer waiting until 2 weeks after completion
 of
therapy. Persons who have a disease that, in itself, suppresses the
 immune
response and who are also receiving either systemic or locally
 administered
corticosteroids generally should not receive MMR, its component
 vaccines,
or  varicella  vaccine.   HIV-Infected  Persons   In  general,  symptomatic  HIV-infected
persons have suboptimal
immunologic responses to vaccines (163-167). The response to both
 live and
killed antigens may decrease as the disease progresses (167).
Administration of higher doses of vaccine or more frequent boosters
 to
HIV-infected persons may be considered. However, because neither
 the
initial immune response to higher doses of vaccine nor the
 persistence of
antibody in HIV-infected patients has been systematically
 evaluated,
recommendations cannot be made at this time.  Limited studies of MMR immunization
in both asymptomatic and
symptomatic HIV-infected patients who did not have evidence of
 severe
immunosuppression documented no serious or unusual adverse events
 after
vaccination (168). HIV-infected persons are at increased risk for
 severe
complications if infected with measles. Therefore, MMR vaccine is
recommended for all asymptomatic HIV-infected HCWs who do not have
 evidence
of severe immunosuppression. Administration of MMR to HIV-infected
 HCWs who
are symptomatic but do not have evidence of severe
 immunosuppression also
should be considered. However, measles vaccine is not recommended
 for
HIV-infected persons who have evidence of severe immunosuppression
 because  
    a case of progressive measles pneumonia has been reported after
    administration of MMR vaccine to a person with AIDS and severe
    immunosuppression (169), b) the incidence of measles in the United
 States
    is currently very low (17), c) vaccination-related morbidity has
 been
    reported in severely immunocompromised persons who were not
 HIV-infected
    (171), and d) a diminished antibody response to measles vaccination
 occurs
 
 
 
 among
 severely
 immunocompromised
 HIV-infected
 persons
 (172).
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  Recommendations for administration of vaccines and other
 immunobiologic
agents to HCWs are organized in three broad disease categories:  
    those for which active immunization is strongly recommended
 because
    of special risks for HCWs (i.e., hepatitis B, influenza,
 measles,
    mumps, rubella, and varicella);  
    those for which active and/or passive immunization of HCWs
 may be
    indicated in certain circumstances (i.e., tuberculosis,
 hepatitis
    A, meningococcal disease, typhoid fever, and vaccinia) or
 in the
    future (i.e.,pertussis); and  
    those for which immunization of all adults is recommended
 (i.e.,
    tetanus,  diphtheria,  and  pneumococcal  disease).   Immunization  Is  Strongly
Recommended  ACIP strongly recommends that all HCWs be vaccinated against
 (or have
documented immunity to) hepatitis B, influenza, measles, mumps,
 rubella,
and varicella (Table_2). Specific recommendations for use of
 vaccines
and other immunobiologics to prevent these diseases among HCWs
 follow.  Hepatitis B  Any HCW who performs tasks involving contact with blood,
blood-contaminated body fluids, other body fluids, or sharps should
 be
vaccinated. Hepatitis B vaccine should always be administered by
 the
intramuscular route in the deltoid muscle with a needle 1-1.5
 inches long.  Among health-care professionals, risks for percutaneous and
 permucosal
exposures to blood vary during the training and working career of
 each
person but are often highest during the professional training
 period.
Therefore, vaccination should be completed during training in
 schools of
medicine, dentistry, nursing, laboratory technology, and other
 allied
health professions, before trainees have contact with blood. In
 addition,
the OSHA Federal Standard requires employers to offer hepatitis B
 vaccine
free of charge to employees who are occupationally exposed to blood
 or
other  potentially  infectious  materials  (27).   Prevaccination  serologic  screening  for
previous infection is
 not
indicated for persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk
 unless
the hospital or health-care organization considers screening
cost-effective. Postexposure prophylaxis with hepatitis B immune
 globulin
(HBIG) (passive immunization) and/or vaccine (active immunization)
 should
be used when indicated (e.g., after percutaneous or mucous membrane
exposure to blood known or suspected to be HBsAg-positive
 {Table_3}).  Needlestick or other percutaneous exposures of unvaccinated
 persons
should lead to initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
 Postexposure
prophylaxis should be considered for any percutaneous, ocular, or
 mucous
membrane exposure to blood in the workplace and is determined by
 the HBsAg
status of the source and the vaccination and vaccine-response
 status of the
exposed  person  (Table_3)(1,18).   If  the  source  of  exposure  is  HBsAg-positive  and  the
exposed
 person is
unvaccinated, HBIG also should be administered as soon as possible
 after
exposure (preferably within 24 hours) and the vaccine series
 started. The
effectiveness of HBIG when administered greater than 7 days after
percutaneous or permucosal exposures is unknown. If the exposed
 person had
an adequate antibody response (greater than or equal to 10 mIU/mL)
documented after vaccination, no testing or treatment is needed,
 although
administration of a booster dose of vaccine can be considered.  One to 2 months after
completion of the 3-dose vaccination
 series, HCWs
who have contact with patients or blood and are at ongoing risk for
injuries with sharp instruments or needlesticks should be tested
 for
antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs). Persons who do
 not
respond to the primary vaccine series should complete a second
 three-dose
vaccine series or be evaluated to determine if they are
 HBsAg-positive.
Revaccinated persons should be retested at the completion of the
 second
vaccine series. Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be
 counseled
accordingly (1,16,121,173). Primary non-responders to vaccination
 who are
HBsAg-negative should be considered susceptible to HBV infection
 and should
be counseled regarding precautions to prevent HBV infection and the
 need to
obtain HBIG prophylaxis for any known or probable parenteral
 exposure to
HBsAg-positive blood (Table_3). Booster doses of hepatitis B
 vaccine
are not considered necessary, and periodic serologic testing to
 monitor
antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series is
 not
recommended.   Influenza   To  reduce  staff  illnesses  and  absenteeism  during  the
influenza
 season
and to reduce the spread of influenza to and from workers and
 patients, the
following HCWs should be vaccinated in the fall of each year:  
    Persons who attend patients at high risk for complications
 of
    influenza (whether the care is provided at home or in a
 health-care
    facility) (3);  
    Persons aged greater than or equal to 65 years; and  
    Persons with certain chronic medical conditions (e.g.,
 persons who
    have chronic disorders of the cardiovascular or pulmonary
 systems;
    persons who required medical follow-up or hospitalization
 within
    the preceding year because of chronic metabolic disease
 {including
    diabetes}, renal dysfunction, hemoglobinopathies, or
    immunosuppression {including HIV infection}).  
    Pregnant women who will be in the second or third trimester
 of
    pregnancy during influenza season.  Measles, Mumps, and Rubella  Persons who work
within medical facilities should be immune to
 measles
and rubella. Immunity to mumps is highly desirable for all HCWs.
 Because
any HCW (i.e., medical or nonmedical, paid or volunteer, full time
 or part
time, student or nonstudent, with or without patient-care
 responsibilities)
who is susceptible can, if exposed, contract and transmit measles
 or
rubella, all medical institutions (e.g., inpatient and outpatient,
 public
and private) should ensure that those who work within their
 facilities *
are immune to measles and rubella. Likewise, HCWs have a
 responsibility to
avoid causing harm to patients by preventing transmission of these
diseases.  Persons born in 1957 or later can be considered immune to
 measles,
mumps, or rubella ** only if they have documentation of a)
physician-diagnosed measles or mumps disease; or b) laboratory
 evidence of
measles, mumps, or rubella immunity (persons who have an
 "indeterminate"
level of immunity upon testing should be considered nonimmune); or
 c)
appropriate vaccination against measles, mumps, and rubella (i.e.,
administration on or after the first birthday of two doses of live
 measles
vaccine separated by greater than or equal to 28 days, at least one
 dose of
live mumps vaccine, and at least one dose of live rubella vaccine).
  Although birth before 1957 generally is considered acceptable
 evidence
of measles and rubella immunity, health-care facilities should
 consider
recommending a dose of MMR vaccine to unvaccinated workers born
 before 1957
who are in either of the following categories: a) those who do not
 have a
history of measles disease or laboratory evidence of measles
 immunity, and
b) those who lack laboratory evidence of rubella immunity. Rubella
vaccination or laboratory evidence of rubella immunity is
 particularly
important for female HCWs born before 1957 who can become pregnant.
  Serologic screening need not be done before vaccinating against
 measles
and rubella unless the health-care facility considers it
 cost-effective
(174-176). Serologic testing is not necessary for persons who have
documentation of appropriate vaccination or other acceptable
 evidence of
immunity to measles and rubella. Serologic testing before
 vaccination is
appropriate only if tested persons identified as nonimmune are
 subsequently
vaccinated in a timely manner, and should not be done if the return
 and
timely vaccination of those screened cannot be ensured (176).
 Likewise,
during outbreaks of measles, rubella, or mumps, serologic screening
 before
vaccination is not recommended because rapid vaccination is
 necessary to
halt  disease  transmission.   Measles-mumps-rubella  (MMR)  trivalent  vaccine  is  the
vaccine of
 choice.
If the recipient has acceptable evidence of immunity to one or more
 of the
components, monovalent or bivalent vaccines may be used. MMR or its
component vaccines should not be administered to women known to be
pregnant. For theoretical reasons, a risk to the fetus from
 administration
of live virus vaccines cannot be excluded. Therefore, women should
 be
counseled to avoid pregnancy for 30 days after administration of
 monovalent
measles or mumps vaccines and for 3 months after administration of
 MMR or
other rubella-containing vaccines. Routine precautions for
 vaccinating
postpubertal women with MMR or its component vaccines include a)
 asking if
they are or may be pregnant, b) not vaccinating those who say they
 are or
may be pregnant, and c) vaccinating those who state that they are
 not
pregnant after the potential risk to the fetus is explained. If a
 pregnant
woman is vaccinated or if a woman becomes pregnant within 3 months
 after
vaccination, she should be counseled about the theoretical basis of
 concern
for the fetus, but MMR vaccination during pregnancy should not
 ordinarily
be a reason to consider termination of pregnancy.
 Rubella-susceptible women
from whom vaccine is withheld because they state they are or may be
pregnant should be counseled about the potential risk for
 congenital
rubella syndrome and the importance of being vaccinated as soon as
 they are
no longer pregnant. Measles vaccine is not recommended for
 HIV-infected
persons with evidence of severe immunosuppression (see Vaccination
 of
HIV-Infected  Persons).   Varicella   All  HCWs  should  ensure  that  they  are  immune  to
varicella.
 Varicella
immunization is particularly recommended for susceptible HCWs who
 have
close contact with persons at high risk for serious complications,
including a) premature infants born to susceptible mothers, b)
 infants who
are born at less than 28 weeks of gestation or who weigh less than
 or equal
to 1,000 g at birth (regardless of maternal immune status), c)
 pregnant
women,  and  d)  immunocompromised  persons.   Serologic  screening  for  varicella
immunity need not be done
 before
vaccinating unless the health-care institution considers it
 cost-effective.
Routine postvaccination testing of HCWs for antibodies to varicella
 is not
recommended because greater than or equal to 90% of vaccinees are
seropositive after the second dose of vaccine.  Hospitals should develop guidelines for
management of
 vaccinated HCWs
who are exposed to natural varicella. Seroconversion after
 varicella
vaccination does not always result in full protection against
 disease.
Therefore, the following measures should be considered for HCWs who
 are
exposed to natural varicella: a) serologic testing for varicella
 antibody
immediately after VZV exposure; b) retesting 5-6 days later to
 determine if
an anamnestic response is present; and c) possible furlough or
 reassignment
of personnel who do not have detectable varicella antibody. Whether
postexposure vaccination protects adults is not known.  Hospitals also should develop
guidelines for managing HCWs
 after
varicella vaccination because of the risk for transmission of
 vaccine
virus. Institutions may wish to consider precautions for personnel
 in whom
a rash develops after vaccination and for other vaccinated HCWs who
 will
have contact with susceptible persons at high risk for serious
complications.  Hepatitis C and Other Parenterally Transmitted Non-A, Non-B
 Hepatitis  No vaccine or other immunoprophylactic measures are available
 for
hepatitis C or other parenterally transmitted non-A, non-B
 hepatitis. HCWs
should follow recommended practices for preventing transmission of
 all
blood borne pathogens (see Background -- Hepatitis C and other
 Parenterally
Transmitted Non-A, Non-B Hepatitis).  Other Diseases for Which Immunoprophylaxis Is
or May Be Indicated  ACIP does not recommend routine immunization of HCWs against
tuberculosis, hepatitis A, pertussis, meningococcal disease,
 typhoid fever,
or vaccinia. However, immunoprophylaxis for these diseases may be
 indicated
for HCWs in certain circumstances.  Tuberculosis and BCG Vaccination of Health-Care
Workers in
 High-Risk
Settings  BCG vaccination of HCWs should be considered on an individual
 basis in
health-care settings where all of the following conditions are met:
  
    a high percentage of TB patients are infected with M.
 tuberculosis
    strains that are resistant to both isoniazid and rifampin;
 and  
    transmission of such drug-resistant M. tuberculosis strains
 to HCWs
    is likely; and,  
    comprehensive TB infection-control precautions have been
    implemented and have not been successful.  Vaccination with BCG should not be
required for employment or for
assignment  in  specific  work  areas.   BCG  is  not  recommended  for  use  in  HIV-infected
persons or
 persons who
are otherwise immunocompromised. In health-care settings where
 there is a
high risk for transmission of M. tuberculosis strains resistant to
 both
isoniazid and rifampin, employees and volunteers who are infected
 with HIV
or are otherwise immunocompromised should be fully informed about
 the risk
for acquiring TB infection and disease and the even greater risk
 for
development of active TB disease associated with immunosuppression.
  HCWs considered for BCG vaccination should be counseled
 regarding the
risks and benefits of both BCG vaccination and preventive therapy.
 They
should be informed about the variable findings of research
 regarding the
efficacy of BCG vaccination, the interference of BCG vaccination
 with
diagnosis of newly acquired M. tuberculosis infection, and the
 possible
serious complications of BCG vaccine in immunocompromised persons,
especially those infected with HIV. They also should be informed
 about the
lack of data regarding the efficacy of preventive therapy for M.
tuberculosis infections caused by strains resistant to isoniazid
 and
rifampin and the risks for drug toxicity associated with multidrug
preventive-therapy regimens. If requested by the employee,
 employers should
offer (but not compel) a work assignment in which an
 immunocompromised HCW
would have the lowest possible risk for infection with M.
 tuberculosis.  HCWs who contract TB are a source of infection for other
 health-care
personnel and patients. Immunocompromised persons are at increased
 risk for
developing active disease after exposure to TB; therefore, managers
 of
health-care facilities should develop written policies to limit
 activities
that might result in exposure of immunocompromised employees to
 persons
with active cases of TB.  BCG vaccination is not recommended for HCWs in low-risk
 settings. In
most areas of the United States, most M. tuberculosis isolates
(approximately 90%) are fully susceptible to isoniazid or rifampin
 or both,
and the risk for TB transmission in health-care facilities is very
 low if
adequate infection control practices are maintained.  Hepatitis A  Routine preexposure
hepatitis A vaccination of HCWs and routine
 IG
prophylaxis for hospital personnel providing care to patients with
hepatitis A are not indicated. Rather, sound hygienic practices
 should be
emphasized. Staff education should emphasize precautions regarding
 direct
contact  with  potentially  infective  materials  (e.g.,  hand  washing).   In  documented
outbreaks of hepatitis A, administration of IG to
 persons
who have close contact with infected patients (e.g., HCWs, other
 patients)
is recommended. A single intramuscular dose (0.02 mL per kg) of IG
 is
recommended as soon as possible and less than or equal to 2 weeks
 after
exposure (2). The usefulness of hepatitis A vaccine in controlling
outbreaks in health-care settings has not been investigated.  The following vaccination
schedules are recommended for the
 vaccines
available in the United States:  
    HAVRIX (R): for persons aged greater than 18 years, two
 doses, the
    second administered 6-12 months after the first.  
    VAQTA (R) : for persons aged greater than 17 years, two
 doses, the
    second  administered  6  months  after  the  first.   Meningococcal  Disease   Routine
vaccination of civilians, including HCWs, is not
 recommended.
HCWs who have intensive contact with oropharyngeal secretions of
 infected
patients, and who do not use proper precautions (95) should receive
antimicrobial prophylaxis with rifampin (or sulfonamides, if the
 organisms
isolated are sulfonamide-sensitive). Ciprofloxacin and ceftriaxone
 are
reasonable alternative drugs; ceftriaxone can be administered to
 pregnant
women. Vaccination with quadrivalent polysaccharide vaccine should
 be used
to control outbreaks of serogroup C meningococcal disease.
 Surveillance for
serogroup C disease and calculation of attack rates can be used to
 identify
outbreaks and determine whether use of meningococcal vaccine is
 warranted.  Pertussis  Pertussis vaccines (whole-cell and acellular) are licensed for
 use only
among children aged 6 weeks through 6 years. If acellular pertussis
vaccines are licensed for use in adults in the future, booster
 doses of
adult formulations may be recommended to prevent the occurrence and
 spread
of the disease in HCWs.  Typhoid  Workers in microbiology laboratories who frequently
work with
 S. typhi
should be vaccinated with any one of the three typhoid vaccines
 distributed
in the United States: oral live-attenuated Ty21a vaccine (one
enteric-coated capsule taken on alternate days to a total of four
capsules), the parenteral heat-phenol inactivated vaccine (two 0.5
 mL
subcutaneous doses, separated by greater than or equal to 4 weeks),
 or the
capsular polysaccharide parenteral vaccine (one 0.5 mL
 intramuscular dose).
Under conditions of continued or repeated exposure to S. typhi,
 booster
doses are required to maintain immunity, every 5 years if the oral
 vaccine
is used, every 3 years if the heat-phenol inactivated parenteral
 vaccine is
used, and every 2 years if the capsular polysaccharide vaccine is
 used.
Live-attenuated Ty21a vaccine should not be used among
 immunocompromised
persons,  including  those  infected  with  HIV  (13).   Vaccinia   Vaccinia  vaccine  is
recommended only for the few persons who
 work with
orthopoxviruses (e.g., laboratory workers who directly handle
 cultures or
animals contaminated or infected with vaccinia, recombinant
 vaccinia
viruses, or other orthopoxviruses that replicate readily in humans
 {e.g.,
monkeypox, cowpox, and others}). Other HCWs (e.g., physicians and
 nurses)
whose contact with these viruses is limited to contaminated
 materials
(e.g., dressings) and who adhere to appropriate infection control
 measures
are at lower risk for accidental infection than laboratory workers,
 but may
be considered for vaccination. When indicated, vaccinia vaccine
 should be
administered every 10 years (10). Vaccinia vaccine should not be
administered to immunocompromised persons (including persons
 infected with
HIV), persons who have eczema or a history of eczema, or to
 pregnant women
(10).  Other Vaccine-Preventable Diseases  Health-care workers are not at substantially
increased risk
 than the
general adult population for acquiring diphtheria, pneumococcal
 disease, or
tetanus. Therefore, they should seek these immunizations from their
 primary
care  provider,  according  to  ACIP  recommendations  (12,14).   Tetanus  and  Diphtheria  
Primary vaccination of previously unvaccinated adults consists
 of three
doses of adult tetanus-diphtheria toxoid (Td): 4-6 weeks should
 separate
the first and second doses; the third dose should be administered
 6-12
months after the second (12). After primary vaccination, a
tetanus-diphtheria (Td) booster is recommended for all persons
 every 10
years. HCWs should be encouraged to receive recommended Td booster
 doses.   Pneumococcal  Disease   Persons  for  whom  pneumococcal  vaccine  is
recommended include:  
    Persons aged greater than or equal to 65 years.  
    Persons aged greater than or equal to 2 and less than 65
 years who,
    because they have certain chronic illnesses, are at
 increased risk
    for pneumococcal disease, its complications, or severe
 disease if
    they become infected. Included are those who have chronic
    cardiovascular disease (i.e., congestive heart failure
 {CHF} or
    cardiomyopathies), chronic pulmonary disease (i.e., chronic
    obstructive pulmonary disease {COPD} or emphysema, but not
 asthma),
    diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, chronic liver disease
 (cirrhosis),
    or cerebrospinal fluid leaks.  
    Persons greater than or equal to 2 and less than 65 years
 of age
    with functional or anatomic asplenia (e.g., sickle cell
 disease,
    splenectomy).  
    Persons greater than or equal to 2 and less than 65 years
 of age
    living in special environments or social settings where an
    increased risk exists for invasive pneumococcal disease or
 its
    complications (e.g., Alaska Natives and certain American
 Indian
    populations).  
    Immunocompromised persons greater than or equal to 2 years
 of age,
    including  
        persons infected with HIV and persons who have
 leukemia,
        lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease, multiple myeloma,
 generalized
        malignancy, chronic renal failure, nephrotic syndrome;  
        persons with other conditions associated with
 immunosuppression
        (e.g., organ or bone marrow transplantation); and  
        persons receiving immunosuppressive chemotherapy,
 including
        long-term  systemic  corticosteroids.   Immunization  of  Immunocompromised
Health-Care Workers  ACIP has published recommendations for immunization of
immunocompromised persons (177). ACIP recommendations for use of
 individual
vaccines or immune globulins also should be consulted for
 additional
information regarding the epidemiology of the diseases and the
 safety and
the efficacy of the vaccines or immune globulin preparations.
 Specific
recommendations for use of vaccines depend upon the type of
immunocompromising  condition  (Table_4).   Killed  or  inactivated  vaccines  do  not
represent a danger to
immunocompromised HCWs and generally should be administered as
 recommended
for workers who are not immunocompromised. Additional vaccines,
particularly bacterial polysaccharide vaccines (i.e., Haemophilus
influenzae type b {Hib} vaccine, pneumococcal vaccine, and
 meningococcal
vaccine), are recommended for persons whose immune function is
 compromised
by anatomic or functional asplenia and certain other conditions.
Frequently, the immune response of immunocompromised persons to
 these
vaccine antigens is not as good as that of nonimmunocompromised
 persons;
higher doses or more frequent boosters may be required. Even with
 these
modifications, the immune response may be suboptimal.  HIV-Infected Persons  Specific
recommendations for vaccination of HIV-infected
 persons have
been developed (Table_4). In general, live virus or live
 bacterial
vaccines should not be administered to HIV-infected persons.
 However,
asymptomatic HCWs need not be tested for HIV infection before
 administering
live virus vaccines.  The following recommendations apply to all HCWs infected with
 HIV:  
    MMR vaccine is recommended for all asymptomatic
 HIV-infected HCWs
    who do not have evidence of severe immunosuppression.
    Administration of MMR to HIV-infected HCWs who are
 symptomatic, but
    who do not have evidence of severe immunosuppression,
 should be
    considered. Measles vaccine is not recommended for
 HIV-infected
    persons with evidence of severe immunosuppression.  
    Enhanced inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) is the only
    poliovirus vaccine recommended for HIV-infected persons
 (11). Live
    oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) should not be administered to
    immunocompromised persons.  
    Influenza and pneumococcal vaccines are indicated for all
    HIV-infected persons (influenza vaccination for persons
 aged
    greater than or equal to 6 months and pneumococcal
 vaccination for
    persons  aged  greater  than  or  equal  to  2  years).   OTHER  CONSIDERATIONS  IN
VACCINATION  OF  HEALTH-CARE  WORKERS   Other  considerations  important  to
appropriate immunoprophylaxis
 of HCWs
include maintenance of complete immunization records, policies for
 catch-up
vaccination of HCWs, work restrictions for susceptible employees
 who are
exposed to vaccine-preventable diseases, and control of outbreaks
 of
vaccine-preventable disease in health-care settings. Additional
 vaccines
not routinely recommended for HCWs in the United States may be
 indicated
for those who travel to certain other regions of the world to
 perform
research or health-care work (e.g., as medical volunteers in a
 humanitarian
effort).  Immunization Records  An immunization record should be maintained for each
HCW. The
 record
should reflect documented disease and vaccination histories as well
 as
immunizing agents administered during employment. At each
 immunization
encounter, the record should be updated and the HCW encouraged to
 maintain
the  record  as  appropriate  (15).   Catch-Up  Vaccination  Programs   Managers  of
health-care facilities should consider implementing
catch-up vaccination programs for HCWs who are already employed, in
addition to policies to ensure that newly hired HCWs receive
 necessary
vaccinations. This strategy will help prevent outbreaks of vaccine
preventable diseases (see Outbreak Control). Because education
 enhances the
success of many immunization programs, reference materials should
 be
available to assist in answering questions regarding the diseases,
vaccines, and toxoids, and the program or policy being implemented.
Conducting educational workshops or seminars several weeks before
 the
initiation of the program may be necessary to ensure acceptance of
 program
goals.   Work  Restrictions  for  Susceptible  Workers  After  Exposure   Postexposure  work
restrictions ranging from restriction of
 contact with
high-risk patients to complete exclusion from duty are appropriate
 for HCWs
who are not immune to certain vaccine-preventable diseases
 (Table_5).
Recommendations concerning work restrictions in these circumstances
 have
been
 published
 (16,35,178).
 
 Outbreak
 Control
 
 Hospitals
 should
 develop
comprehensive policies and protocols
 for
management and control of outbreaks of vaccine-preventable disease.
Outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases are costly and
 disruptive.
Outbreak prevention, by ensuring that all HCWs who have direct
 contact with
patients are fully immunized, is the most effective and
 cost-effective
control strategy. Disease-specific outbreak control measures are
 described
in published ACIP recommendations (Table_1) (1-15) and
 infection
control references (16,35,95, 178-180).  Vaccines Indicated for Foreign Travel  Hospital
and other HCWs who perform research or health-care
 work in
foreign countries may be at increased risk for acquiring certain
 diseases
(e.g, hepatitis A, poliomyelitis, Japanese encephalitis,
 meningococcal
disease, plague, rabies, typhoid, or yellow fever). Vaccinations
 against
those diseases should be considered when indicated for foreign
 travel
(181). Elevated risks for acquiring these diseases may stem from
 exposure
to patients in health-care settings (e.g., poliomyelitis,
 meningococcal
disease), but may also arise from circumstances unrelated to
 patient care
(e.g, high endemicity of hepatitis A or exposure to arthropod
 disease
vectors {yellow fever}).  References 
    CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for
 eliminating
    transmission in the United States through childhood
 immunization:
    recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
 Practices
    (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13):1-25. 
    CDC. Prevention of hepatitis A through active or passive
 immunization:
    recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
 Practices
    (ACIP). MMWR 1996;45(No. RR-15):1-30. 
    Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-9):
    1-25. 
    CDC. Measles prevention: recommendations of the Immunization
 Practices
    Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1989;(No. S-9):1-18. 
    CDC. Mumps prevention. Recommendations of the Immunization
 Practices
    Advisory Committee (ACIP) MMWR 1989;38:388-92,397-400. 
    CDC. Rubella prevention. Recommendations of the Advisory
 Committee on
    Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-15):1-13. 
    CDC. The role of BCG vaccine in the prevention and control of
    tuberculosis in the United States: a joint statement by the
 Advisory
    Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the Advisory
 Committee
    on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1996;45(No. RR-4):1-18.
 
    CDC. Prevention of varicella: recommendations of the Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1996;45(No.
 RR-11):
    1-36. 
    CDC. Control and prevention of meningococcal disease and
 control and
    prevention of serogroup C meningococcal disease: evaluation
 and
    management of suspected outbreaks: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-5):
    1-21. 
    CDC. Vaccinia (smallpox) vaccine. Recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
 1991;40(RR-14):1-10. 
    CDC. Poliomyelitis prevention in the United States:
 introduction of a
    sequential vaccination schedule of inactivated poliovirus
 vaccine
    followed by oral poliovirus vaccine: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-3):
    1-25. 
    CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for
 vaccine
    use and other preventive measures: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No.
 RR-10):
    1-28. 
    CDC. Typhoid immunization: recommendations of the Advisory
 Committee
    on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-14):1-7.
 
    CDC. Prevention of pneumococcal disease: recommendations of
 the
    Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
 1997;46(No.
    RR-8):1-24. 
    CDC. Update on adult immunization: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No.
 RR-12):
    1-94. 
    CDC. Guidelines for infection control in health care
 personnel, 1997:
    recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control Practices
 Advisory
    Committee. Am J Infect Control 1998 (in press). 
    American Hospital Association. Immunization: management
 advisory on
    health care delivery. American Hospital Association; 1992:
 Chicago,
    Illinois. 
    CDC. Hepatitis surveillance report No. 56. Atlanta: U.S.
 Department of
    Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for
 Disease
    Control and Prevention; 1-33, 1996. 
    CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care
 and
    public-safety workers: a response to P. L. 100-607, The Health
 Omnibus
    Programs Extension Act of 1988. Atlanta, GA.: U.S. Department
 of
    Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for
 Disease
    Control; 1-45, 1989. 
    Shapiro CN. Occupational risk of infection with hepatitis B
 and
    hepatitis C virus. Surg Clin North Am 1995;75:1047-56. 
    Thomas DL, Factor SH, Gabon D, et al. Viral hepatitis in
 health care
    personnel at the Johns Hopkins Hospital. Arch Intern Med
    1993;153:1705-12. 
    Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B
 virus in
    hospital personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol
    1982;115:26-39. 
    Shapiro CN, Tokars JI, Chamberland ME, et al. Use of the
 hepatitis B
    vaccine and infection with hepatitis B and C among orthopaedic
    surgeons. J Bone Joint Surg 1996;78-A:1791-1800. 
    Gibas A, Blewett DR, Schoenfled DA, Dienstag JL. Prevalence
 and
    incidence of viral hepatitis in health workers in the
 prehepatitis B
    vaccination era. Am J Epidemiol 1992;136:603-10. 
    Hadler SC, Doto IL, Maynard JE, et al. Occupational risk of
 hepatitis
    B infection in hospital workers. Infection Control
 1985;6:24-31. 
    Department of Labor/Department of Health and Human Services
 Joint
    Advisory Notice. Protection against occupational exposure to
 hepatitis
    B virus (HBV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Federal
 Register
    1987;52:41818-24. 
    Department of Labor. Bloodborne pathogens: the standard.
 Federal
    Register 1991;60:64175-82. 
    Stevens CE, Toy PT, Taylor PE, Lee T, Yip H-Y. Prospects for
 control
    of hepatitis B virus infection: implications of childhood
 vaccination
    and long-term protection. Pediatrics 1992;90:170-3. 
    Hadler SC, Margolis HS. Hepatitis B immunization: vaccine
 types,
    efficacy, and indications for immunization. In Remington JS,
 Swartz
    MN: Current topics in infectious diseases. Boston: Blackwell
    Scientific, 1992:282-308. 
    Balkovic ES, Goodman RA, Rose FB, et al. Nosocomial influenza
 A(H1N1)
    infection. Am J Med Technol 1980;46:318-20. 
    Van Voris LP, Belshe RB, Shaffer JL. Nosocomial influenza B
 virus
    infection in the elderly. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:153-8. 
    CDC. Suspected nosocomial influenza cases in an intensive care
 unit.
    MMWR 1988;37:3. 
    Pachucki CT, Walsh Pappas SA, Fuller GF, Krause SL, Lentino
 JR, Schaaf
    DM. Influenza A among hospital personnel and patients:
 implications
    for recognition, prevention, and control. Arch Intern Med
 1990;149:
    77-80. 
    Hammond GW, Cheang M. Absenteeism among hospital staff during
 an
    influenza epidemic: Implications for immunoprophylaxis. Can
 Med Assoc
    J 1984;131:449-52. 
    Williams WW, Preblud SR, Reichelderfer PS, Hadler SC. Vaccines
 of
    importance in the hospital setting. Infect Dis Clin North Am
    1989;3:701-22. 
    Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and
 possible
    transmission of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing
 home
    outbreaks of influenza (AH3N2). Am J Epidemiol.
 1991;134:986-97. 
    Horman JT, Stetler HC, Israel E, Sorley D, Schipper MT, Joseph
 JM. An
    outbreak of influenza A in a nursing home. Am J Public Health
    1986;76:501-4. 
    Patriarca PA, Weber JA, Parker RA, et al. Risk factors for
 outbreaks
    of influenza in nursing homes: a case-control study. Am J
 Epidemiol
    1986;124:114-9. 
    CDC. Outbreak of influenza A in a nursing home -- New York,
 December,
    1991-January, 1992. MMWR 1992;41:129-31. 
    Gross PA, Rodstein M, LaMontagne JR, et al. Epidemiology of
 acute
    respiratory illness during an influenza outbreak in a nursing
 home.
    Arch Intern Med 1988;148:559-61. 
    Cartter ML, Renzullo PO, Helgerson SD, Martin SM, Jekel JF.
 Influenza
    outbreaks in nursing homes: how effective is influenza vaccine
 in the
    institutionalized elderly? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
 1990;11:
    473-8. 
    Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination
 of health
    care workers in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality
 of
    elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1-6. 
    CDC. Measles in HIV-infected children -- United States. MMWR
 1988;37:
    183-6. 
    CDC. Measles transmitted in a medical office building -- New
 Mexico,
    1986. MMWR 1987;36:25-7. 
    Davis RM, Orenstein WA, Frank Jr, JA, et al. Transmission of
 measles
    in medical settings, 1980 through 1984. JAMA 1986;255:1295-8. 
    Istre GR, KcKee PA, West GR, et al. Measles spread in medical
    settings: an important focus of disease transmission?
 Pediatrics
    1987;79:356-8. 
    Sienko DG, Friedman C, McGee HB, et al. A measles outbreak at
    university medical settings involving health care providers.
 Am J
    Public Health 1987;77:1222-4. 
    Watkins NM, Smith Jr RP, St.Germain DL, et al. Measles
 (rubeola)
    infection in a hospital setting. Am J Infect Control
 1987;15:201-6. 
    Atkinson WL, Markowitz LE, Adams NC, Seastrom GR. Transmission
 of
    measles in medical settings -- United States, 1985-1989. Am J
 Med
    1991;91(Suppl 3B):320S-4S. 
    CDC. Measles -- United States, 1987. MMWR 1988;37:527-31. 
    CDC. Measles -- United States, 1986. MMWR 1987;36:301-5. 
    CDC. Measles -- United States, 1985. MMWR 1986;35:366-70. 
    Braunstein H, Thomas S, Ito R. Immunity to measles in a large
    population of varying age. Am J Dis Child 1990;144:296-8. 
    Smith E, Welch W, Berhow M, Wong VK. Measles susceptibility of
    hospital employees as determined by ELISA. Clin Res
 1990;38:183A. 
    Cochi SL, Preblud SR, Orenstein WA. Perspectives on the
 relative
    resurgence of mumps in the United States. Am J Dis Child
 1988;142:
    499-507. 
    Kaplan KM, Marder DC, Cochi SL, et al. Mumps in the workplace:
 further
    evidence of the changing epidemiology of a childhood
    vaccine-preventable disease. JAMA 1988;260:1434-8. 
    CDC. Mumps outbreaks on university campuses -- Illinois,
 Wisconsin,
    South Dakota, MMWR 1987;36:496-498,503-5. 
    Sosin DM, Cochi SL, Gunn RA, et al. Changing epidemiology of
 mumps and
    its impact on university campuses. Pediatrics 1989;84:779-84. 
    Hersh BS, Fine PEM, Kent WK, et al. Mumps outbreak in a highly
    vaccinated population. J Pediatr 1991;119:87-93. 
    Briss PA, Fehrs LJ, Parker RA, et al. Sustained transmission
 of mumps
    in a highly vaccinated population: assessment of primary
 vaccine
    failure and waning vaccine-induced immunity. J Infect Dis
 1994;169:
    77-82. 
    van Loon FPL, Holmes SJ, Sirotkin BI, et al. Mumps
 surveillance --
    United States, 1988-1993. In: CDC surveillance summaries
 (August 11).
    MMWR 1995;44(No. SS-3):1-14. 
    Wharton M, Cochi SL, Hutcheson RH, Schaffner W. Mumps
 transmission in
    hospitals. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:47-9. 
    Greaves WL, Orenstein WA, Stetler HC, et al. Prevention of
 rubella
    transmission in medical facilities. JAMA 1982;248:861-4. 
    Bart KJ, Orenstein WA, Preblud SR, et al. Elimination of
 rubella and
    congenital rubella from the United States. Pediatr Infect Dis
 1985;4:
    14-21. 
    CDC. Rubella and congenital rubella -- United States,
 1984-1986. MMWR
    1987;36:664-6,671-5. 
    CDC. Increase in rubella and congenital rubella syndrome --
 United
    States, 1988-90. MMWR 1991;40:93-9. 
    CDC. Congenital rubella among the Amish. MMWR
 1992;41:468-9,475-6. 
    Crawford GE, Gremillion DH. Epidemic measles and rubella in
 Air Force
    recruits: impact of immunization. J Infect Dis
 1981;144:403-10. 
    Meyers JD, MacQuarrie MB, Merigan TC, Jennison MH. Varicella.
 Part 1:
    outbreak in oncology patients at a children's hospital. West J
 Med
    1979;130:196-9. 
    Morens DM, Bregman DJ, West CM, et al. An outbreak of
 varicella-zoster
    virus infection among cancer patients. Ann Intern Med
 1980;93:414-9. 
    Baltimore RS. Infections in the pediatric intensive care unit.
 Yale J
    Biol Med 1984;57:185-97. 
    Gustafson TL, Shehab Z, Brunell PA. Outbreak of varicella in a
 newborn
    intensive care nursery. Am J Dis Child 1984;138:548-50. 
    Hyams PJ, Stuewe MCS, Heitzer V. Herpes zoster causing
 varicella
    (chicken pox) in hospital employees: cost of a casual
 attitude. Infect
    Control 1984;12:2-5. 
    Shehab ZM, Brunell PA. Susceptibility of hospital personnel to
    varicella-zoster virus. J Infect Dis 1984;150:786. 
    Weitekamp MR, Schan P, Aber RC. An algorithm for the control
 of
    varicella-zoster virus. Am J Infect Control 1985;13:193-8. 
    Alter SJ, Hammond JA, McVey CJ, Myers MG. Susceptibility to
    varicella-zoster virus among adults at high risk for exposure.
 Infect
    Control 1986;7:448-51. 
    Krasinski K, Holzman RS, LaCouture R, Florman A. Hospital
 experience
    with varicella-zoster virus. Infect Control 1986;7:312-6. 
    Haiduven-Griffiths D, Fecko H. Varicella in hospital
 personnel: a
    challenge for the infection control practitioner. Am J Infect
 Control
    1987;15:207-11. 
    Weber DJ, Rutala WA, Parham C. Impact and costs of varicella
    prevention in a university hospital. Am J Public Health
 1988;78:19-23. 
    McKinney WP, Horowitz MM, Battiola RJ. Susceptibility of
    hospital-based health care personnel to varicella-zoster virus
    infections. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:26-30. 
    Asano Y, Iwayama S, Miyata T, et al. Spread of varicella in
    hospitalized children having no direct contact with an
 indicator
    zoster case and its prevention by a live vaccine. Biken J
 1980;23:
    157-61. 
    Leclair JM, Zaia JA, Levine MJ, Congdon RG, Goldmann DA.
 Airborne
    transmission of chickenpox in a hospital. N Engl J Med
 1980;302:450-3. 
    Gustafson TL, Lavely GB, Brawner ER, Hutcheson RH, Wright PF,
    Schaffner W. An outbreak of airborne varicella. Pediatrics
 1982;70:
    550-6. 
    Josephson A, Gombert ME. Airborne transmission of nosocomial
 varicella
    from localized zoster. J Infect Dis 1988;158:238-41. 
    Sawyer MH, Chamberlin CJ, Wu YN, Aintablian N, Wallace MR.
 Detection
    of varicella-zoster virus DNA in air samples from hospital
 room. J
    Infect Dis 1994;169:91-4. 
    Preblud SR. Nosocomial varicella: worth preventing but how? Am
 J
    Public Health 1988;78:13-5. 
    Myers MG, Rasley DA, Hierholzer WJ. Hospital infection control
 for
    varicella zoster virus infection. Pediatrics 1982;70:199-202. 
    Steele RW, Coleman MA, Fiser M, Bradsher RW. Varicella-zoster
 in
    hospital personnel: skin test reactivity to monitor
 susceptibility.
    Pediatrics 1982;70:604-8. 
    Anderson JD, Bonner M, Scheifele DW, Schneider BC. Lack of
 spread of
    varicella in a pediatric hospital with negative pressure
 ventilated
    patient rooms. Infect Control 1985;6:120-1. 
    Sayre MR, Lucid EJ. Management of varicella-zoster
 virus-exposed
    hospital employees. Ann Emerg Med 1987;16:421-4. 
    Stover BH, Cost KM, Hamm C, Adams G, Cook LN. Varicella
 exposure in a
    neonatal intensive care unit: case report and control
 measures. Am J
    Infect Control 1988;16:167-72. 
    Lipton SV, Brunell PA. Management of varicella exposure in a
 neonatal
    intensive care unit. JAMA 1989;261:1782-4. 
    Ferson MJ, Bell SM, Robertson PW. Determination and importance
 of
    varicella immune status of nursing staff in a children's
 hospital. J
    Hosp Infect 1990;15:347-51. 
    Josephson A, Karanfil L, Gombert ME. Strategies for the
 management of
    varicella-susceptible health care workers after a known
 exposure.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:309-13. 
    CDC. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals.
 Recommendations
    of the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
    (HICPAC) and the National Center for Infectious Diseases.
 Infect
    Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80. 
    Kelly PW, Petruccelli BP, Stehr-Green P, Erickson RL, Mason
 CJ. The
    susceptibility of young adult Americans to vaccine-preventable
    infections. A national serosurvey of US Army recruits. JAMA
 1991;266:
    2724-9. 
    Struewing JP, Hyams KC, Tueller JE, Gray GC. The risk of
 measles,
    mumps, and varicella among young adults: a serosurvey of US
 Navy and
    Marine Corps recruits. Am J Public Health 1993;83:1717-20. 
    Polder JA, Tablan OC, Williams WW. Personnel health services.
 In:
    Bennett JV, Brachman PS, eds. Hospital infections. 3rd ed.
 Boston:
    Little, Brown and Company, 1992:31-61. 
    White CJ, Kuter BJ, Ngai A, et al. Modified cases of
 chickenpox after
    varicella vaccination: correlation of protection with antibody
    response. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1992;11:19-23. 
    Bernstein HH, Rothstein EP, Watson BM, et al. Clinical survey
 of
    natural varicella compared with breakthrough varicella after
    immunization with live attenuated Oka/Merck varicella vaccine.
    Pediatrics 1993;92:833-7. 
    Watson BM, Piercy SA, Plotkin SA, Starr SE. Modified
 chickenpox in
    children immunized with the Oka/Merck varicella vaccine.
 Pediatrics
    1993;91:17-22. 
    Weibel RE, Neff BJ, Kuter BJ, et al. Live attenuated varicella
    vaccine. Efficacy trial in healthy children. N Engl J Med
 1984;310:
    1409-15. 
    Tsolia M, Gershon AA, Steinberg SP, Gelb L. Live attenuated
 varicella
    vaccine: evidence that the vaccine virus is attenuated and the
    importance of skin lesions in transmission of varicella-zoster
 virus.
    The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
 Varicella
    Vaccine Collaborative Study Group. J Pediatr 1990;116:185-9. 
    Steinberg SP, Gershon AA. Measurement of antibodies to
    varicella-zoster virus by using a latex agglutination test. J
 Clin
    Microbiol 1991;29:1527-9. 
    Gershon AA, Steinberg SP, LaRussa PS. Detection of antibody to
    varicella zoster virus using the latex agglutination assay.
 Clin Diagn
    Virol 1994; 2:271-8. 
    American Thoracic Society, CDC. Treatment of tuberculosis and
    tuberculosis infection in adults and children. Am J Respir
 Crit Care
    Med 1994;149:1359-74. 
    Farer LS. Chemoprophylaxis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1982;125(Pt
 2):102-7. 
    CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of M.
 tuberculosis in
    health-care facilities, 1994. MMWR l994;43(RR-13):1-132. 
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis among homeless
 persons.
    MMWR 1992;41(RR-5):13-23. 
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis in correctional
    facilities: recommendations of the Advisory Council for the
    Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1996;45:(No.RR-8):1-27. 
    CDC. Nosocomial transmission of multidrug-resistant
 tuberculosis among
    HIV-infected persons -- Florida and New York, 1988-1991. MMWR
 1991;40
    (34):585-91. 
    Edlin BR, Tokars JI, Grieco MH, et al. An outbreak of
    multidrug-resistant tuberculosis among hospitalized patients
 with the
    acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. N Engl J Med
 1992;326:1514-21. 
    Pearson ML, Jereb JA, Frieden TR, et al. Nosocomial
 transmission of
    multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A risk to
 patients and
    health care workers. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:191-6. 
    CDC. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in a hospital -- Jersey
 City,
    New Jersey, 1990-1992. MMWR 1994;43(22):417-9. 
    CDC. Outbreak of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis at a
 hospital -- New
    York City, 1991. MMWR 1993;42(22):427,433-4. 
    Valway SE, Greifinger RB, Papania M, et al.
 Multidrug-resistant
    tuberculosis in the New York State prison system, 1990-1991. J
 Infect
    Dis 1994;170:151-6. 
    Alter MJ, Margolis HS, Krawczynski K, et al. The natural
 history of
    community-acquired hepatitis C in the United States. N Engl J
 Med
    1992;327:1899-905. 
    Alter MJ. Epidemiology of hepatitis C in the west. Semin Liver
 Dis
    1995;15:5-14. 
    Shakil AO, Conry-Cantilena C, Alter HJ, et al. Volunteer blood
 donors
    with antibody to hepatitis C virus: clinical, biochemical, and
    histologic features. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:330-7. 
    Dienstag JL, Katkov WN, Cody H. Evidence for non-A, non-B
 hepatitis
    agents besides hepatitis C virus. In Hollinger FB, Lemon SM,
 Margolis
    HS (eds). Viral hepatitis and liver disease. Baltimore, MD:
 Williams
    and Wilkins, 1991:349-56. 
    CDC.  Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for
 screening
    donors of blood, plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for
 evidence of
    hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR 1991;40(RR-4):1-17. 
    Leslie M, Damen HTM, Cuypers HL, et al. International
 collaborative
    study on the second Eurohep HCV-RNA reference panel.
 In:Proceedings of
    the IX International Symposium on Viral Hepatitis and Liver
 Disease.
    Rome, 1996: 25. 
    Alter MJ, Gerety RJ, Smallwood L, et al. Sporadic non-A, non-B
    hepatitis: frequency and epidemiology in an urban United
 States
    population. J Infect Dis 1982;145:886-93. 
    Seeff LB. Hepatitis C from a needlestick injury {letter}. Ann
 Intern
    Med 1991;115:411. 
    Cooper BW, Krusell A, Tilton RC, Goodwin R, Levitz RE.
 Seroprevalence
    of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in high-risk hospital
 personnel.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:82-5. 
    Campello C, Majori S, Poli A, Pacini P, Nicolardi L, Pini F.
    Prevalence of HCV antibodies in health-care workers from
 northern
    Italy. Infection 1992;20:224-6. 
    Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors
 for
    hepatitis C virus infection among health care personnel in a
 community
    hospital. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:196-200. 
    Panlilio AL, Shapiro CN, Schable CA, et al. Serosurvey of
 human
    immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C
 virus
    infection among hospital-based surgeons. J Am Coll Surg
 1995;180:
    16-24. 
    Klein RS, Freeman K, Taylor PE, Stevens CE. Occupational risk
 for
    hepatitis C virus infection among New York City dentists.
 Lancet 1991;
    338:1539-42. 
    Thomas DL, Gruninger SE, Siew C, Joy ED, Quinn TC.
 Occupational risk
    of hepatitis C infections among general dentists and oral
 surgeons in
    North America. Am J Med 1996;100:41-5. 
    Tsude K, Fujiyama S, Sato S, Kawano S, Taura Y, Yoshida K,
 Sato T. Two
    cases of accidental transmission of hepatitis C to medical
 staff.
    Hepatogastroenterology 1992;39:73-5. 
    Hernandez ME, Bruguera M, Puyuelo T, Barrera JM, Sanchez
 Tapias JM,
    Rodes J. Risk of needle-stick injuries in the transmission of
    hepatitis C virus in hospital personnel. J Hepatol
 1992;16:56-8. 
    Zuckerman J, Clewley G, Griffiths P Cockcroft A. Prevalence of
    hepatitis C antibodies in clinical health-care workers. Lancet
 1994;
    343:1618-20. 
    Petrosillo N, Puro V, Ippolito G. Prevalence of hepatitis C
 antibodies
    in health-care workers. Italian Study Group on Blood-borne
    Occupational Risk in Dialysis. Lancet 1994;344:339-40. 
    Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC, Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L,
 Kerley LM.
    Hepatitis C virus infection in health care workers: risk of
 exposure
    and infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745-50. 
    Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus
 infection in
    medical personnel after needlestick accident. Hepatology
 1992;16:
    1109-14. 
    Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G. Risk of hepatitis C
 seroconversion
    after occupational exposures in health care workers.Italian
 Study
    Group on Occupational Risk of HIV and Other Bloodborne
 Infections. Am
    J Infect Control 1995;23:273-7. 
    Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, et al. Transmission of
 hepatitis C
    via blood splash into conjunctiva. Scand J Infect Dis
 1993;25:270-1. 
    Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsburg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EP.
 Efficacy of
    prophylactic gamma globulin in preventing non-A, non-B
    post-transfusion hepatitis. Lancet 1976;1:557-61. 
    Seeff LB, Zimmerman JH, Wright EL, et al. A randomized
 double-blind
    controlled trial of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for
 the
    prevention of post-transfusion hepatitis. A Veterans
 Administration
    cooperative study. Gastroenterology 1977;72:111-21. 
    Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of
    post-transfusion non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific
 immunoglobulin
    in heart surgery patients. Lancet 1988;1:1245-9. 
    Bukh J, Miller RH, Purcell RH. Genetic heterogeneity of
 hepatitis C
    virus: quasispecies and genotypes. Semin Liver Dis
 1995;15:41-63. 
    Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Studies on
 protective
    efficacy of hepatitis C immunoglobulins (HCIG) in experimental
    hepatitis C virus infection {Abstract}. Hepatology
 1993;18:110A. 
    Hoofnagle JH, Di Bisceglie AM. Drug therapy: the treatment of
 chronic
    viral hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1997;336:347-56. 
    Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, et al. The interferon system in
 acute
    and chronic viral hepatitis. Prog Liver Dis 1986;8:453-67. 
    CDC. Recommendations for follow-up of health-care workers
 after
    occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus. MMWR
 1997;46:603-6. 
    Noble RC, Kane MA, Reeves SA, et al. Posttransfusion hepatitis
 A in a
    neonatal intensive care unit. JAMA 1984;252:2711-5. 
    Klein BS, Michaels JA, Rytel MW, Berg KG, Davis JP. Nosocomial
    hepatitis A: a multi-nursery outbreak in Wisconsin. JAMA
 1984;252:
    2716-21. 
    Rosenblum LS, Villarino ME, Nainan OV, et al. Hepatitis A
 outbreak in
    a neonatal intensive care unit: risk factors for transmission
 and
    evidence of prolonged viral excretion among preterm infants. J
 Infect
    Dis 1991;164:476-82. 
    Goodman RA. Nosocomial hepatitis A. Ann Intern Med
 1985;103:452-4. 
    Papaevangelou GJ, Roumeliotou-Karayannis AJ, Contoyannis PC.
 The risk
    of hepatitis A and B virus infections from patients under care
 without
    isolation precautions. J Med Virol 1981;7:143-8. 
    Werzberger A, Mensch B, Kuter B, et al. A controlled trial of
 a
    formalin-inactivated hepatitis A vaccine in healthy children.
 N Engl J
    Med 1992;327:453-7. 
    Innis B, Snitbhan R, Kunasol P, et al. Field efficacy trial of
    inactivated hepatitis A vaccine among children in Thailand (an
    extended abstract). Vaccine 1992 10 (Suppl 1):S159. 
    Mortimer EA Jr. Pertussis Vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Mortimer
 EA, eds.
    Vaccines, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1994: 94. 
    Mortimer EA Jr. Pertussis and its prevention: a family affair.
 J
    Infect Dis 1990;161:473-9. 
    Christie C, Glover AM, Willke MJ, Marx ML, Reising SF,
 Hutchinson NM.
    Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital
 during the
    greater Cincinnati epidemic of 1993. Infect Control Hosp
 Epidemiol
    1995;16:556-63. 
    Kurt TL, Yeager AS, Guennette S, Dunlop S. Spread of pertussis
 by
    hospital staff. JAMA 1972;221:264-7. 
    Linnemann CC, Ramundo N, Perlstein PH, et al. Use of pertussis
 vaccine
    in an epidemic involving hospital staff. Lancet 1975;2:540-3. 
    Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis:
 possible
    spread by a hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520-1. 
    Edwards KM, Decker MD, Graham BS, Mezatesta J, Scott J,
 Hackell J.
    Adult immunization with acellular pertussis vaccine.
 JAMA.1993;269:
    53-6. 
    CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis
 vaccines among
    infants and young children -- recommendations of the Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-7):
    1-25. 
    Mermin J, Townes J, Gerber M, Dolan N, Mintz E, Tauxe R. Rise
 of
    antimicrobial resistant Salmonella typhi infections in the
 United
    States, 1985-1994 {Abstract}. Proceedings of the 36th
 Interscience
    Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy.
 Washington, D.C.:
    American Society for Microbiology, 1996:84. 
    Opravil M, Fierz W, Matter L, et al. Poor antibody response
 after
    tetanus and pneumococcal vaccination in immunocompromised,
    HIV-infected patients. Clin Exp Immunol 1991;84(2):185-9. 
    Borkowsky W, Steele CJ, Grubman S, et al. Antibody responses
 to
    bacterial toxoids in children infected with human
 immunodeficiency
    virus. J Pediatr 1987;110:563-6. 
    Huang KL, Ruben FL, Rinaldo CR Jr, et al. Antibody responses
 after
    influenza and pneumococcal immunization in HIV-infected
 homosexual
    men. JAMA 1987; 257:2047-50. 
    Klein RS, Selwyn PA, Maude D, et al. Responses to pneumococcal
 vaccine
    among asymptomatic heterosexual partners of persons with AIDS
 and
    intravenous drug users infected with human immunodeficiency
 virus. J
    Infect Dis 1989;160:826-31. 
    Vardinon N, Handsher R, Burke M, et al. Poliovirus vaccination
    responses in HIV-infected patients: correlation with T4 cell
 counts. J
    Infect Dis 1990;162:238-41. 
    Onorato IM, Markowitz LE. Immunizations, vaccine-preventable
 diseases,
    and HIV infection. In: Wormser GP, ed. AIDS and other
 manifestations
    of HIV infection. New York: Raven Press, 1992:671-81. 
    CDC. Measles pneumonitis following measles-mumps-rubella
 vaccination
    of a patient with HIV infection, 1993. MMWR 1996;45:603-6. 
    CDC. Measles, United States, 1995. MMWR 1996;45:305-7. 
    Mitus A, Holloway A, Evans AE, Enders JF. Attenuated measles
 vaccine
    in children with acute leukemia. Am J Dis Child
 1962;103:413-8. 
    Bellini WJ, Rota JS, Greer PW, Zaki SR. Measles vaccination
 death in a
    child with severe combined immunodeficiency: report of a case.
 Annual
    Meeting of United States and Canadian Academy of Pathology,
 Atlanta,
    GA, 1992. Lab Invest 1992;66:91A. 
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients
 during
    exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(RR-8):1-8. 
    Subbarao EK, Amin S, Kumar ML. Prevaccination serologic
 screening for
    measles in health care workers. J Infect Dis 1991;163:876-8. 
    Sellick Jr. JA, Longbine D, Schifeling R, Mylotte JM.
 Screening
    hospital employees for measles immunity is more cost effective
 than
    blind immunization. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:982-4. 
    Grabowsky M, Markowitz L. Serologic screening, mass
 immunization, and
    implications for immunization programs. J Infect Dis
 1991;164:1237-8. 
    CDC. Use of vaccines and immune globulins in persons with
 altered
    immunocompetence -- recommendations of the Advisory Committee
 on
    Immunization Practices(ACIP). MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-4):1-18. 
    Williams WW. CDC guideline for infection control in hospital
    personnel. Infect Control 1983;4(Suppl):326-49. 
    Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients
 in
    hospitals. In: Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of
 nosocomial
    infections. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1992: 214-94. 
    Mayhall CG, ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control.
    Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1996. 
    CDC. Health information for international travel, 1996-97.
 Atlanta,
    GA: Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
 Disease
    Control and Prevention, 1997. 
* A possible exception might be an outpatient facility that deals
exclusively with elderly patients considered at low risk for
 measles. 
** Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence of rubella immunity
 for
women who can become pregnant because rubella can occur in some
unvaccinated persons born before 1957 and because congenital
 rubella
syndrome can occur in offspring of women infected with rubella
 during
pregnancy. Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Recommendations for immunization practices and use of immunobiologics
applicable to disease prevention among health-care workers -- Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP) statements published as of September 1, 1997
====================================================
=============================================
Subject                                     MMWR Publication
-------------------------------------------------------------------
General recommendations on immunization     1994;43(No.RR-1):1-39
Adult immunization                          1991;40(No.RR-12):1-94
Altered immunocompetence                    1993;42(No.RR-4):1-18
Adverse reactions, contraindications, and
  precautions                               1996;45(No.RR-12):1-35
Bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccine             1996;45(No.RR-4):1-18
Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis          1991;40(No.RR-10):1-28
                                            1997;46(No. RR-7)
Hepatitis B                                 1991;40(No.RR-13):1-25
Hepatitis A                                 1996;45(No.RR-15):1-30
Influenza *                                 1997;46(No.RR-9):1-25
Japanese encephalitis                       1993;42(No.RR-1):1-15
Measles                                     1989;38(No.S9):1-18
Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)               1998;47 (in press)
Meningococcal disease and outbreaks         1997;46(No.RR-5):1-21
Mumps                                       1989;38:388-92, 397-400
 (MMR in press, see Measles above)
Pertussis, acellular                        1992;41(No.RR-1):1-10
 (see also Diphtheria above)                1992;41(No.RR-15):1-5
 (supplementary statements)                 1997;46(No.RR-7):1-25
Pneumococcal                                1997;46(No.RR-8):1-24
Poliomyelitis                               1997;46(No.RR-3):1-25
Rabies                                      1991;40(No.RR-3):1-19
Rubella                                     1990;39(No.RR-15):1-18
 (MMR in press, see Measles above)
Typhoid                                     1994;43(No.RR-14):1-7
Vaccinia (smallpox)                         1991;40(No.RR-14):1-10
Varicella                                   1996;45(No.RR-11):1-36
-------------------------------------------------------------------
* Each year influenza vaccine recommendations are reviewed and amended to reflect
updated
  information  concerning  influenza  activity  in  the  United  States  for  the  preceding
influenza
  season and to provide information on the vaccine available for the upcoming influenza
season.
  These recommendations are published annually in the MMWR, usually during May or
June.
====================================================
=============================================
Return to top.Table_2
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE  2.  Immunizing  agents  and  immunization  schedules  for  health-care  workers
(HCWs)*
====================================================
====================================================
====================================================
===
                          Primary schedule and                                              Major precautions
and
Generic name              booster(s)                   Indications                         
contraindications                 Special considerations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
IMMUNIZING AGENTS STRONGLY RECOMMENDED FOR HEALTH-CARE WORKERS
Hepatitis B (HB)          Two doses IM 4 weeks         Preexposure: HCWs at risk            On
the basis of limited data,     The vaccine produces neither
recombinant               apart; third dose 5          for exposure to blood or             no risk
of adverse effects to     therapeutic nor adverse
vaccine                   months after second;         body fluids.                         developing
fetuses is             effects on HBV-infected
                          booster doses not            Postexposure: See Table 3.           apparent.
Pregnancy should        persons. Prevaccination
                          necessary.                                                        not be considered a         
     serologic screening is not
                                                                                            contraindication to              
indicated for persons being
                                                                                            vaccination of women.            
vaccinated because of
                                                                                            Previous anaphylactic            
occupational risk. HCWs who
                                                                                            reaction to common baker's   
    have contact with patients or
                                                                                            yeast is a contraindication to 
  blood should be tested 1-2
                                                                                            vaccination.                     
months after vaccination to
    determine serologic
    response.
Hepatitis B immune        0.06 mL/kg IM as soon        Postexposure prophylaxis
globulin (HBIG)           as possible after            (Table 3): For persons
                          exposure. A second           exposed to blood or body
                          dose of HBIG should          fluids containing HBsAg and
                          be administered 1            who are not immune to HBV
                          month later if the HB        infection -- 0.06 mL/kg IM as
                          vaccine series has not       soon as possible (but no later
                          been started.                than 7 days after exposure).
Influenza vaccine         Annual vaccination           HCWs who have contact with          
History of anaphylactic           No evidence exists of risk to
(inactivated              with current vaccine.        patients at high risk for           
hypersensitivity to egg           mother or fetus when the
whole-virus and           Administered IM.             influenza or its                     ingestion.    
                   vaccine is administered to a
split-virus vaccines)                                  complications; HCWs who                                 
              pregnant woman with an
                                                       work in chronic care facilities;                                     
 underlying high-risk
                                                       HCWs with high-risk medical                                       
    condition. Influenza
                                                       conditions or who are aged                                         
   vaccination is recommended
                                                       >=65 years.                                                           
during second and third
    trimesters of pregnancy
    because of increased risk for
    hospitalization.
Measles live-virus        One dose SC; second          HCWs + born during or after         
Pregnancy;                        MMR is the vaccine of choice
vaccine                   dose at least 1 month        1957 who do not have                
immunocompromised                 if recipients are likely to be
                          later.                       documentation of having              persons &.,
including             susceptible to rubella and/or
                                                       received 2 doses of live             HIV-infected persons
who          mumps as well as to
                                                       vaccine on of after the first        have evidence of
severe           measles. Persons vaccinated
                                                       birthday or a history of             immunosuppression;  
             during 1963-1967 with a
                                                       physician-diagnosed measles          anaphylaxis after
gelatin         killed measles vaccine alone,
                                                       or serologic evidence of             ingestion or
administration       killed vaccine followed by
                                                       immunity.                            of neomycin; recent         
     live vaccine, or with a
                                                       Vaccination should be                administration of
immune          vaccine of unknown type
                                                       considered for all HCWs who          globulin.                
        should be revaccinated with
                                                       lack proof of immunity,                                               
2 doses of live measles virus
                                                       including those born before                                         
  vaccine.
                                                       1957.
Mumps live-virus          One dose SC; no              HCWs + believed to be               
Pregnancy;                        MMR is the vaccine of choice
vaccine                   booster.                     susceptible can be                  
immunocompromised                 if recipients are likely to be
                                                       vaccinated. Adults born              persons &; history of
            susceptible to measles and
                                                       before 1957 can be                   anaphylactic reaction
after       rubella as well as to mumps.
                                                       considered immune.                   gelatin ingestion or
                                                                                            administration of neomycin.
Rubella live-virus        One dose SC; no              Indicated for HCWs +, both          
Pregnancy;                        The risk for rubella
vaccine                   booster                      men and women, who do not           
immunocompromised                 vaccine-associated
                                                       have documentation of                persons +; history
of             malformations in the
                                                       having received live vaccine         anaphylactic
reaction after       offspring of women pregnant
                                                       on or after their first birthday     administration of
neomycin.       when vaccinated or who
                                                       or laboratory evidence of                                            
 become pregnant within 3
                                                       immunity. Adults born before                                      
    months after vaccination is
                                                       1957, except women who                                           
     negligible. Such women
                                                       can become pregnant, can                                          
    should be counseled
                                                       be considered immune.                                               
  regarding the theoretical
    basis of concern for the fetus.
    MMR is the vaccine of choice
    if recipients are likely to be
    susceptible to measles or
    mumps, as well as to rubella.
Varicella zoster          Two 0.5 mL doses SC          Indicated for HCWs + who do         
Pregnancy,                        Vaccine is available from the
live-virus vaccine        4-8 weeks apart if           not have either a reliable          
immunocompromised                 manufacturer for certain
                          >=13 years of age.           history of varicella or              persons &,
history of             patients with acute
                                                       serologic evidence of                anaphylactic reaction 
           lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)
                                                       immunity.                            following receipt of          
   in remission. Because
                                                                                            neomycin or gelatin. Avoid     
  71%-93% of persons without
                                                                                            salicylate use for 6 weeks      
 a history of varicella are
                                                                                            after vaccination.               
immune, serologic testing
    before vaccination is likely to
    be cost-effective.
Varicella-zoster          Persons <50 kg:              Persons known or likely to be                   
                      Serologic testing may help in
immune globulin           125 u/10 kg IM;              susceptible (particularly                         
                    assessing whether to
(VZIG)                    persons >=50 kg:             those at high risk for                                   
             administer VZIG. If use of
                          625 u @.                     complications, e.g., pregnant                                
         VZIG prevents varicella
                                                       women) who have close and                                       
      disease, patient should be
                                                       prolonged exposure to a                                              
 vaccinated subsequently.
                                                       contact case or to an
                                                       infectious hospital staff
                                                       worker or patient.
BCG VACCINATION
Bacille Calmette          One percutaneous             Should be considered only           
Should not be administered        In the United States
Guerin(BCG)               dose of 0.3 mL; no           for HCWs in areas where              to
immunocompromised              tuberculosis-control efforts
Vaccine                   booster dose                 multi-drug tuberculosis is           persons, &
pregnant women.        are directed towards early
(Tuberculosis)            recommended.                 prevalent, a strong likelihood                  
                      identification, treatment of
                                                       of infection exists, and where                                      
  cases, and preventive
                                                       comprehensive infection                                             
  therapy with isoniazid.
                                                       control precautions have
                                                       failed to prevent TB
                                                       transmission to HCWs.
OTHER  IMMUNOBIOLOGICS  THAT  ARE  OR  MAY  BE  INDICATED  FOR  HEALTH-CARE
WORKERS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
                          Primary schedule and                                              Major precautions
and             Special considerations
Generic name              booster(s)                   Indications                         
contraindications
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
Immune globulin           Postexposure-One IM          Indicated for HCWs exposed          
Contraindicated in persons        Administer in large muscle
(Hepatitis A)             dose of 0.02 mL/kg           to feces of infectious patients.     with IgA
deficiency; do not       mass (deltoid, gluteal).
                          administered <=2 weeks                                            administer within
2 weeks
                          after exposure.                                                   after MMR vaccine, or 3
                                                                                            weeks after varicella vaccine.
                                                                                            Delay administration of MMR
                                                                                            vaccine for >=3 months and
                                                                                            varicella vaccine >=5 months
                                                                                            after administration of IG.
Hepatitis A vaccine       Two doses of vaccine         Not routinely indicated for         
History of anaphylactic
                          either 6-12 months           HCWs in the United States.          
hypersensitivity to alum or,
                          apart (HAVRIX (R)), or 6     Persons who work with                for HAVRIX
(R), the
                          months apart (VAQTA (R)).    HAV-infected primates or            
preservative
                                                       with HAV in a research               2-phenoxyethanol.
The
                                                       laboratory setting should be         safety of the
vaccine in
                                                       vaccinated.                          pregnant women has not
                                                                                            been determined; the risk
                                                                                            associated with vaccination
                                                                                            should be weighed against
                                                                                            the risk for hepatitis A in
                                                                                            women who may be at high
                                                                                            risk for exposure to HAV.
Meningococcal             One dose in volume           Not routinely indicated for          The
safety of the vaccine in
polysaccharide            and by route specified       HCWs in the United States.          
pregnant women has not
vaccine (tetravalent      by manufacturer; need                                             been
evaluated; it should not
A, C, W135, and Y)        for boosters unknown.                                             be
administered during
                                                                                            pregnancy unless the risk for
                                                                                            infection is high.
Typhoid vaccine,          IM vaccine: One 0.5          Workers in microbiology             
Severe local or systemic          Vaccination should not be
IM, SC, and oral          mL dose, booster 0.5         laboratories who frequently         
reaction to a previous dose.      considered an alternative to
                          mL every 2 years.            work with Salmonella typhi.          Ty21a (oral)
vaccine should       the use of proper procedures
                          SC vaccine: two 0.5                                               not be administered
to            when handling specimens
                          mL doses, >=4 weeks                                              
immunocompromised                 and cultures in the laboratory.
                          apart, booster 0.5 mL                                             persons & or to
persons
                          SC or 0.1 ID every 3                                              receiving
antimicrobial
                          years if exposure                                                 agents.
                          continues.
                          Oral vaccine: Four
                          doses on alternate
                          days. The
                          manufacturer
                          recommends
                          revaccination with the
                          entire four-dose series
                          every 5 years.
Vaccinia vaccine          One dose                     Laboratory workers who               The
vaccine is                    Vaccination may be
(smallpox)                administered with a          directly handle cultures with       
contraindicated in pregnancy,     considered for HCWs who
                          bifurcated needle;           vaccinia, recombinant                in persons
with eczema or a       have direct contact with
                          boosters administered        vaccinia viruses, or orthopox        history of
eczema, and in         contaminated dressings or
                          every 10 years.              viruses that infect humans.         
immunocompromised                 other infectious material
                                                                                            persons & and their
household     from volunteers in clinical
                                                                                            contacts.                        
studies involving
    recombinant vaccinia virus.
OTHER VACCINE-PREVENTABLE DISEASES
Tetanus and               Two IM doses 4 weeks         All adults.                          Except in
the first trimester,    Tetanus prophylaxis in
diphtheria (toxoids       apart; third dose 6-12                                            pregnancy is
not a                wound management **.
{Td})                     months after second                                               precaution.
History of a
                          dose; booster every                                               neurologic reaction or
                          10 years.                                                         immediate
hypersensitivity
                                                                                            reaction after a previous
                                                                                            dose. History of severe local
                                                                                            (Arthus-type) reaction after a
                                                                                            previous dose.  Such persons
                                                                                            should not receive further
                                                                                            routine or emergency doses
                                                                                            of Td for 10 years.
Pneumococcal              One dose, 0.5 mL, IM         Adults who are at increased          The
safety of vaccine in
polysaccharide            or SC; revaccination         risk of pneumococcal disease        
pregnant women has not
vaccine (23 valent).      recommended for              and its complications                been
evaluated; it should not
                          those at highest risk        because of underlying health         be
administered during
                          >=5 years after the first    conditions; older adults,            pregnancy
unless the risk for
                          dose.                        especially those age >=65 who        infection is
high. Previous
                                                       are healthy.                         recipients of any type of
                                                                                            pneumococcal
                                                                                            polysaccharide vaccine who
                                                                                            are at highest risk for fatal
                                                                                            infection or antibody loss
                                                                                            may be revaccinated >=5
                                                                                            years after the first dose.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
 *  Persons  who  provide  health  care  to  patients  or  work  in  institutions  that  provide
patient care, e. g., physicians, nurses, emergency medical
   personnel,  dental  professionals  and  students,  medical  and  nursing  students,
laboratory technicians, hospital volunteers, and adminis-
   trative and support staff in health-care institutions
 +  All  HCWs  (i.e.,  medical  or  nonmedical,  paid  or  volunteer,  fulltime  or  part  time,
student or non-student, with or without patient-care
   responsibilities) who work in health-care institutions (e.g., inpatient and outpatient,
public and private) should be immune to measles,
   rubella, and varicella.
 & Persons immunocompromised because of immune deficiency diseases, HIV infection
(who should primarily not receive BCG, OPV, and
   yellow  fever  vaccines),  leukemia,  lymphoma  or  generalized  malignancy  or
immunosuppressed as a result of therapy with corticosteroids,
   alkylating drugs, antimetabolites, or radiation.
  @ Some experts recommend 125 u/10 kg regardless of total body weight.
**  See  (15)  CDC.  Update  on  adult  immunization:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
1991:40(No. RR-12):1-94.
Abbreviations: IM = intramuscular; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface
antigen; SC = subcutaneous; HIV = human
immunodeficiency virus; MMR = measles, mumps, rubella vaccine; HCW = health-care
worker; TB = tuberculosis; HAV = hepatitis A
virus; IgA = immune globulin A; ID = intradermal.
====================================================
====================================================
====================================================
===
Return to top.Table_3
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 3. Recommended postexposure prophylaxis for percutaneous or permucosal
exposure to hepatitis B virus, United States
====================================================
===================================================
                                                    Treatment when source is
Vaccination and anti-    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 body response status                                                       Source not tested or
of exposed person        HBsAG * positive           HBsAg negative           status unknown
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unvaccinated             HBIG + x 1; initiate HB    Initiate HB vaccine     Initiate HB vaccine
                         vaccine series &           series                  series
Previously vaccinated:
Known responder @        No treatment               No treatment            No treatment
Known non-responder      HBIG x 2 or                No treatment            If known high-risk
                         HBIG x 1 and initiate                              source, treat as if
                         revaccination                                      source were HBsAg
                                                                            positive
Antibody response        Test exposed person        No treatment            Test exposed
person
unknown                  for anti-HBs **                                    for anti-HBs
                         1. If adequate @, no                               1. If adequate @, no
                            treatment                                          treatment
                         2. If inadequate @, HBIG                           2. If inadequate @,
                            x 1 and vaccine                                    initiate revaccination
                            booster
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 * Hepatitis B surface antigen.
 + Hepatitis B immune globulin; dose 0.06 mL/kg intramuscularly.
 & Hepatitis B vaccine.
 @  Responder  is  defined  as  a  person  with  adequate  levels  of  serum  antibody  to
hepatitis B
   surface antigen (i.e., anti-HBs >=  10 mIU/mL); inadequate response to vaccination
defined as
   serum anti-HBs < 10 mIU/mL.
** Antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen.
====================================================
===================================================
Return to top.Table_4
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 4. Summary of ACIP recommendations concerning immunization of health-care
workers with special conditions
====================================================
====================================================
================================
                                                                 Severe                                               
Alcoholism
                                                                 Immuno-                                              and
Alcoholic
Vaccine                          Pregnancy    HIV Infection   suppression*    Asplenia   Renal
Failure    Diabetes      Cirrhosis
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
BCG                                  C              C              C             UI            UI            UI            UI
Hepatitis A                          UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI            
R +
Hepatitis B                          R              R              R             R             R             R              R
Influenza                            R &            R              R             R             R             R             
R
Measles, Mumps, Rubella              C              R @            C             R             R             R   
          R
Meningococcus                        UI             UI             UI            R +           UI            UI        
   UI
Poliovirus vaccine,                  UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI           
UI
  inactivated (IPV) **
Poliovirus vaccine, live,            UI             C              C             UI            UI            UI         
  UI
  oral (OPV) **
Pneumococcus +                       UI             R              R             R             R             R         
    R
Rabies                               UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI            UI
Tetanus/diphtheria +                 R              R              R             R             R             R         
    R
Typhoid, Inactivated & Vi ++         UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI   
        UI
Typhoid, Ty21a                       UI             C              C             UI            UI            UI           
UI
Varicella                            C              C              C             R             R             R              R
Vaccinia                             C              C              C             UI            UI            UI            UI
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
 *  Severe  immunosuppression  can  be  caused  by  congenital  immunodeficiency,
leukemia, lymphoma, generalized malignancy or therapy
   with  alkylating  agents,  antimetabolites,  ionizing  radiation,  or  large  amounts  of
corticosteroids.
 +  Recommendation  is  based  on  the  persons  underlying  condition  rather  than
occupation.
 &  Women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third  trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the
influenza season.
 @  Contraindicated  in  HIV-  infected  persons  who  have  evidence  of  severe
immunosuppression.
** Vaccination is recommended for unvaccinated health-care workers who have close
contact with patients who may be excreting wild
   polioviruses.  Primary  vaccination  with  IPV  is  recommended  because  the  risk  for
vaccine-associated paralysis after administration of
   OPV is higher among adults than among children. Health care workers who have had
a primary series of OPV or IPV who are directly
   involved with the provision of care to patients who may be excreting poliovirus may
receive another dose of either IPV or OPV. Any
   suspected  case  of  poliomyelitis  should  be  investigated  immediately.  If  evidence
suggests transmission of wild poliovirus, control
   measures to contain further transmission should be instituted immediately, including
an OPV vaccination campaign.
++ Capsular polysaccharide parenteral vaccine.
Abbreviations: R=Recommended; C=Contraindicated; UI=Use if indicated.
====================================================
====================================================
================================
Return to top.Table_5
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 5. Work restrictions * for health-care workers (HCWs) exposed to or infected
with certain vaccine-preventable diseases
====================================================
====================================================
===
Disease/Problem                    Work Restriction                     Duration
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diphtheria
  Active                           Exclude from duty.                   Until antimicrobial therapy is
                                                                        completed and 2
                                                                        nasopharyngeal cultures
                                                                        obtained >=24 hours apart are
                                                                        negative.
  Postexposure
  (Susceptible HCWs;               Exclude from duty.                   Same as active diphtheria
  previously vaccinated HCWs
  who have not had a Td
  booster dose within the
  previous 5 years)
  Asymptomatic carriers            Exclude from duty.                   Same as active
diphtheria.
Hepatitis A                        Restrict from patient contact        7 days after onset of
jaundice.
                                   and food handling.
Hepatitis B
  HCWs with acute or chronic
  antigenemia:
  -HCWs  who  do  not  perform          Standard  precautions  should           Universal
precautions should
  exposure-prone invasive          always be observed. No               always be observed.
  procedures (21)                  restriction unless
                                   epidemiologically linked to
                                   transmission of infection.
  -HCWs who perform                These HCWs should not                Until HBeAg + is
negative.
  exposure-prone invasive          perform exposure-prone
  procedures                       invasive procedures until they
                                   have sought counsel from an
                                   expert review panel which
                                   should review and recommend
                                   the procedures the worker can
                                   perform, taking into account
                                   the specific procedure as well
                                   as the skill and technique of
                                   the worker (30).
Upper respiratory infections
 (Persons at high risk for         During particular seasons (e.g.,     Until acute symptoms
resolve.
 complications of influenza as     during winter when influenza
 defined by ACIP {3})              and/or RSV are prevalent),
                                   consider excluding personnel
                                   with acute febrile upper
                                   respiratory infections
                                   (including influenza) from care
                                   of high-risk patients.
Measles
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    7 days after rash appears.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty.                   5th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 21st day after last
                                                                        exposure and/or 7 days after
                                                                        the rash appears.
Mumps
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    9 days after onset of parotitis.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty.                   12th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 26th day after last
                                                                        exposure or 9 days after onset
                                                                        of parotitis.
Pertussis
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    Beginning of catarrhal stage
                                                                        through 3rd week after onset
                                                                        of paroxysms or until 5 days
                                                                        after start of effective
                                                                        antimicrobial therapy.
  Postexposure
    Symptomatic personnel          Exclude from duty                    5 days after start of
effective
                                                                        antimicrobial therapy.
    Asymptomatic personnel         No restriction, on antimicrobial
                                   prophylactic therapy.
Rubella
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    5 days after the rash appears.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty.                   7th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 21st day after last
                                                                        exposure and/or 5 days after
                                                                        rash appears.
Varicella
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    Until all lesions dry and crust.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty                    10th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 21st day (28th day if
                                                                        VZIG administered) after the
                                                                        last exposure; if varicella
                                                                        occurs, until all lesions dry and
                                                                        crust.
Zoster
 (Localized in normal person)      Cover lesions; restrict from         Same as varicella.
                                   care of high-risk patients &.
  Postexposure                     Restrict from patient contact.
   (Susceptible personnel)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Adapted from:
 
 -
 (173)
 CDC.
 Recommendations
 for
 preventing
 transmission
 of
 human
immunodeficiency virus
    and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR
    1991;40(RR-8):1-8.
  - (95) CDC. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. Recommendations of the
Hospital
    Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and the National Center for
Infectious
    Diseases. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80.
  - (178) Williams WW: CDC guideline for infection control in hospital personnel. Infect
Control
    1983;4(Suppl):326-49.
+ HBeAg = Hepatitis B e antigen.
&  Patients  who  are  susceptible  to  varicella  and  at  increased  risk  for  complications  of
varicella
  (i.e., neonates and immunocompromised persons of any age.)
====================================================
====================================================
===
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
    CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for
 eliminating
    transmission in the United States through childhood
 immunization:
    recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
 Practices
    (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13):1-25.  
    CDC. Prevention of hepatitis A through active or passive
 immunization:
    recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
 Practices
    (ACIP). MMWR 1996;45(No. RR-15):1-30.  
    Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-9):
    1-25.  
    CDC. Measles prevention: recommendations of the Immunization
 Practices
    Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1989;(No. S-9):1-18.  
    CDC. Mumps prevention. Recommendations of the Immunization
 Practices
    Advisory Committee (ACIP) MMWR 1989;38:388-92,397-400.  
    CDC. Rubella prevention. Recommendations of the Advisory
 Committee on
    Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-15):1-13.  
    CDC. The role of BCG vaccine in the prevention and control of
    tuberculosis in the United States: a joint statement by the
 Advisory
    Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the Advisory
 Committee
    on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1996;45(No. RR-4):1-18.
  
    CDC. Prevention of varicella: recommendations of the Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1996;45(No.
 RR-11):
    1-36.  
    CDC. Control and prevention of meningococcal disease and
 control and
    prevention of serogroup C meningococcal disease: evaluation
 and
    management of suspected outbreaks: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-5):
    1-21.  
    CDC. Vaccinia (smallpox) vaccine. Recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
 1991;40(RR-14):1-10.  
    CDC. Poliomyelitis prevention in the United States:
 introduction of a
    sequential vaccination schedule of inactivated poliovirus
 vaccine
    followed by oral poliovirus vaccine: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-3):
    1-25.  
    CDC. Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis: recommendations for
 vaccine
    use and other preventive measures: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No.
 RR-10):
    1-28.  
    CDC. Typhoid immunization: recommendations of the Advisory
 Committee
    on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-14):1-7.
  
    CDC. Prevention of pneumococcal disease: recommendations of
 the
    Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
 1997;46(No.
    RR-8):1-24.  
    CDC. Update on adult immunization: recommendations of the
 Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No.
 RR-12):
    1-94.  
    CDC. Guidelines for infection control in health care
 personnel, 1997:
    recommendations of the Hospital Infection Control Practices
 Advisory
    Committee. Am J Infect Control 1998 (in press).  
    American Hospital Association. Immunization: management
 advisory on
    health care delivery. American Hospital Association; 1992:
 Chicago,
    Illinois.  
    CDC. Hepatitis surveillance report No. 56. Atlanta: U.S.
 Department of
    Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for
 Disease
    Control and Prevention; 1-33, 1996.  
    CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care
 and
    public-safety workers: a response to P. L. 100-607, The Health
 Omnibus
    Programs Extension Act of 1988. Atlanta, GA.: U.S. Department
 of
    Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for
 Disease
    Control; 1-45, 1989.  
    Shapiro CN. Occupational risk of infection with hepatitis B
 and
    hepatitis C virus. Surg Clin North Am 1995;75:1047-56.  
    Thomas DL, Factor SH, Gabon D, et al. Viral hepatitis in
 health care
    personnel at the Johns Hopkins Hospital. Arch Intern Med
    1993;153:1705-12.  
    Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B
 virus in
    hospital personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol
    1982;115:26-39.  
    Shapiro CN, Tokars JI, Chamberland ME, et al. Use of the
 hepatitis B
    vaccine and infection with hepatitis B and C among orthopaedic
    surgeons. J Bone Joint Surg 1996;78-A:1791-1800.  
    Gibas A, Blewett DR, Schoenfled DA, Dienstag JL. Prevalence
 and
    incidence of viral hepatitis in health workers in the
 prehepatitis B
    vaccination era. Am J Epidemiol 1992;136:603-10.  
    Hadler SC, Doto IL, Maynard JE, et al. Occupational risk of
 hepatitis
    B infection in hospital workers. Infection Control
 1985;6:24-31.  
    Department of Labor/Department of Health and Human Services
 Joint
    Advisory Notice. Protection against occupational exposure to
 hepatitis
    B virus (HBV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Federal
 Register
    1987;52:41818-24.  
    Department of Labor. Bloodborne pathogens: the standard.
 Federal
    Register 1991;60:64175-82.  
    Stevens CE, Toy PT, Taylor PE, Lee T, Yip H-Y. Prospects for
 control
    of hepatitis B virus infection: implications of childhood
 vaccination
    and long-term protection. Pediatrics 1992;90:170-3.  
    Hadler SC, Margolis HS. Hepatitis B immunization: vaccine
 types,
    efficacy, and indications for immunization. In Remington JS,
 Swartz
    MN: Current topics in infectious diseases. Boston: Blackwell
    Scientific, 1992:282-308.  
    Balkovic ES, Goodman RA, Rose FB, et al. Nosocomial influenza
 A(H1N1)
    infection. Am J Med Technol 1980;46:318-20.  
    Van Voris LP, Belshe RB, Shaffer JL. Nosocomial influenza B
 virus
    infection in the elderly. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:153-8.  
    CDC. Suspected nosocomial influenza cases in an intensive care
 unit.
    MMWR 1988;37:3.  
    Pachucki CT, Walsh Pappas SA, Fuller GF, Krause SL, Lentino
 JR, Schaaf
    DM. Influenza A among hospital personnel and patients:
 implications
    for recognition, prevention, and control. Arch Intern Med
 1990;149:
    77-80.  
    Hammond GW, Cheang M. Absenteeism among hospital staff during
 an
    influenza epidemic: Implications for immunoprophylaxis. Can
 Med Assoc
    J 1984;131:449-52.  
    Williams WW, Preblud SR, Reichelderfer PS, Hadler SC. Vaccines
 of
    importance in the hospital setting. Infect Dis Clin North Am
    1989;3:701-22.  
    Mast EE, Harmon MW, Gravenstein S, et al. Emergence and
 possible
    transmission of amantadine-resistant viruses during nursing
 home
    outbreaks of influenza (AH3N2). Am J Epidemiol.
 1991;134:986-97.  
    Horman JT, Stetler HC, Israel E, Sorley D, Schipper MT, Joseph
 JM. An
    outbreak of influenza A in a nursing home. Am J Public Health
    1986;76:501-4.  
    Patriarca PA, Weber JA, Parker RA, et al. Risk factors for
 outbreaks
    of influenza in nursing homes: a case-control study. Am J
 Epidemiol
    1986;124:114-9.  
    CDC. Outbreak of influenza A in a nursing home -- New York,
 December,
    1991-January, 1992. MMWR 1992;41:129-31.  
    Gross PA, Rodstein M, LaMontagne JR, et al. Epidemiology of
 acute
    respiratory illness during an influenza outbreak in a nursing
 home.
    Arch Intern Med 1988;148:559-61.  
    Cartter ML, Renzullo PO, Helgerson SD, Martin SM, Jekel JF.
 Influenza
    outbreaks in nursing homes: how effective is influenza vaccine
 in the
    institutionalized elderly? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
 1990;11:
    473-8.  
    Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Influenza vaccination
 of health
    care workers in long-term-care hospitals reduces the mortality
 of
    elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1-6.  
    CDC. Measles in HIV-infected children -- United States. MMWR
 1988;37:
    183-6.  
    CDC. Measles transmitted in a medical office building -- New
 Mexico,
    1986. MMWR 1987;36:25-7.  
    Davis RM, Orenstein WA, Frank Jr, JA, et al. Transmission of
 measles
    in medical settings, 1980 through 1984. JAMA 1986;255:1295-8.  
    Istre GR, KcKee PA, West GR, et al. Measles spread in medical
    settings: an important focus of disease transmission?
 Pediatrics
    1987;79:356-8.  
    Sienko DG, Friedman C, McGee HB, et al. A measles outbreak at
    university medical settings involving health care providers.
 Am J
    Public Health 1987;77:1222-4.  
    Watkins NM, Smith Jr RP, St.Germain DL, et al. Measles
 (rubeola)
    infection in a hospital setting. Am J Infect Control
 1987;15:201-6.  
    Atkinson WL, Markowitz LE, Adams NC, Seastrom GR. Transmission
 of
    measles in medical settings -- United States, 1985-1989. Am J
 Med
    1991;91(Suppl 3B):320S-4S.  
    CDC. Measles -- United States, 1987. MMWR 1988;37:527-31.  
    CDC. Measles -- United States, 1986. MMWR 1987;36:301-5.  
    CDC. Measles -- United States, 1985. MMWR 1986;35:366-70.  
    Braunstein H, Thomas S, Ito R. Immunity to measles in a large
    population of varying age. Am J Dis Child 1990;144:296-8.  
    Smith E, Welch W, Berhow M, Wong VK. Measles susceptibility of
    hospital employees as determined by ELISA. Clin Res
 1990;38:183A.  
    Cochi SL, Preblud SR, Orenstein WA. Perspectives on the
 relative
    resurgence of mumps in the United States. Am J Dis Child
 1988;142:
    499-507.  
    Kaplan KM, Marder DC, Cochi SL, et al. Mumps in the workplace:
 further
    evidence of the changing epidemiology of a childhood
    vaccine-preventable disease. JAMA 1988;260:1434-8.  
    CDC. Mumps outbreaks on university campuses -- Illinois,
 Wisconsin,
    South Dakota, MMWR 1987;36:496-498,503-5.  
    Sosin DM, Cochi SL, Gunn RA, et al. Changing epidemiology of
 mumps and
    its impact on university campuses. Pediatrics 1989;84:779-84.  
    Hersh BS, Fine PEM, Kent WK, et al. Mumps outbreak in a highly
    vaccinated population. J Pediatr 1991;119:87-93.  
    Briss PA, Fehrs LJ, Parker RA, et al. Sustained transmission
 of mumps
    in a highly vaccinated population: assessment of primary
 vaccine
    failure and waning vaccine-induced immunity. J Infect Dis
 1994;169:
    77-82.  
    van Loon FPL, Holmes SJ, Sirotkin BI, et al. Mumps
 surveillance --
    United States, 1988-1993. In: CDC surveillance summaries
 (August 11).
    MMWR 1995;44(No. SS-3):1-14.  
    Wharton M, Cochi SL, Hutcheson RH, Schaffner W. Mumps
 transmission in
    hospitals. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:47-9.  
    Greaves WL, Orenstein WA, Stetler HC, et al. Prevention of
 rubella
    transmission in medical facilities. JAMA 1982;248:861-4.  
    Bart KJ, Orenstein WA, Preblud SR, et al. Elimination of
 rubella and
    congenital rubella from the United States. Pediatr Infect Dis
 1985;4:
    14-21.  
    CDC. Rubella and congenital rubella -- United States,
 1984-1986. MMWR
    1987;36:664-6,671-5.  
    CDC. Increase in rubella and congenital rubella syndrome --
 United
    States, 1988-90. MMWR 1991;40:93-9.  
    CDC. Congenital rubella among the Amish. MMWR
 1992;41:468-9,475-6.  
    Crawford GE, Gremillion DH. Epidemic measles and rubella in
 Air Force
    recruits: impact of immunization. J Infect Dis
 1981;144:403-10.  
    Meyers JD, MacQuarrie MB, Merigan TC, Jennison MH. Varicella.
 Part 1:
    outbreak in oncology patients at a children's hospital. West J
 Med
    1979;130:196-9.  
    Morens DM, Bregman DJ, West CM, et al. An outbreak of
 varicella-zoster
    virus infection among cancer patients. Ann Intern Med
 1980;93:414-9.  
    Baltimore RS. Infections in the pediatric intensive care unit.
 Yale J
    Biol Med 1984;57:185-97.  
    Gustafson TL, Shehab Z, Brunell PA. Outbreak of varicella in a
 newborn
    intensive care nursery. Am J Dis Child 1984;138:548-50.  
    Hyams PJ, Stuewe MCS, Heitzer V. Herpes zoster causing
 varicella
    (chicken pox) in hospital employees: cost of a casual
 attitude. Infect
    Control 1984;12:2-5.  
    Shehab ZM, Brunell PA. Susceptibility of hospital personnel to
    varicella-zoster virus. J Infect Dis 1984;150:786.  
    Weitekamp MR, Schan P, Aber RC. An algorithm for the control
 of
    varicella-zoster virus. Am J Infect Control 1985;13:193-8.  
    Alter SJ, Hammond JA, McVey CJ, Myers MG. Susceptibility to
    varicella-zoster virus among adults at high risk for exposure.
 Infect
    Control 1986;7:448-51.  
    Krasinski K, Holzman RS, LaCouture R, Florman A. Hospital
 experience
    with varicella-zoster virus. Infect Control 1986;7:312-6.  
    Haiduven-Griffiths D, Fecko H. Varicella in hospital
 personnel: a
    challenge for the infection control practitioner. Am J Infect
 Control
    1987;15:207-11.  
    Weber DJ, Rutala WA, Parham C. Impact and costs of varicella
    prevention in a university hospital. Am J Public Health
 1988;78:19-23.  
    McKinney WP, Horowitz MM, Battiola RJ. Susceptibility of
    hospital-based health care personnel to varicella-zoster virus
    infections. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:26-30.  
    Asano Y, Iwayama S, Miyata T, et al. Spread of varicella in
    hospitalized children having no direct contact with an
 indicator
    zoster case and its prevention by a live vaccine. Biken J
 1980;23:
    157-61.  
    Leclair JM, Zaia JA, Levine MJ, Congdon RG, Goldmann DA.
 Airborne
    transmission of chickenpox in a hospital. N Engl J Med
 1980;302:450-3.  
    Gustafson TL, Lavely GB, Brawner ER, Hutcheson RH, Wright PF,
    Schaffner W. An outbreak of airborne varicella. Pediatrics
 1982;70:
    550-6.  
    Josephson A, Gombert ME. Airborne transmission of nosocomial
 varicella
    from localized zoster. J Infect Dis 1988;158:238-41.  
    Sawyer MH, Chamberlin CJ, Wu YN, Aintablian N, Wallace MR.
 Detection
    of varicella-zoster virus DNA in air samples from hospital
 room. J
    Infect Dis 1994;169:91-4.  
    Preblud SR. Nosocomial varicella: worth preventing but how? Am
 J
    Public Health 1988;78:13-5.  
    Myers MG, Rasley DA, Hierholzer WJ. Hospital infection control
 for
    varicella zoster virus infection. Pediatrics 1982;70:199-202.  
    Steele RW, Coleman MA, Fiser M, Bradsher RW. Varicella-zoster
 in
    hospital personnel: skin test reactivity to monitor
 susceptibility.
    Pediatrics 1982;70:604-8.  
    Anderson JD, Bonner M, Scheifele DW, Schneider BC. Lack of
 spread of
    varicella in a pediatric hospital with negative pressure
 ventilated
    patient rooms. Infect Control 1985;6:120-1.  
    Sayre MR, Lucid EJ. Management of varicella-zoster
 virus-exposed
    hospital employees. Ann Emerg Med 1987;16:421-4.  
    Stover BH, Cost KM, Hamm C, Adams G, Cook LN. Varicella
 exposure in a
    neonatal intensive care unit: case report and control
 measures. Am J
    Infect Control 1988;16:167-72.  
    Lipton SV, Brunell PA. Management of varicella exposure in a
 neonatal
    intensive care unit. JAMA 1989;261:1782-4.  
    Ferson MJ, Bell SM, Robertson PW. Determination and importance
 of
    varicella immune status of nursing staff in a children's
 hospital. J
    Hosp Infect 1990;15:347-51.  
    Josephson A, Karanfil L, Gombert ME. Strategies for the
 management of
    varicella-susceptible health care workers after a known
 exposure.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:309-13.  
    CDC. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals.
 Recommendations
    of the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
    (HICPAC) and the National Center for Infectious Diseases.
 Infect
    Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80.  
    Kelly PW, Petruccelli BP, Stehr-Green P, Erickson RL, Mason
 CJ. The
    susceptibility of young adult Americans to vaccine-preventable
    infections. A national serosurvey of US Army recruits. JAMA
 1991;266:
    2724-9.  
    Struewing JP, Hyams KC, Tueller JE, Gray GC. The risk of
 measles,
    mumps, and varicella among young adults: a serosurvey of US
 Navy and
    Marine Corps recruits. Am J Public Health 1993;83:1717-20.  
    Polder JA, Tablan OC, Williams WW. Personnel health services.
 In:
    Bennett JV, Brachman PS, eds. Hospital infections. 3rd ed.
 Boston:
    Little, Brown and Company, 1992:31-61.  
    White CJ, Kuter BJ, Ngai A, et al. Modified cases of
 chickenpox after
    varicella vaccination: correlation of protection with antibody
    response. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1992;11:19-23.  
    Bernstein HH, Rothstein EP, Watson BM, et al. Clinical survey
 of
    natural varicella compared with breakthrough varicella after
    immunization with live attenuated Oka/Merck varicella vaccine.
    Pediatrics 1993;92:833-7.  
    Watson BM, Piercy SA, Plotkin SA, Starr SE. Modified
 chickenpox in
    children immunized with the Oka/Merck varicella vaccine.
 Pediatrics
    1993;91:17-22.  
    Weibel RE, Neff BJ, Kuter BJ, et al. Live attenuated varicella
    vaccine. Efficacy trial in healthy children. N Engl J Med
 1984;310:
    1409-15.  
    Tsolia M, Gershon AA, Steinberg SP, Gelb L. Live attenuated
 varicella
    vaccine: evidence that the vaccine virus is attenuated and the
    importance of skin lesions in transmission of varicella-zoster
 virus.
    The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
 Varicella
    Vaccine Collaborative Study Group. J Pediatr 1990;116:185-9.  
    Steinberg SP, Gershon AA. Measurement of antibodies to
    varicella-zoster virus by using a latex agglutination test. J
 Clin
    Microbiol 1991;29:1527-9.  
    Gershon AA, Steinberg SP, LaRussa PS. Detection of antibody to
    varicella zoster virus using the latex agglutination assay.
 Clin Diagn
    Virol 1994; 2:271-8.  
    American Thoracic Society, CDC. Treatment of tuberculosis and
    tuberculosis infection in adults and children. Am J Respir
 Crit Care
    Med 1994;149:1359-74.  
    Farer LS. Chemoprophylaxis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1982;125(Pt
 2):102-7.  
    CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of M.
 tuberculosis in
    health-care facilities, 1994. MMWR l994;43(RR-13):1-132.  
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis among homeless
 persons.
    MMWR 1992;41(RR-5):13-23.  
    CDC. Prevention and control of tuberculosis in correctional
    facilities: recommendations of the Advisory Council for the
    Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1996;45:(No.RR-8):1-27.  
    CDC. Nosocomial transmission of multidrug-resistant
 tuberculosis among
    HIV-infected persons -- Florida and New York, 1988-1991. MMWR
 1991;40
    (34):585-91.  
    Edlin BR, Tokars JI, Grieco MH, et al. An outbreak of
    multidrug-resistant tuberculosis among hospitalized patients
 with the
    acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. N Engl J Med
 1992;326:1514-21.  
    Pearson ML, Jereb JA, Frieden TR, et al. Nosocomial
 transmission of
    multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A risk to
 patients and
    health care workers. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:191-6.  
    CDC. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in a hospital -- Jersey
 City,
    New Jersey, 1990-1992. MMWR 1994;43(22):417-9.  
    CDC. Outbreak of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis at a
 hospital -- New
    York City, 1991. MMWR 1993;42(22):427,433-4.  
    Valway SE, Greifinger RB, Papania M, et al.
 Multidrug-resistant
    tuberculosis in the New York State prison system, 1990-1991. J
 Infect
    Dis 1994;170:151-6.  
    Alter MJ, Margolis HS, Krawczynski K, et al. The natural
 history of
    community-acquired hepatitis C in the United States. N Engl J
 Med
    1992;327:1899-905.  
    Alter MJ. Epidemiology of hepatitis C in the west. Semin Liver
 Dis
    1995;15:5-14.  
    Shakil AO, Conry-Cantilena C, Alter HJ, et al. Volunteer blood
 donors
    with antibody to hepatitis C virus: clinical, biochemical, and
    histologic features. Ann Intern Med 1995;123:330-7.  
    Dienstag JL, Katkov WN, Cody H. Evidence for non-A, non-B
 hepatitis
    agents besides hepatitis C virus. In Hollinger FB, Lemon SM,
 Margolis
    HS (eds). Viral hepatitis and liver disease. Baltimore, MD:
 Williams
    and Wilkins, 1991:349-56.  
    CDC.  Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for
 screening
    donors of blood, plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for
 evidence of
    hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR 1991;40(RR-4):1-17.  
    Leslie M, Damen HTM, Cuypers HL, et al. International
 collaborative
    study on the second Eurohep HCV-RNA reference panel.
 In:Proceedings of
    the IX International Symposium on Viral Hepatitis and Liver
 Disease.
    Rome, 1996: 25.  
    Alter MJ, Gerety RJ, Smallwood L, et al. Sporadic non-A, non-B
    hepatitis: frequency and epidemiology in an urban United
 States
    population. J Infect Dis 1982;145:886-93.  
    Seeff LB. Hepatitis C from a needlestick injury {letter}. Ann
 Intern
    Med 1991;115:411.  
    Cooper BW, Krusell A, Tilton RC, Goodwin R, Levitz RE.
 Seroprevalence
    of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in high-risk hospital
 personnel.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:82-5.  
    Campello C, Majori S, Poli A, Pacini P, Nicolardi L, Pini F.
    Prevalence of HCV antibodies in health-care workers from
 northern
    Italy. Infection 1992;20:224-6.  
    Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors
 for
    hepatitis C virus infection among health care personnel in a
 community
    hospital. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:196-200.  
    Panlilio AL, Shapiro CN, Schable CA, et al. Serosurvey of
 human
    immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C
 virus
    infection among hospital-based surgeons. J Am Coll Surg
 1995;180:
    16-24.  
    Klein RS, Freeman K, Taylor PE, Stevens CE. Occupational risk
 for
    hepatitis C virus infection among New York City dentists.
 Lancet 1991;
    338:1539-42.  
    Thomas DL, Gruninger SE, Siew C, Joy ED, Quinn TC.
 Occupational risk
    of hepatitis C infections among general dentists and oral
 surgeons in
    North America. Am J Med 1996;100:41-5.  
    Tsude K, Fujiyama S, Sato S, Kawano S, Taura Y, Yoshida K,
 Sato T. Two
    cases of accidental transmission of hepatitis C to medical
 staff.
    Hepatogastroenterology 1992;39:73-5.  
    Hernandez ME, Bruguera M, Puyuelo T, Barrera JM, Sanchez
 Tapias JM,
    Rodes J. Risk of needle-stick injuries in the transmission of
    hepatitis C virus in hospital personnel. J Hepatol
 1992;16:56-8.  
    Zuckerman J, Clewley G, Griffiths P Cockcroft A. Prevalence of
    hepatitis C antibodies in clinical health-care workers. Lancet
 1994;
    343:1618-20.  
    Petrosillo N, Puro V, Ippolito G. Prevalence of hepatitis C
 antibodies
    in health-care workers. Italian Study Group on Blood-borne
    Occupational Risk in Dialysis. Lancet 1994;344:339-40.  
    Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC, Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L,
 Kerley LM.
    Hepatitis C virus infection in health care workers: risk of
 exposure
    and infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745-50.  
    Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus
 infection in
    medical personnel after needlestick accident. Hepatology
 1992;16:
    1109-14.  
    Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G. Risk of hepatitis C
 seroconversion
    after occupational exposures in health care workers.Italian
 Study
    Group on Occupational Risk of HIV and Other Bloodborne
 Infections. Am
    J Infect Control 1995;23:273-7.  
    Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, et al. Transmission of
 hepatitis C
    via blood splash into conjunctiva. Scand J Infect Dis
 1993;25:270-1.  
    Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsburg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EP.
 Efficacy of
    prophylactic gamma globulin in preventing non-A, non-B
    post-transfusion hepatitis. Lancet 1976;1:557-61.  
    Seeff LB, Zimmerman JH, Wright EL, et al. A randomized
 double-blind
    controlled trial of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for
 the
    prevention of post-transfusion hepatitis. A Veterans
 Administration
    cooperative study. Gastroenterology 1977;72:111-21.  
    Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of
    post-transfusion non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific
 immunoglobulin
    in heart surgery patients. Lancet 1988;1:1245-9.  
    Bukh J, Miller RH, Purcell RH. Genetic heterogeneity of
 hepatitis C
    virus: quasispecies and genotypes. Semin Liver Dis
 1995;15:41-63.  
    Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Studies on
 protective
    efficacy of hepatitis C immunoglobulins (HCIG) in experimental
    hepatitis C virus infection {Abstract}. Hepatology
 1993;18:110A.  
    Hoofnagle JH, Di Bisceglie AM. Drug therapy: the treatment of
 chronic
    viral hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1997;336:347-56.  
    Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, et al. The interferon system in
 acute
    and chronic viral hepatitis. Prog Liver Dis 1986;8:453-67.  
    CDC. Recommendations for follow-up of health-care workers
 after
    occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus. MMWR
 1997;46:603-6.  
    Noble RC, Kane MA, Reeves SA, et al. Posttransfusion hepatitis
 A in a
    neonatal intensive care unit. JAMA 1984;252:2711-5.  
    Klein BS, Michaels JA, Rytel MW, Berg KG, Davis JP. Nosocomial
    hepatitis A: a multi-nursery outbreak in Wisconsin. JAMA
 1984;252:
    2716-21.  
    Rosenblum LS, Villarino ME, Nainan OV, et al. Hepatitis A
 outbreak in
    a neonatal intensive care unit: risk factors for transmission
 and
    evidence of prolonged viral excretion among preterm infants. J
 Infect
    Dis 1991;164:476-82.  
    Goodman RA. Nosocomial hepatitis A. Ann Intern Med
 1985;103:452-4.  
    Papaevangelou GJ, Roumeliotou-Karayannis AJ, Contoyannis PC.
 The risk
    of hepatitis A and B virus infections from patients under care
 without
    isolation precautions. J Med Virol 1981;7:143-8.  
    Werzberger A, Mensch B, Kuter B, et al. A controlled trial of
 a
    formalin-inactivated hepatitis A vaccine in healthy children.
 N Engl J
    Med 1992;327:453-7.  
    Innis B, Snitbhan R, Kunasol P, et al. Field efficacy trial of
    inactivated hepatitis A vaccine among children in Thailand (an
    extended abstract). Vaccine 1992 10 (Suppl 1):S159.  
    Mortimer EA Jr. Pertussis Vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Mortimer
 EA, eds.
    Vaccines, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1994: 94.  
    Mortimer EA Jr. Pertussis and its prevention: a family affair.
 J
    Infect Dis 1990;161:473-9.  
    Christie C, Glover AM, Willke MJ, Marx ML, Reising SF,
 Hutchinson NM.
    Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital
 during the
    greater Cincinnati epidemic of 1993. Infect Control Hosp
 Epidemiol
    1995;16:556-63.  
    Kurt TL, Yeager AS, Guennette S, Dunlop S. Spread of pertussis
 by
    hospital staff. JAMA 1972;221:264-7.  
    Linnemann CC, Ramundo N, Perlstein PH, et al. Use of pertussis
 vaccine
    in an epidemic involving hospital staff. Lancet 1975;2:540-3.  
    Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis:
 possible
    spread by a hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520-1.  
    Edwards KM, Decker MD, Graham BS, Mezatesta J, Scott J,
 Hackell J.
    Adult immunization with acellular pertussis vaccine.
 JAMA.1993;269:
    53-6.  
    CDC. Pertussis vaccination: use of acellular pertussis
 vaccines among
    infants and young children -- recommendations of the Advisory
    Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 1997;46(No.
 RR-7):
    1-25.  
    Mermin J, Townes J, Gerber M, Dolan N, Mintz E, Tauxe R. Rise
 of
    antimicrobial resistant Salmonella typhi infections in the
 United
    States, 1985-1994 {Abstract}. Proceedings of the 36th
 Interscience
    Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy.
 Washington, D.C.:
    American Society for Microbiology, 1996:84.  
    Opravil M, Fierz W, Matter L, et al. Poor antibody response
 after
    tetanus and pneumococcal vaccination in immunocompromised,
    HIV-infected patients. Clin Exp Immunol 1991;84(2):185-9.  
    Borkowsky W, Steele CJ, Grubman S, et al. Antibody responses
 to
    bacterial toxoids in children infected with human
 immunodeficiency
    virus. J Pediatr 1987;110:563-6.  
    Huang KL, Ruben FL, Rinaldo CR Jr, et al. Antibody responses
 after
    influenza and pneumococcal immunization in HIV-infected
 homosexual
    men. JAMA 1987; 257:2047-50.  
    Klein RS, Selwyn PA, Maude D, et al. Responses to pneumococcal
 vaccine
    among asymptomatic heterosexual partners of persons with AIDS
 and
    intravenous drug users infected with human immunodeficiency
 virus. J
    Infect Dis 1989;160:826-31.  
    Vardinon N, Handsher R, Burke M, et al. Poliovirus vaccination
    responses in HIV-infected patients: correlation with T4 cell
 counts. J
    Infect Dis 1990;162:238-41.  
    Onorato IM, Markowitz LE. Immunizations, vaccine-preventable
 diseases,
    and HIV infection. In: Wormser GP, ed. AIDS and other
 manifestations
    of HIV infection. New York: Raven Press, 1992:671-81.  
    CDC. Measles pneumonitis following measles-mumps-rubella
 vaccination
    of a patient with HIV infection, 1993. MMWR 1996;45:603-6.  
    CDC. Measles, United States, 1995. MMWR 1996;45:305-7.  
    Mitus A, Holloway A, Evans AE, Enders JF. Attenuated measles
 vaccine
    in children with acute leukemia. Am J Dis Child
 1962;103:413-8.  
    Bellini WJ, Rota JS, Greer PW, Zaki SR. Measles vaccination
 death in a
    child with severe combined immunodeficiency: report of a case.
 Annual
    Meeting of United States and Canadian Academy of Pathology,
 Atlanta,
    GA, 1992. Lab Invest 1992;66:91A.  
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients
 during
    exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(RR-8):1-8.  
    Subbarao EK, Amin S, Kumar ML. Prevaccination serologic
 screening for
    measles in health care workers. J Infect Dis 1991;163:876-8.  
    Sellick Jr. JA, Longbine D, Schifeling R, Mylotte JM.
 Screening
    hospital employees for measles immunity is more cost effective
 than
    blind immunization. Ann Intern Med 1992;116:982-4.  
    Grabowsky M, Markowitz L. Serologic screening, mass
 immunization, and
    implications for immunization programs. J Infect Dis
 1991;164:1237-8.  
    CDC. Use of vaccines and immune globulins in persons with
 altered
    immunocompetence -- recommendations of the Advisory Committee
 on
    Immunization Practices(ACIP). MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-4):1-18.  
    Williams WW. CDC guideline for infection control in hospital
    personnel. Infect Control 1983;4(Suppl):326-49.  
    Fedson DS. Immunizations for health care workers and patients
 in
    hospitals. In: Wenzel RP, ed. Prevention and control of
 nosocomial
    infections. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1992: 214-94.  
    Mayhall CG, ed. Hospital epidemiology and infection control.
    Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1996.  
    CDC. Health information for international travel, 1996-97.
 Atlanta,
    GA: Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
 Disease
    Control and Prevention, 1997.  * A possible exception might be an outpatient facility
that deals
exclusively with elderly patients considered at low risk for
 measles.  ** Birth before 1957 is not acceptable evidence of rubella immunity
 for
women who can become pregnant because rubella can occur in some
unvaccinated persons born before 1957 and because congenital
 rubella
syndrome can occur in offspring of women infected with rubella
 during
pregnancy. Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Recommendations for immunization practices and use of immunobiologics
applicable to disease prevention among health-care workers -- Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP) statements published as of September 1, 1997
====================================================
=============================================
Subject                                     MMWR Publication
-------------------------------------------------------------------
General recommendations on immunization     1994;43(No.RR-1):1-39
Adult immunization                          1991;40(No.RR-12):1-94
Altered immunocompetence                    1993;42(No.RR-4):1-18
Adverse reactions, contraindications, and
  precautions                               1996;45(No.RR-12):1-35
Bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccine             1996;45(No.RR-4):1-18
Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis          1991;40(No.RR-10):1-28
                                            1997;46(No. RR-7)
Hepatitis B                                 1991;40(No.RR-13):1-25
Hepatitis A                                 1996;45(No.RR-15):1-30
Influenza *                                 1997;46(No.RR-9):1-25
Japanese encephalitis                       1993;42(No.RR-1):1-15
Measles                                     1989;38(No.S9):1-18
Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)               1998;47 (in press)
Meningococcal disease and outbreaks         1997;46(No.RR-5):1-21
Mumps                                       1989;38:388-92, 397-400
 (MMR in press, see Measles above)
Pertussis, acellular                        1992;41(No.RR-1):1-10
 (see also Diphtheria above)                1992;41(No.RR-15):1-5
 (supplementary statements)                 1997;46(No.RR-7):1-25
Pneumococcal                                1997;46(No.RR-8):1-24
Poliomyelitis                               1997;46(No.RR-3):1-25
Rabies                                      1991;40(No.RR-3):1-19
Rubella                                     1990;39(No.RR-15):1-18
 (MMR in press, see Measles above)
Typhoid                                     1994;43(No.RR-14):1-7
Vaccinia (smallpox)                         1991;40(No.RR-14):1-10
Varicella                                   1996;45(No.RR-11):1-36
-------------------------------------------------------------------
* Each year influenza vaccine recommendations are reviewed and amended to reflect
updated
  information  concerning  influenza  activity  in  the  United  States  for  the  preceding
influenza
  season and to provide information on the vaccine available for the upcoming influenza
season.
  These recommendations are published annually in the MMWR, usually during May or
June.
====================================================
=============================================
Return to top.Table_2
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE  2.  Immunizing  agents  and  immunization  schedules  for  health-care  workers
(HCWs)*
====================================================
====================================================
====================================================
===
                          Primary schedule and                                              Major precautions
and
Generic name              booster(s)                   Indications                         
contraindications                 Special considerations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
IMMUNIZING AGENTS STRONGLY RECOMMENDED FOR HEALTH-CARE WORKERS
Hepatitis B (HB)          Two doses IM 4 weeks         Preexposure: HCWs at risk            On
the basis of limited data,     The vaccine produces neither
recombinant               apart; third dose 5          for exposure to blood or             no risk
of adverse effects to     therapeutic nor adverse
vaccine                   months after second;         body fluids.                         developing
fetuses is             effects on HBV-infected
                          booster doses not            Postexposure: See Table 3.           apparent.
Pregnancy should        persons. Prevaccination
                          necessary.                                                        not be considered a         
     serologic screening is not
                                                                                            contraindication to              
indicated for persons being
                                                                                            vaccination of women.            
vaccinated because of
                                                                                            Previous anaphylactic            
occupational risk. HCWs who
                                                                                            reaction to common baker's   
    have contact with patients or
                                                                                            yeast is a contraindication to 
  blood should be tested 1-2
                                                                                            vaccination.                     
months after vaccination to
    determine serologic
    response.
Hepatitis B immune        0.06 mL/kg IM as soon        Postexposure prophylaxis
globulin (HBIG)           as possible after            (Table 3): For persons
                          exposure. A second           exposed to blood or body
                          dose of HBIG should          fluids containing HBsAg and
                          be administered 1            who are not immune to HBV
                          month later if the HB        infection -- 0.06 mL/kg IM as
                          vaccine series has not       soon as possible (but no later
                          been started.                than 7 days after exposure).
Influenza vaccine         Annual vaccination           HCWs who have contact with          
History of anaphylactic           No evidence exists of risk to
(inactivated              with current vaccine.        patients at high risk for           
hypersensitivity to egg           mother or fetus when the
whole-virus and           Administered IM.             influenza or its                     ingestion.    
                   vaccine is administered to a
split-virus vaccines)                                  complications; HCWs who                                 
              pregnant woman with an
                                                       work in chronic care facilities;                                     
 underlying high-risk
                                                       HCWs with high-risk medical                                       
    condition. Influenza
                                                       conditions or who are aged                                         
   vaccination is recommended
                                                       >=65 years.                                                           
during second and third
    trimesters of pregnancy
    because of increased risk for
    hospitalization.
Measles live-virus        One dose SC; second          HCWs + born during or after         
Pregnancy;                        MMR is the vaccine of choice
vaccine                   dose at least 1 month        1957 who do not have                
immunocompromised                 if recipients are likely to be
                          later.                       documentation of having              persons &.,
including             susceptible to rubella and/or
                                                       received 2 doses of live             HIV-infected persons
who          mumps as well as to
                                                       vaccine on of after the first        have evidence of
severe           measles. Persons vaccinated
                                                       birthday or a history of             immunosuppression;  
             during 1963-1967 with a
                                                       physician-diagnosed measles          anaphylaxis after
gelatin         killed measles vaccine alone,
                                                       or serologic evidence of             ingestion or
administration       killed vaccine followed by
                                                       immunity.                            of neomycin; recent         
     live vaccine, or with a
                                                       Vaccination should be                administration of
immune          vaccine of unknown type
                                                       considered for all HCWs who          globulin.                
        should be revaccinated with
                                                       lack proof of immunity,                                               
2 doses of live measles virus
                                                       including those born before                                         
  vaccine.
                                                       1957.
Mumps live-virus          One dose SC; no              HCWs + believed to be               
Pregnancy;                        MMR is the vaccine of choice
vaccine                   booster.                     susceptible can be                  
immunocompromised                 if recipients are likely to be
                                                       vaccinated. Adults born              persons &; history of
            susceptible to measles and
                                                       before 1957 can be                   anaphylactic reaction
after       rubella as well as to mumps.
                                                       considered immune.                   gelatin ingestion or
                                                                                            administration of neomycin.
Rubella live-virus        One dose SC; no              Indicated for HCWs +, both          
Pregnancy;                        The risk for rubella
vaccine                   booster                      men and women, who do not           
immunocompromised                 vaccine-associated
                                                       have documentation of                persons +; history
of             malformations in the
                                                       having received live vaccine         anaphylactic
reaction after       offspring of women pregnant
                                                       on or after their first birthday     administration of
neomycin.       when vaccinated or who
                                                       or laboratory evidence of                                            
 become pregnant within 3
                                                       immunity. Adults born before                                      
    months after vaccination is
                                                       1957, except women who                                           
     negligible. Such women
                                                       can become pregnant, can                                          
    should be counseled
                                                       be considered immune.                                               
  regarding the theoretical
    basis of concern for the fetus.
    MMR is the vaccine of choice
    if recipients are likely to be
    susceptible to measles or
    mumps, as well as to rubella.
Varicella zoster          Two 0.5 mL doses SC          Indicated for HCWs + who do         
Pregnancy,                        Vaccine is available from the
live-virus vaccine        4-8 weeks apart if           not have either a reliable          
immunocompromised                 manufacturer for certain
                          >=13 years of age.           history of varicella or              persons &,
history of             patients with acute
                                                       serologic evidence of                anaphylactic reaction 
           lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)
                                                       immunity.                            following receipt of          
   in remission. Because
                                                                                            neomycin or gelatin. Avoid     
  71%-93% of persons without
                                                                                            salicylate use for 6 weeks      
 a history of varicella are
                                                                                            after vaccination.               
immune, serologic testing
    before vaccination is likely to
    be cost-effective.
Varicella-zoster          Persons <50 kg:              Persons known or likely to be                   
                      Serologic testing may help in
immune globulin           125 u/10 kg IM;              susceptible (particularly                         
                    assessing whether to
(VZIG)                    persons >=50 kg:             those at high risk for                                   
             administer VZIG. If use of
                          625 u @.                     complications, e.g., pregnant                                
         VZIG prevents varicella
                                                       women) who have close and                                       
      disease, patient should be
                                                       prolonged exposure to a                                              
 vaccinated subsequently.
                                                       contact case or to an
                                                       infectious hospital staff
                                                       worker or patient.
BCG VACCINATION
Bacille Calmette          One percutaneous             Should be considered only           
Should not be administered        In the United States
Guerin(BCG)               dose of 0.3 mL; no           for HCWs in areas where              to
immunocompromised              tuberculosis-control efforts
Vaccine                   booster dose                 multi-drug tuberculosis is           persons, &
pregnant women.        are directed towards early
(Tuberculosis)            recommended.                 prevalent, a strong likelihood                  
                      identification, treatment of
                                                       of infection exists, and where                                      
  cases, and preventive
                                                       comprehensive infection                                             
  therapy with isoniazid.
                                                       control precautions have
                                                       failed to prevent TB
                                                       transmission to HCWs.
OTHER  IMMUNOBIOLOGICS  THAT  ARE  OR  MAY  BE  INDICATED  FOR  HEALTH-CARE
WORKERS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
                          Primary schedule and                                              Major precautions
and             Special considerations
Generic name              booster(s)                   Indications                         
contraindications
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
Immune globulin           Postexposure-One IM          Indicated for HCWs exposed          
Contraindicated in persons        Administer in large muscle
(Hepatitis A)             dose of 0.02 mL/kg           to feces of infectious patients.     with IgA
deficiency; do not       mass (deltoid, gluteal).
                          administered <=2 weeks                                            administer within
2 weeks
                          after exposure.                                                   after MMR vaccine, or 3
                                                                                            weeks after varicella vaccine.
                                                                                            Delay administration of MMR
                                                                                            vaccine for >=3 months and
                                                                                            varicella vaccine >=5 months
                                                                                            after administration of IG.
Hepatitis A vaccine       Two doses of vaccine         Not routinely indicated for         
History of anaphylactic
                          either 6-12 months           HCWs in the United States.          
hypersensitivity to alum or,
                          apart (HAVRIX (R)), or 6     Persons who work with                for HAVRIX
(R), the
                          months apart (VAQTA (R)).    HAV-infected primates or            
preservative
                                                       with HAV in a research               2-phenoxyethanol.
The
                                                       laboratory setting should be         safety of the
vaccine in
                                                       vaccinated.                          pregnant women has not
                                                                                            been determined; the risk
                                                                                            associated with vaccination
                                                                                            should be weighed against
                                                                                            the risk for hepatitis A in
                                                                                            women who may be at high
                                                                                            risk for exposure to HAV.
Meningococcal             One dose in volume           Not routinely indicated for          The
safety of the vaccine in
polysaccharide            and by route specified       HCWs in the United States.          
pregnant women has not
vaccine (tetravalent      by manufacturer; need                                             been
evaluated; it should not
A, C, W135, and Y)        for boosters unknown.                                             be
administered during
                                                                                            pregnancy unless the risk for
                                                                                            infection is high.
Typhoid vaccine,          IM vaccine: One 0.5          Workers in microbiology             
Severe local or systemic          Vaccination should not be
IM, SC, and oral          mL dose, booster 0.5         laboratories who frequently         
reaction to a previous dose.      considered an alternative to
                          mL every 2 years.            work with Salmonella typhi.          Ty21a (oral)
vaccine should       the use of proper procedures
                          SC vaccine: two 0.5                                               not be administered
to            when handling specimens
                          mL doses, >=4 weeks                                              
immunocompromised                 and cultures in the laboratory.
                          apart, booster 0.5 mL                                             persons & or to
persons
                          SC or 0.1 ID every 3                                              receiving
antimicrobial
                          years if exposure                                                 agents.
                          continues.
                          Oral vaccine: Four
                          doses on alternate
                          days. The
                          manufacturer
                          recommends
                          revaccination with the
                          entire four-dose series
                          every 5 years.
Vaccinia vaccine          One dose                     Laboratory workers who               The
vaccine is                    Vaccination may be
(smallpox)                administered with a          directly handle cultures with       
contraindicated in pregnancy,     considered for HCWs who
                          bifurcated needle;           vaccinia, recombinant                in persons
with eczema or a       have direct contact with
                          boosters administered        vaccinia viruses, or orthopox        history of
eczema, and in         contaminated dressings or
                          every 10 years.              viruses that infect humans.         
immunocompromised                 other infectious material
                                                                                            persons & and their
household     from volunteers in clinical
                                                                                            contacts.                        
studies involving
    recombinant vaccinia virus.
OTHER VACCINE-PREVENTABLE DISEASES
Tetanus and               Two IM doses 4 weeks         All adults.                          Except in
the first trimester,    Tetanus prophylaxis in
diphtheria (toxoids       apart; third dose 6-12                                            pregnancy is
not a                wound management **.
{Td})                     months after second                                               precaution.
History of a
                          dose; booster every                                               neurologic reaction or
                          10 years.                                                         immediate
hypersensitivity
                                                                                            reaction after a previous
                                                                                            dose. History of severe local
                                                                                            (Arthus-type) reaction after a
                                                                                            previous dose.  Such persons
                                                                                            should not receive further
                                                                                            routine or emergency doses
                                                                                            of Td for 10 years.
Pneumococcal              One dose, 0.5 mL, IM         Adults who are at increased          The
safety of vaccine in
polysaccharide            or SC; revaccination         risk of pneumococcal disease        
pregnant women has not
vaccine (23 valent).      recommended for              and its complications                been
evaluated; it should not
                          those at highest risk        because of underlying health         be
administered during
                          >=5 years after the first    conditions; older adults,            pregnancy
unless the risk for
                          dose.                        especially those age >=65 who        infection is
high. Previous
                                                       are healthy.                         recipients of any type of
                                                                                            pneumococcal
                                                                                            polysaccharide vaccine who
                                                                                            are at highest risk for fatal
                                                                                            infection or antibody loss
                                                                                            may be revaccinated >=5
                                                                                            years after the first dose.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
 *  Persons  who  provide  health  care  to  patients  or  work  in  institutions  that  provide
patient care, e. g., physicians, nurses, emergency medical
   personnel,  dental  professionals  and  students,  medical  and  nursing  students,
laboratory technicians, hospital volunteers, and adminis-
   trative and support staff in health-care institutions
 +  All  HCWs  (i.e.,  medical  or  nonmedical,  paid  or  volunteer,  fulltime  or  part  time,
student or non-student, with or without patient-care
   responsibilities) who work in health-care institutions (e.g., inpatient and outpatient,
public and private) should be immune to measles,
   rubella, and varicella.
 & Persons immunocompromised because of immune deficiency diseases, HIV infection
(who should primarily not receive BCG, OPV, and
   yellow  fever  vaccines),  leukemia,  lymphoma  or  generalized  malignancy  or
immunosuppressed as a result of therapy with corticosteroids,
   alkylating drugs, antimetabolites, or radiation.
  @ Some experts recommend 125 u/10 kg regardless of total body weight.
**  See  (15)  CDC.  Update  on  adult  immunization:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
1991:40(No. RR-12):1-94.
Abbreviations: IM = intramuscular; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface
antigen; SC = subcutaneous; HIV = human
immunodeficiency virus; MMR = measles, mumps, rubella vaccine; HCW = health-care
worker; TB = tuberculosis; HAV = hepatitis A
virus; IgA = immune globulin A; ID = intradermal.
====================================================
====================================================
====================================================
===
Return to top.Table_3
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 3. Recommended postexposure prophylaxis for percutaneous or permucosal
exposure to hepatitis B virus, United States
====================================================
===================================================
                                                    Treatment when source is
Vaccination and anti-    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 body response status                                                       Source not tested or
of exposed person        HBsAG * positive           HBsAg negative           status unknown
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unvaccinated             HBIG + x 1; initiate HB    Initiate HB vaccine     Initiate HB vaccine
                         vaccine series &           series                  series
Previously vaccinated:
Known responder @        No treatment               No treatment            No treatment
Known non-responder      HBIG x 2 or                No treatment            If known high-risk
                         HBIG x 1 and initiate                              source, treat as if
                         revaccination                                      source were HBsAg
                                                                            positive
Antibody response        Test exposed person        No treatment            Test exposed
person
unknown                  for anti-HBs **                                    for anti-HBs
                         1. If adequate @, no                               1. If adequate @, no
                            treatment                                          treatment
                         2. If inadequate @, HBIG                           2. If inadequate @,
                            x 1 and vaccine                                    initiate revaccination
                            booster
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 * Hepatitis B surface antigen.
 + Hepatitis B immune globulin; dose 0.06 mL/kg intramuscularly.
 & Hepatitis B vaccine.
 @  Responder  is  defined  as  a  person  with  adequate  levels  of  serum  antibody  to
hepatitis B
   surface antigen (i.e., anti-HBs >=  10 mIU/mL); inadequate response to vaccination
defined as
   serum anti-HBs < 10 mIU/mL.
** Antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen.
====================================================
===================================================
Return to top.Table_4
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 4. Summary of ACIP recommendations concerning immunization of health-care
workers with special conditions
====================================================
====================================================
================================
                                                                 Severe                                               
Alcoholism
                                                                 Immuno-                                              and
Alcoholic
Vaccine                          Pregnancy    HIV Infection   suppression*    Asplenia   Renal
Failure    Diabetes      Cirrhosis
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
BCG                                  C              C              C             UI            UI            UI            UI
Hepatitis A                          UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI            
R +
Hepatitis B                          R              R              R             R             R             R              R
Influenza                            R &            R              R             R             R             R             
R
Measles, Mumps, Rubella              C              R @            C             R             R             R   
          R
Meningococcus                        UI             UI             UI            R +           UI            UI        
   UI
Poliovirus vaccine,                  UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI           
UI
  inactivated (IPV) **
Poliovirus vaccine, live,            UI             C              C             UI            UI            UI         
  UI
  oral (OPV) **
Pneumococcus +                       UI             R              R             R             R             R         
    R
Rabies                               UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI            UI
Tetanus/diphtheria +                 R              R              R             R             R             R         
    R
Typhoid, Inactivated & Vi ++         UI             UI             UI            UI            UI            UI   
        UI
Typhoid, Ty21a                       UI             C              C             UI            UI            UI           
UI
Varicella                            C              C              C             R             R             R              R
Vaccinia                             C              C              C             UI            UI            UI            UI
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
 *  Severe  immunosuppression  can  be  caused  by  congenital  immunodeficiency,
leukemia, lymphoma, generalized malignancy or therapy
   with  alkylating  agents,  antimetabolites,  ionizing  radiation,  or  large  amounts  of
corticosteroids.
 +  Recommendation  is  based  on  the  persons  underlying  condition  rather  than
occupation.
 &  Women  who  will  be  in  the  second  or  third  trimester  of  pregnancy  during  the
influenza season.
 @  Contraindicated  in  HIV-  infected  persons  who  have  evidence  of  severe
immunosuppression.
** Vaccination is recommended for unvaccinated health-care workers who have close
contact with patients who may be excreting wild
   polioviruses.  Primary  vaccination  with  IPV  is  recommended  because  the  risk  for
vaccine-associated paralysis after administration of
   OPV is higher among adults than among children. Health care workers who have had
a primary series of OPV or IPV who are directly
   involved with the provision of care to patients who may be excreting poliovirus may
receive another dose of either IPV or OPV. Any
   suspected  case  of  poliomyelitis  should  be  investigated  immediately.  If  evidence
suggests transmission of wild poliovirus, control
   measures to contain further transmission should be instituted immediately, including
an OPV vaccination campaign.
++ Capsular polysaccharide parenteral vaccine.
Abbreviations: R=Recommended; C=Contraindicated; UI=Use if indicated.
====================================================
====================================================
================================
Return to top.Table_5
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 5. Work restrictions * for health-care workers (HCWs) exposed to or infected
with certain vaccine-preventable diseases
====================================================
====================================================
===
Disease/Problem                    Work Restriction                     Duration
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diphtheria
  Active                           Exclude from duty.                   Until antimicrobial therapy is
                                                                        completed and 2
                                                                        nasopharyngeal cultures
                                                                        obtained >=24 hours apart are
                                                                        negative.
  Postexposure
  (Susceptible HCWs;               Exclude from duty.                   Same as active diphtheria
  previously vaccinated HCWs
  who have not had a Td
  booster dose within the
  previous 5 years)
  Asymptomatic carriers            Exclude from duty.                   Same as active
diphtheria.
Hepatitis A                        Restrict from patient contact        7 days after onset of
jaundice.
                                   and food handling.
Hepatitis B
  HCWs with acute or chronic
  antigenemia:
  -HCWs  who  do  not  perform          Standard  precautions  should           Universal
precautions should
  exposure-prone invasive          always be observed. No               always be observed.
  procedures (21)                  restriction unless
                                   epidemiologically linked to
                                   transmission of infection.
  -HCWs who perform                These HCWs should not                Until HBeAg + is
negative.
  exposure-prone invasive          perform exposure-prone
  procedures                       invasive procedures until they
                                   have sought counsel from an
                                   expert review panel which
                                   should review and recommend
                                   the procedures the worker can
                                   perform, taking into account
                                   the specific procedure as well
                                   as the skill and technique of
                                   the worker (30).
Upper respiratory infections
 (Persons at high risk for         During particular seasons (e.g.,     Until acute symptoms
resolve.
 complications of influenza as     during winter when influenza
 defined by ACIP {3})              and/or RSV are prevalent),
                                   consider excluding personnel
                                   with acute febrile upper
                                   respiratory infections
                                   (including influenza) from care
                                   of high-risk patients.
Measles
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    7 days after rash appears.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty.                   5th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 21st day after last
                                                                        exposure and/or 7 days after
                                                                        the rash appears.
Mumps
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    9 days after onset of parotitis.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty.                   12th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 26th day after last
                                                                        exposure or 9 days after onset
                                                                        of parotitis.
Pertussis
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    Beginning of catarrhal stage
                                                                        through 3rd week after onset
                                                                        of paroxysms or until 5 days
                                                                        after start of effective
                                                                        antimicrobial therapy.
  Postexposure
    Symptomatic personnel          Exclude from duty                    5 days after start of
effective
                                                                        antimicrobial therapy.
    Asymptomatic personnel         No restriction, on antimicrobial
                                   prophylactic therapy.
Rubella
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    5 days after the rash appears.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty.                   7th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 21st day after last
                                                                        exposure and/or 5 days after
                                                                        rash appears.
Varicella
  Active                           Exclude from duty                    Until all lesions dry and crust.
  Postexposure                     Exclude from duty                    10th day after 1st exposure
   (Susceptible personnel)                                              through 21st day (28th day if
                                                                        VZIG administered) after the
                                                                        last exposure; if varicella
                                                                        occurs, until all lesions dry and
                                                                        crust.
Zoster
 (Localized in normal person)      Cover lesions; restrict from         Same as varicella.
                                   care of high-risk patients &.
  Postexposure                     Restrict from patient contact.
   (Susceptible personnel)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Adapted from:
 
 -
 (173)
 CDC.
 Recommendations
 for
 preventing
 transmission
 of
 human
immunodeficiency virus
    and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR
    1991;40(RR-8):1-8.
  - (95) CDC. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. Recommendations of the
Hospital
    Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and the National Center for
Infectious
    Diseases. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80.
  - (178) Williams WW: CDC guideline for infection control in hospital personnel. Infect
Control
    1983;4(Suppl):326-49.
+ HBeAg = Hepatitis B e antigen.
&  Patients  who  are  susceptible  to  varicella  and  at  increased  risk  for  complications  of
varicella
  (i.e., neonates and immunocompromised persons of any age.)
====================================================
====================================================
===
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 09/19/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00050577.htm
