Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. The COVID-19 note was revised to provide guidance for use of
updated (2023–2024 Formula) COVID-19 vaccines. The DTaP note was revised to clarify
primary  and  booster  doses  The  routine  vaccination  section  was  revised  to  clarify
additional  doses  are  not  recommended  for  persons  who  have  completed  HPV
vaccination  series  with  any  valency  using  the  recommended  dosing  intervals.  The
influenza note was updated to reflect the recommendations for the 2023-24 influenza
season. In the “Special situations” section, all bullets describing recommendations for
persons  with  a  history  of  egg  allergy  have  been  deleted.  A  note  has  been  added
clarifying persons with a history of egg allergy of any severity can be vaccinated with
any  influenza  vaccine  indicated  for  the  recipient’s  age  and  health  status  with  no
additional safety considerations. The MMR note was updated to clarify when MMRV is
used for routine, catch-up vaccination, or in “Special situations”, the minimum interval
between  doses  is  3  months.  MenACWY-D  (Menactra)  has  been  removed  from  all
sections.  Information  on  recommendation  for  the  use  of  the  newly  licensed
meningococcal  A,  B,  C,  W,  Y  vaccine  have  also  been  included.  Information  about  the
use  of  the  newly  licensed  meningococcal  A,  B,  C,  W,  Y  vaccine  has  been  added.  A
resource  to  assist  healthcare  providers  with  shared  clinical  decision-making
recommendations  for  MenB  vaccination  has  also  been  included.  An  Mpox  note  was
added  to  provide  guidance  for  use  of  Jynneos  in  adolescents  age  18  years  based  on
sexual risk factors. PCV13 has been deleted from all sections. The routine vaccination,
catch-up vaccination, and “Special situations” sections have been updated with the new
recommendations  for  use  of  15-valent  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (PCV15),
PCV20,  and  PPSV23.  Chronic  kidney  disease,  chronic  liver  disease,  and  moderate
persistent or severe persistent asthma were added to the list of medical conditions that
increase  the  risk  for  invasive  pneumococcal  disease.  The  “Catch  up”  vaccination  has
been revised to include updated recommendations for adolescents age 18 years. The
recommendations for adolescents age 18 years who are at increased risk for exposure
to  poliovirus  and  have  completed  the  primary  series  have  also  added.  A  note  was
added  to  provide  details  on  the  use  of  nirsevimab  in  infants  and  young  children.
Additionally,  information  describing  timing  of  immunization  including  guidance  for
jurisdictions with RSV seasonality that differs from most of the continental United States
was  added.  A  note  was  added  to  provide  details  on  the  use  of  RSV  vaccine  during
pregnancy.  Abrysvo  is  the  only  RSV  recommended  for  use  during  pregnancy.
Information  describing  timing  of  vaccination  including  guidance  for  jurisdictions  with
RSV seasonality that differs from most of the continental United States has also been
included. The Tdap note was revised to clarify that the Tdap dose recommended at age
11–12years  is  the  adolescent  Tdap  booster  dose.  COVID-19  row:  added  new  rows
describing  the  contraindications  and  precautions  to  mRNA  and  protein  subunit
COVID-19 vaccination DTaP and DT row: deleted DT because this vaccine is no longer
distributed in the United States. Hib row: removed history of severe allergic reaction to
dry  natural  latex  from  the  “Contraindicated  or  Not  Recommended”  column
Meningococcal  ACWY  row:  Menactra  has  been  removed  because  this  product  is  no
longer distributed in the United States. Meningococcal ABCWY row: added a new row
describing  the  contraindications  and  precautions  to  MenABCWY  vaccination  RSV-mAb
(nirsevimab) row: added a new row describing the contraindications and precautions to
nirsevimab immunization. RSV row: added a new row describing the contraindications
and precautions to RSV vaccination CDC has developed catch-up guidance job aids to
assist  healthcare  providers  in  interpreting  Table  2  in  the  child  and  adolescent
immunization schedule.  The COVID-19 note was revised to provide guidance for use of
updated (2023–2024 Formula) COVID-19 vaccines. The note was revised to clarify that
any person who is not fully vaccinated and requests vaccination can receive HepA. The
note was updated to describe the risk-based vaccination recommendation for persons
60  years  of  age  and  older.  Information  on  the  shared  clinical  decision-making
recommendation  for  persons  60  years  of  age  and  older  with  diabetes  has  also  been
added. The routine vaccination section was revised to clarify additional doses are not
recommended  for  persons  who  have  completed  HPV  vaccination  series  with  any
valency  using  the  recommended  dosing  intervals.  Additionally,  a  hyperlink  to  a
resource  describing  shared  clinical  decision-making  recommendations  for  HPV
vaccination  was  provided  to  assist  healthcare  providers.  The  influenza  note  was
updated  to  reflect  the  recommendations  for  the  2023-24  influenza  season.  In  the
“Special situations” section, all bullets describing recommendations for persons with a
history of egg allergy have been deleted. A note has been added clarifying persons with
a history of egg allergy of any severity can be vaccinated with any influenza vaccine
indicated  for  the  recipient’s  age  and  health  status  with  no  additional  safety
considerations.  MenACWY-D  (Menactra)  has  been  removed  from  all  sections.  
Information on recommendation for the use of the newly licensed meningococcal A, B,
C,  W,  Y  vaccine  and  a  resource  to  assist  healthcare  providers  with  shared  clinical
decision-making  recommendations  for  MenB  vaccination  have  also  been  included.  An
Mpox note was added to provide guidance for use of Jynneos in adults based on sexual
risk factors. The routine vaccination and “Special situations” sections were revised to
provide clarity on the guidance and minimum intervals between pneumococcal vaccine
doses.
 The
 poliovirus
 vaccination
 note
 was
 updated
 to
 add
 the
 routine
recommendations  for  adults  who  are  known  or  suspected  to  be  unvaccinated  or
incompletely
 vaccinated
 to
 complete
 the
 3-dose
 IPV
 primary
 series.
 The
recommendation  for  adults  who  are  at  increased  risk  for  exposure  to  poliovirus  and
have completed the primary series was also added. Details were provided on the use of
RSV  vaccine  during  pregnancy  and  in  adults  60  years  of  age  and  older.  Information
describing  timing  of  vaccination  including  guidance  for  jurisdictions  with  RSV
seasonality  that  differs  from  most  of  the  continental  United  States  has  also  been
included. Another note was added that lists the risk factors and medical conditions that
healthcare  providers  should  consider  when  thinking  about  a  patient’s  risk  for  severe
RSV disease and if such patients would benefit from vaccination. Finally, a hyperlink to
a  resource  describing  shared  clinical  decision-making  recommendations  for  RSV
vaccination among patients 60 years of age and older was provided. The Tdap note was
revised to clarify that a dose of Tdap received at 10 years of age may be counted as the
adolescent  dose  that  is  routinely  recommended  at  age  11-12  years.  COVID-19  row:
added new rows describing the contraindications and precautions to mRNA and protein
subunit  COVID-19  vaccination  Hib  row:  removed  history  of  severe  allergic  reaction  to
dry natural latex from the “Contraindicated or Not Recommended” column MenACWY
row: Menactra has been removed because this product is no longer distributed in the
United  States.  Meningococcal  ABCWY  row:  added  a  new  row  describing  the
contraindications and precautions to MenABCWY vaccination RSV row: added a new row
describing the contraindications and precautions to RSV vaccination
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/schedule-changes.html
