Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  For  answers  to  frequently  asked  questions  about  the
importation  of  infectious  biological  materials  that  could  cause  disease  in  humans,
please refer to the information below. Should you have any further questions, please
contact  us  at  importpermit@cdc.gov.  The  Import  Permit  Program  (IPP)  uses  a  secure
electronic  information  system,  eIPP,  to  conduct  all  program  business.  This  two-way
portal,  accessible  by  both  the  program  and  those  seeking  import  permits,  is  used  to
submit and share information. As of September 2018, the only way to apply for a CDC
import  permit  is  by  using  this  system.  Additional  information  can  be  found  here.  All
potential applicants are required to have a SAMS (Secure Access Management Services)
account – which protects the security of the information by requiring users to enter a
user  ID  and  password,  or  other  secure  credentials,  before  providing  access  to  the
system – in order to access the eIPP system to apply for a permit.  If you do not yet
have  a  SAMS  account  but  would  like  to  establish  one  in  order  to  submit  a  new
application,  please  contact  us.  Only  applications  submitted  via  eIPP  will  be  accepted.
Real-time  status  updates  are  available  on  the  permittees  dashboard  in  eIPP.  Options
that can appear include: No. Currently, only one user can be connected to a SAMS/eIPP
account.  Information  cannot  be  transferred  between  accounts.  No.  Currently,  SAMS
accounts cannot be transferred from one individual to another. The permit cannot be
transferred  to  someone  else  at  the  company.  Therefore,  someone  at  the  company
would need to obtain a SAMS account and submit an application to obtain a permit. Yes,
but  your  contact  information  will  need  to  be  updated  under  the  account  settings  tab
within eIPP. Changes to your account username/email must be requested by contacting
the  eIPP  Help  Desk.  Yes.  After  an  application  has  been  saved  as  a  draft  and  an
application number has been generated, you are able to upload supporting documents
using  the  “Upload  Attachment”  feature  that  is  displayed  at  the  bottom  of  the
application below the discussion section. Required fields are marked by red asterisks (*)
in  eIPP.  Applications  can  be  saved  as  a  draft,  but  can  only  be  submitted  when  all
required  fields  are  completed.  Additional  assistance  with  filling  out  the  application  is
available  from  the  Import  Permit  Program  by  email  at  importpermit@cdc.gov  or
telephone at (404) 718-2077. Yes. The application must be resubmitted in eIPP. If the
imported material is being sent from more than one sender, select “Add Sender & Add
Template” to add additional senders. Currently, there are no limits on the number of
senders  that  can  be  entered.  If  your  facility  will  receive  multiple  agents,  select  “Add
Infectious  Biological  Agent  &  Add  Template”  to  include  the  scientific  name  of  all
known/suspected  infectious  biological  agents  in  Section  D,  items  #5-11.  Currently,
there  are  no  limits  on  the  number  of  agents/vectors  that  can  be  entered.  “Infectious
biological agent” is defined as a microorganism [including, but not limited to, bacteria
(including rickettsiae), viruses, fungi, or protozoa] or prion, whether naturally occurring,
bioengineered,  or  artificial,  or  a  component  of  such  microorganism  or  prion  that  is
capable  of  causing  communicable  disease  in  a  human.  If  the  specific  agents  are  not
known, it is acceptable to list the genus and species of the vector in Section D, item #5
(e.g.,  non-human  primates  such  as  rhesus  macaques  should  be  listed  as  Macaca
mulatta and bats such as Egyptian fruit bats should be listed as Rousettus aegyptiacus).
All requests for renewal of an existing import permit require the submission of a new
application and current digital signature of the permittee via eIPP. To prevent lapses in
the  import  permit  status,  it  is  recommended  that  permit  renewal  applications  be
submitted  at  least  30  days  prior  to  the  expiration  date  on  the  current  permit.  Once
approved,  a  downloadable  PDF  of  the  permit  will  be  available  in  eIPP.  Since  eIPP
currently  does  not  have  an  email  alert  feature  to  notify  account  holders  of  status
changes or to automatically email the approved permit, it is recommended that account
holders  check  the  status  of  their  application  daily.  The  e-Tool  will  assist  you  in
determining  if  an  import  permit  is  needed  to  import  infectious  biological  agents,
infectious  substances,  and  vectors  into  the  United  States.  To  facilitate  clearance  of
materials  that  do  not  require  a  CDC  import  permit,  each  shipment  must  be
accompanied  by  a  certification  statement  from  the  sender  or  the  recipient  of  this
material. The certification statement should include: No. Currently, there is no fee for
processing  a  CDC  import  permit.  If  noted  as  a  condition  of  the  issued  permit,
subsequent transfers of any infectious biological agent, infectious substance or vector
within the United States will require an additional permit issued by the CDC. The CDC
import permit is issued only to the importer located in the United States. The importer
must take measures to help ensure that the shipper complies with all applicable legal
requirements  concerning  the  packaging,  labeling,  and  shipment  of  infectious
substances. Yes, other import restrictions can exist. The importation of specific animals
and animal products from specific geographical areas into the United States is currently
restricted.  Contact  the  U.S.  Fish  and  Wildlife  Service,  U.S.  State  Department  for
additional
 information.
 Please
 also
 see
https://www.cdc.gov/importation/bringing-an-animal-into-the-united-states/african-rode
nts.html  DGMH’s  guidance  provides  recommended  methods  for  rendering  animal
products to be used as hunting trophies noninfectious. Yes. The novel H7N9 Influenza A
virus has caused infections in both humans and birds. APHIS and CDC have authority
over the importation of all microorganisms which cause, or have the potential, to cause
disease in animals or humans respectively, and so both agencies will issue permits for
the  novel  H7N9  influenza  A  virus.  For  further  information,  please  contact  APHIS  at
301-851-3300 (Option 1) or CDC at 404-718-2077. CDC will not issue a permit for Asian
lineage H7N9 low path avian influenza until a USDA/APHIS permit has been obtained.
Please
 see
https://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/downloads/organisms_and_vectors/newasian
-lineage-h7n9-requirements.pdf  for  more  information.  Please  upload  a  copy  of  your
approved USDA/APHIS permit into eIPP. Infectious biological agent – A microorganism
[including, but not limited to, bacteria (including rickettsiae), viruses, fungi, or protozoa]
or  prion,  whether  naturally  occurring,  bioengineered,  or  artificial,  or  a  component  of
such  microorganism  or  prion  that  is  capable  of  causing  communicable  disease  in  a
human.  Infectious  substance  –  Any  material  that  is  known  or  reasonably  expected  to
contain an infectious biological agent. Vector – Any animals (vertebrate or invertebrate)
including  arthropods  or  any  noninfectious  self-replicating  system  (e.g.,  plasmids  or
other  molecular  vector)  or  animal  products  (e.g.,  a  mount,  rug,  or  other  display  item
composed of the hide, hair, skull, teeth, bones, or claws of an animal) that are known to
transfer  or  are  capable  of  transferring  an  infectious  biological  agent  to  a  human.
Animals  –  Any  member  of  the  animal  kingdom  except  a  human  including  an  animal
product  (e.g.,  a  mount,  rug,  or  other  display  item  composed  of  the  hide,  hair,  skull,
teeth, bones, or claws). Arthropods – Any living insect including crustaceans, spiders,
scorpions,  etc.  capable  of  being  a  host  or  vector  of  human  disease.  Snails  –  Any
freshwater  snails  (phylum  Mollusca,  class  Gastropoda)  capable  of  transmitting
schistosomiasis. Bats – All live bats. See below for further information on obtaining an
import permit for live bats. Bats may also require a permit from the U.S. Department of
Interior,
 Fish
 and
 Wildlife
 Service.
 For
 additional
 information,
 see
https://www.fws.gov/permits/?ref=topbar. Non-human primate material – All non-human
primate  material  (e.g.  blood,  plasma,  tissue,  urine,  feces)  requires  an  import  permit,
unless it has been specifically treated and rendered non-infectious. Please note that the
described  material  may  require  a  permit  from  the  United  States  Department  of
Agriculture (USDA)/Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) or be prohibited
from importation under the USDA regulations. Information on USDA transport or import
permits  is  available  at  https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/importexport.  Yes.
The  novel  H1N1  influenza  virus  has  genetic  components  of  both  swine  and  avian
influenza  viruses  in  it  which  result  in  causing  infections  in  those  species.  APHIS  has
authority  over  all  organisms  which  cause  or  have  the  potential  to  cause  disease  in
animals; therefore, they issue permits for novel H1N1 influenza. For further information,
contact  APHIS  at  301-734-3277.  The  issuance  and  expiration  dates  located  on  the
import permit pertain only to the dates that the importer is allowed to import into the
United States the infectious biological agents, infectious substances, and vectors listed
on the import permit. The conditions for importation and continued possession listed on
the permit remain in effect until the importer is no longer in possession of the imported
material. In most cases, an import permit may not be required. Diagnostic specimens
that  are  not  known  by  the  importer  to  contain,  or  suspected  by  the  importer  of
containing,  an  infectious  biological  agent  and  is  accompanied  by  an  importer
certification  statement  confirming  that  the  material  is  not  known  to  contain  or
suspected  of  containing  an  infectious  biological  agent,  or  has  been  rendered
noninfectious would not require a CDC import permit. No. CDC Import Permit Program
does  not  currently  regulate  the  importation  of  a  toxin.  Yes.  Any  diagnostic  specimen
known,  or  suspected  by  the  importer  of  containing,  any  infectious  biological  agent
would require a CDC import permit. No. An animal not known to contain (or suspected
of containing) an infectious biological agent or has been rendered noninfectious would
not require a CDC import permit.  However, other regulations such as APHIS or U.S. Fish
and  Wildlife  Service  regulations  may  apply  to  the  importation  of  this  material.  No.
Organisms or parasites that are not infectious to humans do not require a CDC import
permit. However, other regulations may apply to the importation of this material. No.
Any product that is cleared, approved, licensed, or otherwise authorized under any of
the following laws would not require a CDC import permit: It depends. Nucleic acids that
can  produce  infectious  forms  of  any  infectious  biological  agent  would  require  a  CDC
import  permit.  For  example,  viral  genomes  which  consist  of  positive  sense  RNA  are
infectious when the purified viral RNA is applied to permissive cells in the absence of
any  viral  proteins.  In  some  cases,  viral  genomes  which  are  composed  of
double-stranded DNA are also infectious [e.g., genome of Cercopithecine Herpesvirus 1
(Herpes B virus)]. Nucleic acids that cannot produce infectious forms of any infectious
biological agent and are accompanied by an importer certification statement confirming
that  the  material  is  not  known  to  contain  or  suspected  of  containing  an  infectious
biological  agent  would  not  require  a  CDC  import  permit.  Yes.  Any  sample  known,  or
suspected by the importer of containing, an infectious biological agent would require a
CDC import permit. This product would not meet the exemption because the product is
not approved or cleared by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et
seq.). However, if the material is not known to contain or suspected of containing an
infectious biological agent, or has been rendered noninfectious, it would not require a
CDC  import  permit.  The  material  must  be  accompanied  by  an  importer  certification
statement  confirming  that  the  material  is  not  known  to  contain  or  suspected  of
containing  an  infectious  biological  agent,  or  has  been  rendered  noninfectious.  You
should safeguard the material and immediately report the incident to the CDC Import
Permit  Program  either  by  email  at  importpermit@cdc.gov  or  by  telephone  at  (404)
718-2077. No. However, please note that the exportation of biological agents of human,
plant, and animal diseases may require a license from the Department of Commerce.
Information may be obtained by calling the Department of Commerce Bureau of Export
Administration at 202-482-4811 or through the internet at www.bis.doc.gov/Licensing.
“Guidance  for  Importation  of  Human  Remains  into  the  United  States  for  Interment  or
Subsequent
 Cremation”
 is
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/human-remains.html. If the CDC Import Permit Program
requires  an  additional  permit  for  subsequent  transfers  of  any  infectious  biological
agent, infectious substance or vector within the United States, the requirement will be
listed  as  a  condition  of  issuance  on  the  import  permit.  To  initiate  the  process  for  an
additional permit, the recipient must submit an application through eIPP. Yes. Since the
requirement  for  approval  of  subsequent  transfers  of  imported  materials  within  the
United  States  was  noted  as  a  condition  on  the  issued  permit  to  the  importer,  the
recipient is required to obtain a CDC import permit to receive this material. To initiate
the process for a permit, the facility would need to submit an application through eIPP.
The USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) permits are required for
the  import,  transit  and  release  of  regulated  animals,  animal  products,  veterinary
biologics,  plants,  plant  products,  pests,  organisms,  soil,  and  genetically  engineered
organisms.  Information  on  the  APHIS  permitting  requirements  is  available  at
https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/resources/permits.  A  permit  to  import,  or  receive
through subsequent transfer, is valid only for the time period indicated on the issued
permit. The issuance and expiration dates located on the import permit pertain only to
the dates that the importer is allowed to import into the United States the infectious
biological agents, infectious substances, and vectors listed on the import permit. The
conditions  for  importation  and  continued  possession  listed  on  the  permit  remain  in
effect until the importer is no longer in possession of the imported material. Please note
that all requests for renewal of an existing import permit require the submission of a
new application and current signature of the permittee. To prevent lapses in the import
permit status, it is recommended that permit renewal applications be submitted at least
30  days  prior  to  the  expiration  date  on  the  current  permit.  There  is  no  regulatory
requirement in the import permit regulations for maintaining records of shipments for a
specific  amount  of  time.  However,  the  CDC  Import  Permit  Program  recommends  that
the permittee maintain records of shipments for at least 3 years. If your facility will no
longer  be  importing  infectious  biological  agents,  infectious  substances,  or  vectors  of
human disease into the United States, your facility should not complete an application
to renew your facility’s import permit. However, the conditions specified on the permit
apply until you no longer possess the material. No. The issuance of an import permit is
not  an  authorization  to  hand  carry  the  imported  material  into  the  United  States.  The
shipment  of  infectious  biological  agents,  infectious  substances,  or  vectors  of  human
disease into the United States must be packaged, labeled, and shipped in accordance
with  all  federal  and  international  regulations.  When  traveling  by  air,  the  biological
materials must be declared to the airline and cannot be concealed in checked luggage.
Contact  the  airline  and  U.S.  Customs  in  advance  to  ensure  compliance  with  their
policies and procedures. No person may carry a hazardous material in the cabin of a
passenger-carrying  aircraft  or  on  the  flight  deck  of  any  aircraft,  and  the  hazardous
material  must  be  located  in  a  place  that  is  inaccessible  to  persons  other  than  crew
members. Hazardous materials may be carried in a main deck cargo compartment of a
passenger  aircraft  provided  that  the  compartment  is  inaccessible  to  passengers  and
that it meets all certification requirements for a Class B aircraft cargo compartment in
14 CFR 25.857(b) or for a Class C aircraft cargo compartment in 14 CFR 25.857(c). The
facility  should  use  a  scientifically  supportable  method.  The  method  used  to  cause
permanent  loss  of  biological  activity  must  be  reliable  and  based  on  the  agent’s
sensitivity to the inactivating method. An acceptable method may consist of traditional
methods  that  have  been  generally  recognized  in  the  scientific  community  and
published in the scientific literature or a method developed in-house, but that method
should  be  validated  as  applied.  While  there  is  no  requirement  to  notify  CDC  prior  to
rendering  an  agent  non-infectious,  the  facility  should  incorporate  a  practice  of
maintaining  records  on  file  in  support  of  materials  being  non-infectious.  Information
from  CDC  on  the  MERS  CoV  is  available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/mers/.  An
applicant who wishes to make an appeal would have 30 calendar days after receiving
the denial to submit the appeal in writing to the CDC Director. The appeal must state
the factual basis for the appeal and provide any supporting documentations to justify
the appeal (e.g., documents that demonstrate the facility has the appropriate biosafety
measures in place for working safely with the requested imported material). CDC will
issue a written response, which would constitute final agency action. The applicant can
submit the appeal to the CDC Director through the CDC Import Permit Program by email
(importpermit@cdc.gov), fax [(404) 718-2093] or mail: CDC Import Permit Program
1600 Clifton Rd, Mailstop A-46
Atlanta, GA 30329 It depends. In general, a CDC import permit is not required for breast
milk  from  a  healthy  human  when  being  imported  for  personal  use.  However,  if  the
breast  milk  is  being  imported  for  research  or  diagnostic  purposes  and  is  reasonably
expected  to  contain  a  biological  agent  that  is  infectious  to  humans  (e.g.,  human
immunodeficiency  virus),  then  a  CDC  import  permit  is  required.  SARS-CoV-2  is  not  a
select agent identified in the select agent regulations. Therefore, the possession, use
and  transfer  of  SARS-CoV-2  is  not  regulated  by  the  Federal  Select  Agent  Program
(FSAP).  On  February  11,  2020,  the  International  Committee  on  Taxonomy  of  Viruses
(ICTV)  announced  that  taxonomically,  what  has  previously  been  referred  to  as
2019-nCoV  should  now  be  referred  to  as  SARS-CoV-2.  The  “Severe  acute  respiratory
syndrome-related  coronavirus:  The  species  and  its  viruses  –  a  statement  of  the
Coronavirus
 Study
 Group”
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.07.937862v1
 
 indicates
 that
SARS-CoV-2 is not a descendent of SARS-CoV (a select agent), but is genetically closely
related. The select agent regulations currently govern the possession, use and transfer
of  viruses  identified  as  SARS-CoV,  not  viruses  identified  as  SARS-CoV-2.  The  positive
strand RNA genome of SARS-COV is also a select agent because this genomic material
represents  nucleic  acids  capable  of  generating  infectious  virus.  As  the  Federal  Select
Agent  Program  gains  more  information  about  the  SARS-CoV-2,  we  will  reassess  the
select agent status as needed. Any changes in the select agent status of SARS-CoV-2
will  be  published  in  the  Federal  Register.  Vials  should  be  accurately  labeled  as
SARS-CoV-2  to  ensure  that  there  is  a  clear  distinction  between  the  regulated  virus
(SARS-CoV)  and  the  unregulated  virus  (SARS-CoV2).  It  depends.  The  Centers  for
Disease Control and Prevention’s Import Permit Program may inspect an entity to verify
the  importer  has  implemented  biosafety  measures  commensurate  with  the  hazard
posed  by  the  infectious  biological  agent,  infectious  substance  and/or  vector  to  be
imported,  and  the  level  of  risk  given  its  intended  use.  Laboratories  that  have  been
inspected by either HHS/CDC or the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant
Health  Inspection  Service  (USDA/APHIS)  under  the  HHS  or  USDA  select  agent
regulations  (42  CFR  Part  73,  9  CFR  Part  121,  or  7  CFR  Part  331)  will  not  require  an
additional  inspection.  The  CDC’s  Import  Permit  Program  will  only  inspect  locations
where the imported material will be used and stored to evaluate whether the importer’s
biosafety measures (e.g., physical structure and features of the facility, and operational
and procedural safeguards) are commensurate with the hazard posed by the infectious
biological  agent,  infectious  substance,  and/or  vector,  and  the  level  of  risk  given  its
intended use. Upon review of the application for import permit, the CDC Import Permit
Program will contact your facility if an inspection is needed. The CDC’s Import Permit
Program checklists are posted on the CDC’s Import Permit Program website. Yes. CDC
limits the importation of bats under the authority of the Public Health Service Act (42
U.S.C.  §  264)  based  on  the  significant  public  health  risks  associated  with  bats.
Specifically,  bats  are  known  carriers  of  infectious  biological  agents  that  cause
communicable and other diseases in humans. The most significant of these infectious
biological agents are Nipah virus and viruses that cause communicable diseases such
as  Ebola,  Marburg  Hemorrhagic  Fever,  Sudden  Acute  Severe  Respiratory  Syndrome
(SARS),  and  rabies.  If  the  bat  is  a  native  species  of  the  United  States,  no  permit  is
required to transfer the live bats. However, the CDC Import Permit Program requires a
permit  for  the  transfer  of  live  bats  within  the  United  States  if  the  bat  was  previously
imported  from  outside  of  the  United  States.  This  requirement  is  listed  as  a  condition
indicated on the issued permit. To initiate the process for a permit, the facility would
need  to  submit  the  “Application  for  Permit  to  Import  or  Transport  Live  Bats”  through
eIPP. An importer must demonstrate an understanding of the risks which bats pose to
public  health  and  provide  evidence  of  efforts  taken  to  protect  the  importer  and  the
public from such risks. In order to make the determination that an importer will protect
public  health,  through  this  notice,  and  in  addition  to  a  completed  application,  CDC
requires: The Import Permit Program (IPP) uses a secure electronic information system,
eIPP,  to  conduct  all  program  business.  This  two-way  portal,  accessible  by  both  the
program and those seeking import permits, is used to submit and share information. As
of  September  2018,  the  only  way  to  apply  for  a  CDC  import  permit  is  by  using  this
system. Additional information can be found here. All potential applicants are required
to  have  a  SAMS  (Secure  Access  Management  Services)  account  –  which  protects  the
security of the information by requiring users to enter a user ID and password, or other
secure credentials, before providing access to the system – in order to access the eIPP
system to apply for a permit.  If you do not yet have a SAMS account but would like to
establish one in order to submit a new application, please contact us. Only applications
submitted  via  eIPP  will  be  accepted.  The  specific  measures  required  to  ensure  that
infectious biological agents, infectious substances, and vectors are shipped safely are
included in the Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 CFR
Parts 171-180). A condensed version of these measures can be found in the CDC/NIH
publication Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories. Requirements for
All Infectious Substances The DOT regulations (49 CFR 171.15 and 171.16) require each
person  in  physical  possession  of  a  hazardous  material,  including  an  infectious
substance,  to  report  specific  types  of  transportation  incidents  that  involve  these
materials.  Immediate  reporting  by  telephone  to  the  National  Response  Center  at
1-800-424-8802  is  required  for  incidents  where  fire,  breakage,  spillage,  or  suspected
contamination occurs that involves the shipment of infectious substances other than a
patient specimen or regulated medical waste (See 49 CFR 171.15(b)(3)). In addition, a
written report to DOT is required within 30 days of the discovery of the incident for any
unintentional  release  of  hazardous  material  from  a  packaging  during  transportation,
including those covered under 49 CFR 171.15 (See 49 CFR 171.16(a)). DOT regulations
also require packages that contain infectious substances to be accompanied by several
forms  of  hazard  communication,  as  applicable,  as  well  as  labeled  to  indicate  the
infectious hazard (See 49 CFR 172.432 for a depiction of the required label). This label
currently  includes  a  statement  for  reporting  a  damaged  package.  Please  refer  to  the
Department of Transportation regulations (See 49 CFR 173.22 and 24) where it refers to
the  integrity  of  the  packaging.  Imported  infectious  biological  agents,  infectious
substances,  and  vectors  classified  as  a  Category  A  infectious  substance  must  be
packaged  in  accordance  with  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation’s  (DOT’s)
Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR; 49 CFR Parts 171-180), and be accompanied by
a  shipping  paper,  marking,  labeling,  and  note  the  appropriate  emergency  response
information.  Please  see  the  Guidance  for  Completing  the  Shipper’s  Declaration  for
Dangerous Goods for more information. The outer container of all Category A infectious
substance  packages  must  display  the  following:  To  receive  email  updates  from  the
Import Permit Program, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/orr/ipp/faq.htm
