Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. CDC’s milestones and parent tips have been updated and new
checklist ages have been added (15 and 30 months). For more information about the
updates  to  CDC’s  developmental  milestones,  please  review  the  Pediatrics  journal
article and these important key points. How your child plays, learns, speaks, acts, and
moves  offers  important  clues  about  your  child’s  development.  Developmental
milestones are things most children (75% or more) can do by a certain age. Check the
milestones your child has reached by 15 months by completing a checklist with CDC’s
free Milestone Tracker mobile app, for iOS and Android devices, using the Digital Online
Checklist,  or  by  printing  the  checklist  [1  MB,  2  Pages,  Print  Only]  below.  “Learn  the
Signs.  Act  Early.”  materials  are  not  a  substitute  for  standardized,  validated
developmental screening tools] Close this video Close this video Close this video Close
this video Close this video Close this video Close this video  1 of 2 images 
Right click here and select “Save Target As…” for hi-resolution image (784 KB) 2 of 2
images 
Right click here and select “Save Target As…” for hi-resolution image (740 KB)  
Right click here and select “Save Target As…” for hi-resolution image (1013 KB)  
Right click here and select “Save Target As…” for hi-resolution image (598 KB)  
Right click here and select “Save Target As…” for hi-resolution image (985 KB)    
Right click here and select “Save Target As…” for hi-resolution image (875 KB)  1 of 2
images 
Right click here and select “Save Target As…” for hi-resolution image (784 KB) 2 of 2
images 
Right  click  here  and  select  “Save  Target  As…”  for  hi-resolution  image  (740  KB)  View
You  know  your  child  best.  Don’t  wait.  If  your  child  is  not  meeting  one  or  more
milestones, has lost skills he or she once had, or you have other concerns, act early.
Talk  with  your  child’s  doctor,  share  your  concerns,  and  ask  about  developmental
screening. If you or the doctor are still concerned: For more on how to help your child,
visit cdc.gov/Concerned. As your child’s first teacher, you can help his or her learning
and  brain  development.  Try  these  simple  tips  and  activities  in  a  safe  way.  Talk  with
your child’s doctor and teachers if you have questions or for more ideas on how to help
your child’s development.   Special acknowledgments to the subject matter experts and
others  who  contributed  to  the  review  of  data  and  selection  of  developmental
milestones, especially Paul H. Lipkin, MD, Michelle M. Macias, MD, Julie F. Pajek, PhD,
Judith S. Shaw, EdD, MPH, RN, Karnesha Slaughter, MPH, Jane K. Squires, PhD, Toni M.
Whitaker,  MD,  Lisa  D.  Wiggins,  PhD,  and  Jennifer  M.  Zubler,  MD.  Sincere  gratitude  to
Natalia Benza, MD and José O. Rodríguez, MD, MBA for their thoughtful review of the
Spanish-language  translation  of  these  milestones.  Print  Milestone  Checklist  English  [1
MB, 2 Pages, Print Only]
Spanish [1 MB, 2 Pages, Print Only] Order free materials
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/milestones/milestones-15mo.html
