Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Improving ventilation (air flow, filtration, and treatment) can
help  you  protect  building  occupants  from  respiratory  infections.  Good  ventilation  can
also  help  you  provide  clean  air  and  maintain  a  healthy  indoor  environment.  Droplets
and  small  particles  that  people  breathe  out  can  contain  viruses.  Because  people  can
get  respiratory  illnesses  from  breathing  in  these  droplets  and  viral  particles,  it  is
important to use protective ventilation strategies to prevent them from accumulating in
indoor air. Ventilation systems bring fresh, outdoor air into rooms, filter or disinfect the
air there, and improve air flow.  Making ventilation system upgrades or improvements
in  your  building  can  increase  the  delivery  of  clean  air  and  reduce  potential
contaminants in indoor spaces. This can help reduce the number of viral particles in the
air.  Building  owners  and  operators  can  take  steps  to  improve  ventilation  and  help
prevent  respiratory  illnesses  from  spreading  in  indoor  spaces.  You  can  use  a  layered
approach  that  combines  ventilation  strategies  with  other  infection  prevention  and
control  measures.  With  each  added  layer  of  protection,  the  risk  of  exposure  to
respiratory  viruses  decreases.  Make  sure  your  building’s  heating,  ventilation,  and  air
conditioning (HVAC) systems operate as designed. Older systems may need updating to
meet  current  ventilation  standards  or  to  improve  ventilation  and  filtration  capability.
Improving ventilation, filtration, and air treatment systems in buildings can help lower
the concentration of viral particles in the air. Low cost and low energy strategies are
available. Learn more about using CDC’s building recommendations in your setting. The
Clean Air in Buildings Challenge helps building owners and operators improve indoor air
quality and protect public health. Create your clean indoor air action plan today.
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/improving-ventilation-in-buildings.html
