Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
COMMENTARY  —  Volume  17  —  July  9,  2020  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:
Smith  CD,  Mennis  J.  Incorporating  Geographic  Information  Science  and  Technology  in
Response  to  the  COVID-19  Pandemic.  Prev  Chronic  Dis  2020;17:200246.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd17.200246. PEER REVIEWED What is already known about
this  topic?  Incorporating  geographic  information  science  and  technology  (GIS&T)  into
COVID-19 pandemic surveillance, modeling, and response enhances understanding and
control  of  the  disease.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  Applications  of  GIS&T  include
developing spatial data infrastructures for surveillance and data sharing, incorporating
mobility data in infectious disease forecasting, using geospatial technologies for digital
contact  tracing,  integrating  geographic  data  in  COVID-19  modeling,  investigating
geographic social vulnerabilities and health disparities, and communicating the status
of  the  disease  or  status  of  facilities  for  return-to-normal  operations.  What  are  the
implications  for  public  health  practice?  Protections  for  individual  privacy  and  close
collaboration among the fields of geography, medicine, public health, and public policy
to  use  GIS&T  are  imperative.  Incorporating  geographic  information  science  and
technology  (GIS&T)  into  COVID-19  pandemic  surveillance,  modeling,  and  response
enhances  understanding  and  control  of  the  disease.  Applications  of  GIS&T  include  1)
developing  spatial  data  infrastructures  for  surveillance  and  data  sharing,  2)
incorporating  mobility  data  in  infectious  disease  forecasting,  3)  using  geospatial
technologies  for  digital  contact  tracing,  4)  integrating  geographic  data  in  COVID-19
modeling, 5) investigating geographic social vulnerabilities and health disparities, and
6) communicating the status of the disease or status of facilities for return-to-normal
operations.  Locations  and  availability  of  personal  protective  equipment,  ventilators,
hospital  beds,  and  other  items  can  be  optimized  with  the  use  of  GIS&T.  Challenges
include  protection  of  individual  privacy  and  civil  liberties  and  closer  collaboration
among  the  fields  of  geography,  medicine,  public  health,  and  public  policy.  Top  The
spread of infectious disease is inherently a spatial process; therefore, geospatial data,
technologies,  and  analytical  methods  play  a  critical  role  in  understanding  and
responding  to  the  coronavirus  disease  2019  (COVID-19)  pandemic.  Geographic
information  science  and  technology  (GIS&T)  is  the  academic  field  centered  on
geospatial  data  and  analysis.  The  field  encompasses  geographic  information  systems
(GIS),  spatial  statistics  and  visualization,  and  location-based  data  derived  from  global
navigation satellite systems (GNSS, eg, global positioning systems [GPS]) and remotely
sensed  imagery.  Opportunities  for  incorporating  GIS&T  into  COVID-19  pandemic
surveillance, modeling, and response include 1) developing spatial data infrastructures
(SDI)  for  surveillance  and  data  sharing,  2)  incorporating  mobility  data  in  infectious
disease  forecasting,  3)  using  geospatial  technologies  for  digital  contact  tracing,  4)
integrating geographic data in COVID-19 modeling, 5) investigating geographic health
disparities and social vulnerabilities, and 6) communicating the status of the disease or
status of facilities for return-to-normal operations. Locations and availability of personal
protective equipment, ventilators, hospital beds, and other items can be optimized with
the use of GIS&T. Top Current surveillance of COVID-19 at the national and global levels
is  built  on  lessons  learned  from  maintaining  previously  developed  databases  of
contamination and disease, such as FluNet (1). Disease surveillance systems have been
enhanced  by  the  use  of  GIS  for  monitoring  disease  outbreaks,  facilitating  contact
tracing,  and  evaluating  the  efficacy  of  interventions.  For  example,  Zenilman  et  al
described  the  application  of  GIS  to  a  surveillance  system  for  sexually  transmitted
diseases at the Fort Bragg military base (2). The assessment of various potential risk
factors  indicated  that  geography  was  the  only  variable  positively  associated  with
gonorrhea among study participants. The Connect to Protect program is an example of
how researcher–community collaborations (or community-based participatory research)
can assist program planners to efficiently use limited resources (3). Connect to Protect,
a  nongovernmental  organization,  uses  GIS  and  community  involvement  to  prioritize
resources  and  outreach  activities.  The  research  team  uses  GIS  to  evaluate  the
geographic epidemiology of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV among adolescents
in 15 US cities and Puerto Rico. Their work led to a shift from traditional evaluations of
condom use, number of sex partners, and demographic characteristics, to identification
of sociophysical environments. The observation of clusters of cases in geographic areas
informed research teams on where to apply interventions. The use of GIS supports the
investigation  of  the  social  and  environmental  correlates  of  disease  clusters,  thereby
facilitating  targeted  interventions  and  researcher–community  collaborations  to  assist
program  planners  to  efficiently  use  limited  resources  (3).  An  important  aspect  of
monitoring  the  spread  of  infectious  disease  is  spatial  data  infrastructure  (SDI),
composed  of  the  human  resources  and  institutions  that  create  and  maintain  the
foundation to which additional spatial data can be attached and used. Key components
of  an  SDI  include  geospatial  culture  and  awareness,  resources  for  information  and
communications
 technology,
 common
 standards
 for
 data
 integration
 and
interoperability, a legal framework for data security and privacy, a common lexicon, the
use
 of
 robust
 statistical
 and
 epidemiological
 methods,
 and
 interdisciplinary
collaboration and partnerships (4). Along with the SDI, the concepts of open data, crowd
sourcing, and data sharing for georeferenced health data are important components of
real-time  infectious  disease  surveillance,  particularly  in  under-resourced  settings  (5).
Maps play a key role in communicating the risks and spread of COVID-19 (6). Interactive
web-based maps and dashboards present near–real-time data on morbidity, mortality,
and  recovery,  as  well  as  pandemic-related  factors  such  as  supply-chain  quantities  of
personal  protective  equipment  or  therapeutics.  A  dashboard  developed  by  Johns
Hopkins  University  in  collaboration  with  ESRI  (Redlands,  California),  which  originally
showed the number of COVID-19 cases, deaths, and recoveries, was updated to show
smaller  geographic  areas  (ie,  counties)  and  detailed  infographics  (7).  This  type  of
infographic  has  been  useful  for  tracking  COVID-19  cases  globally  and  for  allocating
resources and planning for “return-to-normal” conditions. Location-enabled infographics
also  allow  for  dissemination  of  knowledge  on,  for  example,  the  readiness  of  facilities
such  as  retail  outlets  to  accept  customers,  or  schools  and  campuses  to  reopen.  An
interactive  dashboard  (ESRI,  Redlands,  California),  developed  for  faculty,  staff,
students, and administrators at the University of California, Berkeley, shows the status
of  custodians’  efforts  to  disinfect  university  buildings  (Figure).  The  dashboard  is
populated in real time as custodial staff members complete disinfection of rooms. The
room  number  and  type  (eg,  classroom,  laboratory,  bathroom),  the  date  and  time
completed, and the product used for disinfection appear in a pop-up on the dashboard
when the user selects a building.
 
Figure.
An interactive dashboard for showing the status of disinfection of buildings during the
coronavirus  disease  2019  (COVID-19)  pandemic  on  the  campus  of  the  University  of
California,  Berkeley.  [A  text  version  of  this  figure  is  also  available.]  The  GIS&T
community  has  long  worked  toward  development  of  the  National  Spatial  Data
Infrastructure  (NSDI)  for  the  United  States  (8),  an  effort  managed  by  the  US  Federal
Geographic  Data  Committee  (FGDC);  facilitated  by  spatial  data  interoperability
standards,  such  as  those  developed  by  the  Open  Geospatial  Consortium  (OGC);  and
recently  bolstered  by  the  Geospatial  Data  Act  of  2018,  a  component  of  H.R.302,  the
FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018. The US NSDI is typically considered an infrastructure
for  geospatial  framework  data  (eg,  cadastral  and  transportation)  and  not  necessarily
health  data;  however,  just  as  the  events  of  September  11,  2001,  catalyzed  the
development  of  enhanced  spatial  data  sharing  to  support  disaster  response  in  the
United States, the COVID-19 pandemic has the potential to spark the improvement of
health  data  infrastructures  to  facilitate  spatial  data  sharing  and  interoperability  for
health crisis response. A particular challenge is that SDIs for responding to a crisis like
COVID-19  require  sharing  data  not  only  among  various  national  and  international
governments  but,  as  with  the  US  NSDI,  also  among  various  levels  of  government,
including  the  federal,  state,  and  county  levels.  Corporate  partners  also  play  a  pivotal
role in the development of SDI for pandemic response, because they have large sets of
spatial data on the mobility, purchasing, and web browsing behaviors of individuals and
other  relevant  place-based  and  georeferenced  data  that  may  be  useful  in
understanding  disease  dynamics.  In  addition,  responding  to  a  rapidly  evolving  health
crisis  such  as  the  COVID-19  pandemic  requires  pipelines  for  supplying  health  and
related data in near real time, which presents challenges. Finally, privacy protection for
individuals is paramount in developing useful SDIs for pandemic response. As with the
US NSDI, initiative and management at the federal level is likely necessary to develop
an  SDI  for  pandemic  response.  Top  Along  with  handwashing  and  social  distancing,
perhaps  the  foremost  mitigation  strategy  for  reducing  person-to-person  contact  and
transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in the
absence  of  pharmaceutical  intervention  is  regulation  restricting  mobility  (ie,  human
movement and travel behavior). Consequently, one key role for geospatial technologies
in  responding  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic  is  monitoring  population  distribution  and
mobility through the use of social media and location-tracking applications embedded
in mobile telephones that employ GNSS, cell phone tower connections, and/or wireless
connections (9). Several corporate location-data collectors and vendors have released
spatially  aggregated  COVID-19  pandemic-related  data  on  population  mobility.  These
data  have  been  widely  used  by  the  popular  media  to  report  on  the  effects  of
jurisdictional stay-at-home orders on population mobility and by researchers to analyze
the efficacy of population mobility change for altering disease dynamics (10). Modeling
population  distribution  and  mobility  has  a  long  history  in  GIS&T  and  focuses  on
fine-scale estimations of population distribution and mobility (11,12), most recently by
using  mobile  telephone–based  location  data  (13,14).  The  scholarly  response  to  the
pandemic  marks  a  major  advance  in  the  incorporation  of  fine-resolution  data  on
population and individual mobility from geospatial technologies to understand disease
dynamics  and  formulate  effective  intervention  strategies.  Because  questions  remain
about  the  best  way  to  measure  and  collect  data  on  individual  mobility,  provide  such
data  to  researchers,  and  incorporate  such  mobility  measures  into  infectious  disease
models, the COVID-19 pandemic provides an opportunity for testing methods for using
such data to evaluate and forecast the effects of nonpharmaceutical interventions that
restrict  mobility.  However,  current  legal  frameworks  and  practices  for  preserving  the
privacy of individuals are obstacles to widespread adoption. Top Monitoring mobility at
the  individual  level,  in  addition  to  the  population  level,  has  also  emerged  as  an
important use of geospatial technologies, particularly in its application to digital contact
tracing.
 Conventional
 contact
 tracing,
 involving
 identifying,
 contacting,
 and
encouraging  quarantine  for  the  people  with  whom  an  infected  person  has  had  close
contact to mitigate disease transmission, is labor intensive. The process can be made
more  efficient  and  scaled  up  to  large  populations  by  exploiting  individual  digital
mobility  data,  as  well  as  data  indicating  proximity  among  mobile  telephones  using
Bluetooth  or  related  technologies,  to  computationally  show  close  proximity  among
individuals (15). Such location data can be combined with health and other data that
might indicate vulnerability to infection or disease. Individuals can then be contacted
and  given  quarantine  instructions  automatically  through  mobile  telephone  text
messages,  or  their  future  behavior  may  even  be  monitored  to  encourage  or  enforce
quarantine.  Such  procedures  have  been  used  to  some  degree,  in  combination  with
population  mobility  restrictions,  in  an  attempt  to  reduce  SARS-CoV-2  transmission  in
China, Israel, Singapore, and South Korea, among other nations, and developments for
digital contact tracing technologies by the largest international technology companies
continue  (16).  Advances  in  GIS&T  have  been  made  in  modeling  the  geographic
trajectories  of  individuals  throughout  their  daily  lives,  their  interactions  with  other
people,  and  their  immediate  environment  using  geographic  and  computational
constructs such as activity space and space–time prisms (17–20). However, to leverage
this  body  of  research  for  digital  contact  tracing,  progress  needs  to  be  made  in
developing,  testing,  and  implementing  digital  contact  tracing  applications,  including
evaluations of behavioral compliance, efficacy, and scaling. Additionally, this approach
raises  concerns  about  confidentiality  and  civil  liberties  that  need  to  be  addressed
before  widespread  adoption  (21).  Top  A  strength  of  GIS  is  the  ability  to  integrate
diverse spatial data sets based on georeferencing, facilitating the integration of health
data with contextual characteristics. Descriptive modeling research that leverages this
capability has examined the spatial associations of COVID-19 with socioeconomic and
environmental characteristics. This research found, for example, that lower income and
income  inequality  (22),  higher  temperature  and  humidity  (23),  exposure  to  fine
particulate  air  pollution  (24),  and  mobility  and  transportation  networks  (25,26)  were
associated with a higher prevalence of COVID-19 cases or mortality. GIS&T also offers
approaches to investigating statistical spatial effects and spatial heterogeneity, such as
spatial autoregressive models and geographically weighted regression, to account for
modeling  geographic  processes  such  as  spatial  diffusion  and  the  variation  in
relationships  among  variables  over  space  (27,28).  Recent  research  leveraged  these
approaches  in  demonstrating  the  spatial  heterogeneity  in  the  relationships  among
observed  COVID-19  cases  and  mortality  with  georeferenced  socioeconomic  and
environmental  variables  (22,29,30)  and  found  that  the  influence  of  area-based
socioeconomic status, pre-existing health conditions, and environmental characteristics
on disease transmission may vary from place to place. Computational infectious disease
models are widely used to predict or forecast the spread of COVID-19 disease and the
effects  of  intervention  strategies.  Predictive  modeling  approaches  can  be  generally
categorized as SEIR/SIR (susceptible, exposed, infected, and removed/recovered) (31),
agent-based (32), or statistical modeling (33). Such modeling approaches are inherently
geographic  in  the  sense  that  they  make  predictions  for  certain  areas  or  regions,
although  only  some  models  contain  an  explicit  spatial  interaction  component  or
forecast  the  spatial  variation  in  disease  incidence  over  small  areas.  Explicitly
incorporating a spatial component into infectious disease models attempts to account
for  1)  place-based  contextual  mechanisms  of  infection  or  disease  related  to  the
socioeconomic,  built,  or  natural  environments,  such  as  air  pollution  or  type  of
employment,  2)  spatial  heterogeneity  in  the  drivers  of  disease  transmission,  for
example, where certain socioeconomic characteristics may be associated with disease
prevalence in one region but not in another as a result of regional differences in culture
or behavioral norms, and 3) transportation networks or patterns of human mobility to
better account for disease transmission dynamics (34,35). Such approaches have been
extended to modeling the spread of COVID-19, providing evidence that restrictions on
mobility  have  mitigated  the  spread  of  COVID-19  in  different  parts  of  the  world  and
aided  in  forecasts  of  disease  diffusion  under  various  scenarios  of  mobility  restriction
(36,37).  Spatial  transportation  and  mobility  data  can  play  an  important  role  in
forecasting  disease  prevalence,  where,  for  example,  the  effect  of  nonpharmaceutical
interventions  (eg,  restrictions  on  mobility)  on  city-level  transmission  of  COVID-19  in
China
 was
 analyzed
 using
 mobility
 data
 harvested
 from
 mobile
 telephone
location-based services. This method allows one to parameterize the local contact rate
and  forecast  the  geographic  distribution  of  disease  prevalence  under  different
intervention  timing  scenarios  (37).  Related  approaches  to  modeling  the  spread  of
COVID-19 also incorporated airline transportation networks (38) and were extended to
other  countries  with  extensive  COVID-19  outbreaks,  such  as  Italy  (36),  providing
substantial  evidence  that  restrictions  on  mobility  have  mitigated  the  spread  of
COVID-19  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  Top  Indices  of  social  vulnerability  are
place-based variables that incorporate factors such as race/ethnicity and socioeconomic
status  to  encode  the  vulnerability  to  adverse  health  outcomes  and  other  types  of
hazards (39). Community social vulnerability, along with health care resources, plays an
important  role  in  predicting  health  care  capacity  in  responding  to  the  COVID-19
pandemic  (40).  Social  vulnerability  can  interact  with  pre-existing  medical  conditions
and access to medical resources, such as prescription drugs, to produce inequities in
COVID-19 outcomes (41). People with underlying medical conditions, such as asthma,
obesity, and diabetes, as well as people who are immunocompromised or aged 65 or
older are at higher risk of serious consequences from SARS-CoV-2 infection than their
healthier  or  younger  counterparts.  Because  such  medical  conditions  are  often
concentrated  geographically  and  among  certain  demographic  groups,  understanding
the spatial and demographic distribution of these conditions is critical to investigating
health  disparities  associated  with  COVID-19.  For  example,  COVID-19  morbidity  and
mortality  are  higher  among  African  American  and  Hispanic  people  than  among
non-Hispanic white people (42). Such racial/ethnic disparities highlight the importance
of  efficient  collection  of  socioeconomic,  demographic,  and  other  data  among  people
with COVID-19. Resources for investigating COVID-19-related social disparities include
publicly  available  data  on  COVID-19  cases  by  small  areas,  such  as  zip  codes  (43),
although such data are not widely available at a national level. The same issue exists
for  fine  spatial  resolution  data  on  social  vulnerability.  The  Public  Health  Disparities
Geocoding Project at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health seeks to address
this  latter  shortcoming  (44).  Researchers  should  understand  the  geographic  and
historical  background  of  discrimination  and  resource  deprivation  that  may  produce
place-based  social  vulnerabilities,  to  avoid  stigmatizing  or  placing  blame  on  certain
communities. An understanding of the social determinants and structural forces, such
as  food  insecurity,  housing  insecurity,  and  disparities  in  educational  or  health  care
infrastructure, that can influence health outcomes such as obesity, hypertension, and
certain types of cancer, is important. The multidimensional social, economic, and health
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic are geographically inequitable: some places
and  populations  have  greater  social,  economic,  health  and  other  effects  than  other
places and populations. Beyond the need to identify such factors as lack of access to
resources or the prevalence of pre-existing health conditions is the need to recognize
and understand the mechanisms of vulnerability that have been in place and led to the
exacerbation  of  the  COVID-19  crisis  in  some  communities.  Community  recovery  from
the  COVID-19  pandemic  requires  incorporation  of  social,  economic,  and  health
components and an emphasis on investigating how place shapes the uneven effect of
COVID-19.  Top  We  have  outlined  how  GIS&T  can  be  used  for  understanding  and
responding  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  future  infectious  disease  epidemics  and
pandemics. Central to this understanding and response is a commitment for the use of
GIS  and  geospatial  technologies  as  the  platform  for  collecting,  integrating,  and
analyzing georeferenced data on the locations and characteristics of individuals and the
spatial  distribution  of  socioeconomic,  health,  and  built  and  natural  environmental
characteristics.  Geospatial  resources  for  COVID-19  response  are  available  through
several organizations, including the University Consortium for Geographic Information
Science
 (www.ucgis.org/covid-19-resources),
 the
 OGC
(www.ogc.org/resources-for-COVID-19-from-ogc),  and  the  National  Alliance  for  Public
Safety  GIS  Foundation  (www.napsgfoundation.org/resources/covid-19).  Leveraging
GIS&T  for  responding  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic  requires  a  close  and  extensive
collaboration between researchers in the fields of geography, medicine, public health,
and public policy. The field of GIS&T has a long history of research in data synthesis,
statistical  modeling,  and  computational  simulation  for  spatial  data  and  applications.
Recognizing that GIS&T is a theoretical and scientific approach rather than simply a set
of analytical tools will facilitate transdisciplinary collaboration. Advances in preserving
individual  privacy  and  civil  liberties  in  the  age  of  big  spatial  data,  where  geospatial
technologies  generate  massive  repositories  of  individual-level  data  on  movement,
health,  and  behavior  widely  available,  are  also  necessary.  These  advances  will  likely
require  enhanced  government  regulations,  corporate  policies,  and  technological
innovations in data sharing and privacy protection. The COVID-19 pandemic is still in
the beginning phase, and the research community is continuing to learn and revise the
best way to respond to this global public health crisis. Geospatial data, methods, and
technologies  have  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  understanding  and  responding  to  the
pandemic, and the lessons learned on the use of GIS&T for pandemic response at this
time should enhance preparedness and response for future public health crises. Top No
copyrighted materials were used in the preparation of this article. Top Corresponding
Author:  Charlotte  D.  Smith,  School  of  Public  Health,  2121  Berkeley  Way  #5302,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720. Telephone: 935-377-1891. Email:
charlottesmith@berkeley.edu.  Author  Affiliations:  1University  of  California,  Berkeley,
School  of  Public  Health,  Berkeley,  California.  2Temple  University,  Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. Top Top The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do
not  necessarily  reflect  the  opinions  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or
the authors’ affiliated institutions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2020/20_0246.htm
