A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Similar  to  other  multidrug-resistant  organisms  (MDROs),  C.  auris  spreads  easily  in
healthcare settings and can cause outbreaks. C. auris can colonize patients for many
months,  persist  on  surfaces,  and  is  not  killed  by  some  commonly  used  healthcare
facility  disinfectants.   Hand  hygiene,  appropriate  precautions,  and  environmental
disinfection prevent and control outbreaks. The primary infection control measures for
prevention  of  C.  auris  transmission  in  healthcare  settings  are:  In  most  instances,
facilities  equipped  to  care  for  patients  with  other  multidrug-resistant  organisms
(MDROs) or Clostridioides difficile can also care for patients with C. auris. C. auris can
persist  on  surfaces  in  healthcare  settings.  C.  auris  has  been  cultured  from  multiple
locations  in  patient  rooms.  The  fungus  has  been  found  on  both  high-touch  surfaces,
such as bedside tables and bedrails, and surfaces farther away from the patient, such
as windowsills. Several common hospital disinfectants are not effective against C. auris.
 Some  products  with  C.  albicans  or  fungicidal  claims  may  not  be  effective  against  C.
auris.  Accumulating  data  indicate  that  products  solely  dependent  on  quaternary
ammonia  compounds  (QACs)  are  NOT  effective.  CDC  recommends  using  an
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)–registered hospital-grade disinfectant effective
against C. auris. See EPA's List P for a current list of EPA-approved products for C. auris.
 If the products on List P are not accessible or otherwise suitable, facilities may use an
EPA-registered hospital-grade disinfectant effective against C. difficile spores (List K).  It
is  important  to  follow  all  manufacturer's  directions  for  use,  including  applying  the
product  for  the  correct  contact  time  for  all  products.  Research  about  disinfection
effective against C. auris is ongoing. Data on "no-touch" devices, such as germicidal UV
irradiation and vaporized hydrogen peroxide, are limited. The parameters required for
effective disinfection are not yet well understood. These methods should only be used
as  a  supplement  to  standard  cleaning  and  disinfection  methods.  Perform  thorough
routine  (at  least  daily)  and  terminal  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  patients'  rooms  and
areas where patients receive care. Appropriately disinfect radiology, physical therapy,
and  other  areas  of  the  hospital  patients  may  have  visited.  Medical  equipment  that  is
shared between patients can spread C. auris. Clean and disinfect equipment after each
use.  Label  disinfected  equipment  and  separate  it  from  dirty  equipment.   Examples
include:  CDC  and  health  department  outbreak  investigations  have  found  that
healthcare personnel are not always aware of ftheir responsibilities for cleaning mobile
and shared equipment. Responsibilities for cleaning all mobile and reusable equipment
should be well-established. Healthcare personnel should be aware of which equipment
they  are  responsible  to  clean  and  trained  in  disinfection  methods.  When  caring  for
patients  with  C.  auris,  healthcare  providers  should  follow  standard  hand  hygiene
practices.  Alcohol-based  hand  sanitizer  is  preferred  for  C.  auris  when  hands  are  not
visibly soiled. If hands are visibly soiled, wash with soap and water. Wearing gloves is
not a substitute for hand hygiene. The Transmission-Based Precautions and Enhanced
Barrier Precautions for C. auris are similar to those used for other multidrug-resistant
organisms  (MDROs).  In  most  instances,  facilities  equipped  to  care  for  patients  with
other MDROs or Clostridioides difficile can also care for patients with C. auris.  In acute
care  and  long-term  acute  care  hospitals,  healthcare  providers  should  use  Contact
Precautions. In nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities, healthcare providers should
use  either  Contact  Precautions  or  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  (EBP),  based  on  the
situation and local or state jurisdiction recommendations.   Refer to the CDC Guidance
on  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  for  more  details  about  when  Contact  Precautions
versus Enhanced Barrier Precautions would apply. Hospitals and nursing homes Patients
on Contact Precautions should be placed in a single-patient room whenever possible. In
situations  where  limited  single-rooms  are  available,  prioritize  placing  patients  with
higher  likelihood  of  transmission  (such  as  those  with  uncontained  secretions  or
excretions,  diarrhea,  and  draining  wounds).  Facilities  can  group  C.  auris  patients
together in a dedicated unit or part of a unit. This decreases movement of healthcare
personnel  and  equipment  to  non-affected  areas.  Facilities  could  also  consider
dedicating healthcare personnel (e.g., nurses, nursing assistants) who provide regular
care to these patients during a shift. In nursing homes, facilities with the capacity may
consider placing patients with C. auris in single-patient rooms. Healthcare providers can
find  recommendations  about  patient  placement  in  nursing  homes  using  Enhanced
Barrier Precautions (EBP) in CDC's FAQs about Enhanced Barrier Precautions in Nursing
Homes. When single rooms are not available, facilities may choose to cohort patients
with  C.  auris  together  in  the  same  room.  It  is  preferable  to  cohort  patients  with  the
same  MDROs  together.  However,  facilities  may  assign  rooms  based  on  single  (or  a
limited  number  of)  high-concern  MDROs  (e.g.,  C.  auris  or  carbapenemase-producing
Enterobacterales) without regard to co-colonizing organisms. Reducing transmission in
cohort  settings  Facilities  must  implement  strategies  to  help  minimize  transmission
between  roommates  when  patients  are  placed  in  shared  rooms.  The  following
strategies  apply  for  all  shared  rooms,  regardless  of  patient  colonization  or  infection
status:  Before  making  decisions  to  cohort  patients  according  to  C.  auris  or  other
high-concern MDROs, consider the benefits and drawbacks. Ensure these practices are
implemented without increasing the risk of pathogen spread in dedicated units or areas
in  a  facility.  Placing  patients  with  C.  auris  or  other  high-concern  MDROs  in  the  same
room,  or  in  a  dedicated  unit,  wing,  or  area  (even  if  in  single-patient  rooms)  with
dedicated  staff  can  help  prevent  the  transfer  of  healthcare  personnel  and  equipment
between those colonized or infected with C. auris and those who are not.  This strategy
may  be  best  used  for  initial  room  assignments  in  facilities  performing  admission
screening for select MDROs or for a single MDRO in facilities with an acute outbreak.
Moving  patients  to  the  same  room,  unit,  or  areas  based  on  MDROs  increases  patient
movement,  and  in  some  circumstances,  increases  C.  auris  transmission.  This  risk
increases if there are gaps in environmental cleaning. Facilities choosing to implement
this  strategy  should  do  so  in  a  way  that  reduces  overall  exposures  throughout  the
facility.  This  includes  avoiding  frequent  room  changes  that  lead  to  environmental
contamination  in  more  areas  and  more  healthcare  contacts  that  could  be  exposed.
Patient transfer Notify the receiving facility or unit of the patients C. auris infection or
colonization  status  when  transferring  a  patient.  This  includes  recommended
Transmission-Based Precautions. An example of an infection control transfer form to aid
this  communication  can  be  found  at  the  top  of  the  Healthcare-Associated  Infections
Prevention  Toolkits  web  page.  Ensuring  that  all  healthcare  personnel  adhere  to
infection  control  recommendations  is  critical  to  preventing  transmission  of  C.  auris,
other MDROs, and communicable diseases. Consider taking the steps outlined below to
enhance  adherence.  The  following  is  interim  guidance  for  patients  with  C.  auris  who
require  dialysis  care.  Further  updates  will  be  provided  as  additional  information
becomes available. In addition to following Standard Precautions and infection control
practices routinely recommended for the care of all hemodialysis patients, facilities and
healthcare  personnel  at  dialysis  centers  should  follow  the  guidance  outlined  below.
Inform and educate appropriate personnel about the presence of a patient with C. auris
and the need for specific infection control measures. Use alcohol-based hand sanitizer
as the preferred method for cleaning hands when they are not visibly soiled. If hands
are visibly soiled, wash with soap and water. Wearing gloves is not a substitute for hand
hygiene.  Wear  gowns  and  gloves  using  proper  donning  and  doffing  techniques  when
caring for patients with C. auris or touching items at the dialysis station. Remove gowns
and  gloves,  dispose  of  them  carefully,  and  perform  hand  hygiene  when  leaving  the
patient's  station.  Minimize  exposure  to  other  patients  by  dialyzing  the  patient  at  a
station with as few adjacent stations as possible (e.g., at the end or corner of the unit),
and  consider  dialyzing  the  patient  on  the  last  shift  of  the  day.   Properly  clean  and
disinfect reusable equipment brought to the dialysis station after each use. Thoroughly
clean  and  disinfect  the  dialysis  station  (e.g.,  chairs,  side  tables,  machines)  between
patients  by  using  products  approved  for  use  against  C.  auris  (see  above  for  more
information about these disinfectant products and List P). If the patient is transferred to
another healthcare facility, inform the receiving facility of the patient's C. auris status.
Communication  tools  can  be  found  in  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  Prevention
Toolkits.  In  addition  to  following  Standard  Precautions  and  infection  control  practices
routinely  recommended  for  care  of  all  patients  in  outpatient  settings,  facilities  and
healthcare  personnel  should  follow  the  guidance  outlined  below.  Inform  and  educate
appropriate healthcare personnel about the presence of a patient with C. auris and the
need for infection control measures outlined below. Use alcohol-based hand sanitizer as
the preferred method for cleaning hands when they are not visibly soiled. If hands are
visibly soiled, wash with soap and water. Wearing gloves is not a substitute for hand
hygiene.  As  always,  perform  hand  hygiene  when  entering  and  leaving  the  patient's
room. Wear gown and gloves using proper donning and doffing techniques if extensive
patient  contact  is  anticipated  or  contact  with  infected  areas  is  planned  (e.g.,
debridement or dressing of colonized or infected wound). Remove gowns and gloves,
dispose of them carefully, and perform hand hygiene when leaving the patient's room.
Thoroughly clean and disinfect the areas in the facility the patient came into contact
with (e.g., chairs, exam tables) by using products with EPA-registered claims for C. auris
(List  P).  Properly  clean  and  disinfect  reusable  equipment  (e.g.,  blood  pressure  cuffs)
used in the care of the patient after each use. If the patient needs to be admitted or
referred to another facility, inform the receiving facility of the patient's C. auris status.
In  addition  to  following  Standard  Precautions  and  infection  control  practices  routinely
recommended  in  home  healthcare  settings,  personnel  should  follow  the  guidance
outlined below. If possible, schedule patients with C. auris as the last visit of the day.
Use alcohol-based hand sanitizer as the preferred method for cleaning hands when they
are  not  visibly  soiled.  If  hands  are  visibly  soiled,  wash  with  soap  and  water.  Wearing
gloves  is  not  a  substitute  for  hand  hygiene.  As  always,  perform  hand  hygiene  when
entering and leaving the patient care area. Wear gown and gloves using proper donning
and  doffing  techniques  when  entering  the  area  of  the  house  where  providing  patient
care. Remove gowns and gloves and dispose of them carefully when leaving the area.
Properly clean any reusable equipment (e.g., blood pressure cuffs) brought to the home
after each use. If the patient needs to be admitted or referred to another facility, inform
the  receiving  facility  of  the  patient's  C.  auris  status.  The  risk  of  C.  auris  infection  for
otherwise  healthy  household  members,  even  those  with  extensive  contact  with  the
patient, is believed to be low. Nearly all cases of C. auris colonization detected to date
have  been  associated  with  admission  to  a  healthcare  facility.  Household  members
should  practice  good  hand  hygiene  (i.e.,  use  of  alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  or
frequent  handwashing  with  soap  and  water).  Household  members  could  consider
wearing  disposable  gloves  while  providing  high-touch  care  to  a  person  with  C.  auris,
such as changing the dressing on an infected wound, and perform hand hygiene after
glove  removal.  Although  the  risk  of  C.  auris  colonization  among  healthy  household
members  is  thought  to  be  very  low,  household  members  who  require  admission  to  a
healthcare  facility  can  inform  healthcare  providers  that  they  live  with  someone
colonized  with  C.  auris  so  that  colonization  testing  can  be  considered.  Patients  in
healthcare  facilities  often  remain  colonized  with  C.  auris  for  many  months,  perhaps
indefinitely,  even  after  an  acute  infection  (if  present)  has  been  treated  and  resolves.
CDC  recommends  continuing  Contact  Precautions  or  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions,
depending on the healthcare setting, for the entire duration of all inpatient healthcare
stays.  This  includes  patients  in  long-term  healthcare  facilities.  Surveillance  has
identified patients that remained colonized for longer than 4 years and it is likely that
colonization  may  even  persist  longer.  Repeat  colonization  swabs  may  alternate
between detecting and not detecting C. auris. A considerable number of patients have
had  a  positive  C.  auris  specimen  after  multiple  negative  swabs.  CDC  does  not
recommend  routine  reassessments  for  C.  auris  colonization.  Long-term  follow-up  of
colonized  patients  in  healthcare  facilities,  especially  those  patients  who  continue  to
require complex medical care, such as ventilator support, suggests colonization persists
for a prolonged period of time.  In a publication by Pacilli et al. (Clin Infect Dis 2020),
among patients who had a positive C. auris screening result followed by one or more
negative screening results, more than 50% had a subsequent positive screening result.
Additional information is being collected to understand the duration of colonization and
the role of colonization in spread of C. auris. The decision to discharge a patient from
one level of care to another should be based on clinical criteria and the ability of the
accepting  facility  to  provide  care—not  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  infection  or
colonization.  At  this  time,  no  specific  intervention  is  known  to  reduce  or  eliminate  C.
auris  colonization.  Laboratory  evidence suggests  that high  levels  of  chlorhexidine are
active against C. auris. However, the effects of chlorhexidine on reducing C. auris skin
burden  or  infection  have  not  been  systematically  assessed.  C.  auris  outbreaks  and
transmission have been observed in facilities routinely using chlorhexidine bathing. C.
auris is an emerging fungus that can cause severe, often multidrug-resistant, infections.
It  spreads  easily  among  patients  in  healthcare  facilities.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/candida-auris/hcp/infection-control/index.html
