A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 CDC  works  with  partners  to  identify  and  evaluate  other  measures  to  decrease  the
transmission  of  multidrug-resistant  organisms  (MDROs)  in  healthcare  settings.  MRSA
remains  an  important  healthcare  pathogen.  The  prevention  of  MRSA  infections  is  a
priority for CDC. CDC estimates that MRSA is responsible for more than 70,000 severe
infections and 9,000 deaths per year.  CDC recommends the use of Contact Precautions
in inpatient acute care settings for patients colonized or infected with MDROs, including
MRSA.  In  2022,  the  United  States  showed  progress  in  preventing  several  important
healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) in acute care hospitals (ACHs). ACHs observed
16%  decrease  in  hospital-onset  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)
bacteremia,  according  to  data  from  the  National  Healthcare  Safety  Network.  
Interventions  like  Contact  Precautions  and  hand  hygiene,  both  designed  to  reduce
device- and procedure-associated infections and transmissions, have contributed to the
decreases. The contribution of Contact Precautions in comparison to other interventions
is unknown. In recent years, more than a dozen studies, article reviews and editorials
have  sought  to  address  whether  Contact  Precautions  should  be  recommended  for
endemic  MDROs  like  MRSA.  The  impact  of  discontinuing  Contact  Precautions  for
MRSA-colonized  or infected  patients  has  been  assessed  in  single-center studies  using
lower quality quasi-experimental designs. These studies have not identified changes in
MRSA  infection  or  acquisition  rates.  They  likely  underestimate  the  impact  of
discontinuing Contact Precautions including the effect on downstream adverse events
such as post-discharge infections. Based on the current evidence, CDC recommends the
use of Contact Precautions for MRSA-colonized or infected patients. CDC continues to
evaluate  the  evidence  on  Contact  Precautions  as  it  becomes  available.  CDC  also
continues to work with partners to identify and evaluate other measures to decrease
transmission of MDROs in healthcare settings. Healthcare providers can complete this
case scenario to test their knowledge of prevention strategies to protect patients from
serious  staph  infections.  MRSA  is  a  germ  that  is  resistant  to  some  antibiotics.  It  can
spread  in  hospitals,  other  healthcare  facilities,  and  in  the  community.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/hcp/infection-control/index.html
