A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Your kidneys play a vital role in cleaning your blood, eliminating waste from your body,
and  supporting  other  important  functions.  Dialysis  is  a  medical  treatment  for  kidney
failure  or  kidneys  that  do  not  work  right.  It  is  not  a  cure  to  restore  kidney  function.
Infections  are  common  among  people  receiving  dialysis  and  can  be  very  serious.
Everyone  has  a  role  to  play  in  preventing  infections  and  improving  dialysis  patient
safety. You can be a safe patient and take action to help prevent infections.  Dialysis
treatment  options     Each  treatment  option  has  varying  risks  for  infection.  Discuss
treatment options with your doctor to decide which is best based on your needs. Vein
access:  also  known  as  vascular  access,  moves  blood  between  your  body  and  the
dialysis  machine  during  hemodialysis  treatments.   When  someone  is  sick  with  a
respiratory infection in a dialysis facility, you can breathe in respiratory droplets after a
sick  person  coughs  or  sneezes.  Germs  can  also  spread  through  contact  with
contaminated  equipment  surfaces,  through  unclean  hands  or  through  vein  access
points when proper infection control processes are not used.  In some cases, you may
need  to  take  extra  actions  to  prevent  infections.  For  example,  during  the  COVID-19
pandemic.  CDC  has  posters  and  fact  sheets  to  help  patients  prevent  infections  while
receiving  dialysis.  Infections  are  common  in  people  receiving  dialysis  and  can  be
serious.  Take  steps  to  lower  your  risk  for  infection  before,  during,  and  after  dialysis.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dialysis-safety/about/index.html
