Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Prevention  and  Control  of  Seasonal  Influenza  with  Vaccines:
Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  —  United
States, 2023-2024 Influenza Season has been published. Everyone 6 months and older
in  the  United  States,  with  rare  exception,  should  get  an  influenza  (flu)  vaccine  every
season.  CDC’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  has  made  this
“universal”  recommendation  since  the  2010-2011  influenza  season.  Vaccination  to
prevent influenza and its potentially serious complications is particularly important for
people who are at higher risk of developing serious influenza complications. A full list of
age and health factors that are associated with increased risk is available at People at
Higher  Risk  of  Developing  Flu-Related  Complications.  More  information  is  available  at
Who  Needs  a  Flu  Vaccine.  For  people  younger  than  65  years,  CDC  does  not
preferentially  recommend  any  licensed,  age-appropriate  influenza  (flu)  vaccine  over
another.  Options  for  this  age  group  include  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  [IIV],
recombinant  influenza  vaccine  [RIV],  or  live  attenuated  influenza  vaccine  (LAIV),  with
no preference for any flu vaccine over another. For people 65 years and older, there are
three  flu  vaccines  that  are  preferentially  recommended  over  standard-dose,
unadjuvanted flu vaccines. These are Fluzone High-Dose Quadrivalent vaccine, Flublok
Quadrivalent  recombinant  flu  vaccine  and  Fluad  Quadrivalent  adjuvanted  flu  vaccine.
More information is available at Flu & People 65 Years and Older. All flu vaccines for the
2024-2025 season will be trivalent vaccines, designed to protect against three different
flu viruses, including two influenza A viruses and an influenza B/Victoria virus. Different
vaccines  are  licensed  for  use  in  different  age  groups,  and  some  vaccines  are  not
recommended for some groups of people. Available influenza vaccines include: Yes, for
some people. There are three influenza vaccines that are preferentially recommended
for  people  65  years  and  older.  These  are  Fluzone  High-Dose  Quadrivalent  vaccine
Flublok Quadrivalent recombinant Influenza vaccinea nd Fluad Quadrivalent adjuvanted
influenza  vaccine.  This  recommendation  was  based  on  a  review  of  available  studies
which  suggests  that,  in  this  age  group,  these  vaccines  are  potentially  more  effective
than  standard  dose  unadjuvanted  influenza  vaccines.  There  is  no  preferential
recommendation  for  people  younger  than  65  years.  If  none  of  the  three  influenza
vaccines preferentially recommended for people 65 years and older is available at the
time of administration, people in this age group should get any other age-appropriate
influenza  vaccine  instead.   For  most  people  who  need  only  one  dose  of  influenza
vaccine  for  the  season,  September  and  October  are  generally  good  times  to  be
vaccinated  against  influenza.  Ideally,  everyone  should  be  vaccinated  by  the  end  of
October.  Additional  considerations  concerning  the  timing  of  vaccination  for  certain
groups of people include: Children 6 months of age and older are recommended to get
an  annual  influenza  vaccine.  Children  younger  than  5  years  old—especially  those
younger
 than
 2—are
 at
 higher
 risk
 of
 developing
 serious influenza-related
complications. An influenza vaccine is the best way to reduce the risk of getting sick
with  influenza  and  developing  any  of  the  potentially  that  can  result.  influenza
vaccination  also  can  reduce  the  spread  of  influenza  to  others.  Children  can  get
vaccinated  as  soon  as  influenza  vaccines  become  available—even  if  this  is  in  July  or
August. Children 6 months to 8 years of age receiving their first influenza vaccine, who
have  not  previously  received  a  total  of  two  or  more  doses  in  their  lives,  or  whose
influenza  vaccination  history  is  unknown need  two  doses.  For  those  children  it  is
recommended to get the first dose as soon as vaccine is available, because the second
needs to be given at least four weeks after the first. For more information visit Flu &
Young Children. Everyone 6 months of age and older is recommended to get an annual
influenza vaccine, including even healthy adults. Vaccination is especially important for
people at higher risk of serious influenza complications or people who live with or care
for people at higher risk for serious influenza complications. Persons working in health
care  settings  also  should  be  vaccinated  annually  against  influenza.  Vaccination  of
health care professionals has been associated with reduced work absenteeism and with
fewer deaths among nursing home patients. Different influenza vaccines are approved
for  use  in  people  in  different  age  groups.  In  addition,  some  vaccines  are  not
recommended  for  certain  groups  of  people.  Factors  that  can  determine  a  person’s
suitability for vaccination, or vaccination with a particular vaccine, include a person’s
age, health (current and past) and any allergies to influenza vaccine or its components.
More information is available at  Who Should and Who Should NOT get a Flu Vaccine.
People with egg allergy may receive any vaccine (egg-based or non-egg-based) that is
otherwise appropriate for their age and health status. Previously, it was recommended
that people with severe allergy to egg (those who have had any symptom other than
hives with egg exposure) be vaccinated in an inpatient or outpatient medical setting.
Beginning  with  the  2023-2024  season,  additional  safety  measures  are  no  longer
recommended  for  influenza  vaccination  of  egg-allergic  persons  beyond  those
recommended for receipt of any vaccine, regardless of the severity of previous reaction
to  egg.  All  vaccines  should  be  administered  in  settings  in  which  personnel  and
equipment  needed  for  rapid  recognition  and  treatment  of  allergic  reactions  are
available. A previous severe allergic reaction to a component of an influenza vaccine
(with the exception of egg protein) is a contraindication to receipt of that vaccine and
vaccines  containing  that  component.   Vaccine  components  can  be  found  in  package
inserts. For people who have had an allergic reaction to a previous dose of an influenza
vaccine, future receipt of that vaccine is contraindicated. For other influenza vaccines,
there  will  either  be  a  contraindication  or  a  precaution  to  future  receipt.  Whether
another  influenza  vaccine  has  a  contraindication  or  precaution  depends  upon  what
vaccine
 was
 associated
 with
 the
 severe
 allergic
 reaction.
 Current
 ACIP
recommendations has further guidance. If vaccination is elected when a precaution is
present, it should occur in a medical setting under supervision of a provider who can
recognize  and  manage  a  severe  allergic  reaction.  Providers  can  also  consider
consultation  with  an  allergist  in  such  cases  to  help  identify  the  vaccine  component
responsible  for  the  severe  allergic  reaction.  Administration  of  inactivated  influenza
vaccine
 to
 persons
 receiving
 influenza
 antiviral
 drugs
 for
 treatment
 or
chemoprophylaxis  is  acceptable.  Use  of  LAIV4  for  persons  who  are  receiving  or  who
have recently received influenza antiviral medications has not been studied. However,
influenza  antiviral  medications  might  interfere  with  the  action  of  LAIV4  because  this
vaccine  contains  live  influenza  viruses.   The  exact  period  of  time  during  which  this
might  occur  is  not  known.  Based  upon  the  half-lives  of  the  different  medications,
interference  might  be  possible  People  who  receive  these  medications  during  these
periods  before  or  after  receipt  of  LAIV4  should  be  revaccinated  with  another
appropriate  influenza  vaccine.  Time  periods  for  which  interference  might  be  possible
could  be  longer  than  those  listed  in  the  setting  of  medical  conditions  that  delay
clearance  of  medications.  Inactivated  and  recombinant  influenza  vaccines  may  be
administered  concurrently  or  sequentially  with  other  live  or  inactivated  vaccines.
Injectable vaccines given simultaneously should be administered at separate anatomic
sites.  LAIV4  may  be  administered  simultaneously  with  other  inactivated  or  live
vaccines.  If  not  given  simultaneously,  then  LAIV4  and  other  live  vaccine  should  be
spaced  at  least  4  weeks  apart.  Current  guidance  for  the  use  of  COVID-19  vaccines
states  that  these  vaccines  may  be  administered  with  influenza  vaccines.   Providers
should refer to current CDC and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
recommendations  and  guidance  for  the  use  of  COVID-19  vaccines   for  up-to-date
information on administration of these vaccines with other vaccines. The findings of a
CDC review of related published literature indicate that influenza vaccination of health
care  personnel  can  enhance  patient  safety.  1,2  CDC  conducts  science-based
investigations,
 research,
 and
 public
 health
 surveillance
 both
 nationally
 and
internationally.  CDC  adopts  recommendations  that  are  made  by  the  Advisory
Committee for Immunization Practices. These recommendations may be considered by
state  and  other  Federal  agencies  when  making  or  enforcing  laws.  CDC  also  has
infection  control  recommendations  for  health  care  settings.  However,  CDC  does  not
issue any requirements or mandates for state agencies, health systems, or health care
workers regarding infection control practices, including influenza vaccination or the use
of masks. Some employers require certain immunizations. Hospitals, for example, may
require  some  staff  to  get  an  influenza  vaccine  or  hepatitis  B  vaccine  or  take  other
precautions such as the use of masks. To find out more about the laws in your state and
to contact your state health department through Public Health Resources: State Health
Departments.
 State
 Immunization
 Laws
 for
 Healthcare
 Workers
 and
Patients  and  Vaccines  and  Immunizations:  Basics  and  Common  Questions  National
Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases  have  more  information.  For  more
information,  updates,  and  access  to  free  materials  to  assist  with  educating  staff  and
patients  about  the  impact  of  influenza  and  the  benefits  of  vaccination,  visit  CDC
Seasonal  Influenza  (Flu)  or  call  the  National  Immunization  Hotline  at  (800)  232-2522
(English),  (800)  232-0233  (Español),  or  (800)  243-7889  (TTY).  VIS  are  information
sheets produced by CDC that explain both the benefits and risks of a vaccine to vaccine
recipients.  To  receive  weekly  email  updates  about  Seasonal  Flu,  enter  your  email
address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/vaccination/vax-summary.htm
