 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. 
Please note: 
An erratum has been published for this article. To view 
the erratum, please click here. 
 Prepared by
Michele L. Pearson, MD1
Carolyn B. Bridges, MD2
Scott A. Harper, MD3
1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases
2Epidemiology and Surveillance Division, National Immunization Program
3Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD, Director; Division of Healthcare 
Quality  Promotion,  Denise  M.  Cardo,  MD,  Director;  Division  of  Viral  and  Rickettsial
Diseases, Steve Monroe, PhD, Acting Director; and 
National  Immunization  Program,  Anne  Schuchat,  MD,  Director;  Epidemiology  and
Surveillance Division, Alison Mawle, PhD, Acting Director.
 Corresponding  preparer:  Michele  L.  Pearson,  MD,  Division  of  Healthcare  Quality
Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases, 1600 
Clifton  Road,  NE,  MS  A-31,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  Telephone:  404-639-4251;  Fax:
404-639-4046; E-mail: 
mpearson@cdc.gov. 
Summary
 This report summarizes recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) 
and  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  concerning  influenza
vaccination of health-care personnel 
(HCP)  in  the  United  States.  These  recommendations  apply  to  HCP  in  acute  care
hospitals, nursing homes, skilled nursing 
facilities, 
physician's  offices,  urgent  care  centers,  and  outpatient  clinics,  and  to  persons  who
provide home health care and 
emergency medical services. The recommendations are targeted at health-care facility
administrators, infection-control professionals, 
and  occupational  health  professionals  responsible  for  influenza  vaccination  programs
and influenza infection-control programs 
in their institutions. HICPAC and ACIP recommend that all HCP be vaccinated annually
against influenza. Facilities 
that  employ  HCP  are  strongly  encouraged  to  provide  vaccine  to  their  staff  by  using
evidence-based approaches that 
maximize vaccination rates.
Introduction
 Influenza transmission and outbreaks in hospitals 
(1--8) and nursing homes (9--13) are well documented. HCP 
can acquire influenza from patients or transmit influenza to 
patients and other staff. Despite the documented benefits of 
HCP influenza vaccination on patient outcomes 
(14,15) and HCP absenteeism (16) and on 
reducing influenza infection among staff 
(16,17), vaccination coverage among HCP remain 
low (i.e., <50%) (18). Because HCP provide care to patients at 
high risk for complications of influenza, HCP should be considered a high priority for 
expanding influenza vaccine use. In addition, older HCP (i.e., aged 
>65 years) and those who have underlying chronic medical conditions or who might 
be  pregnant  are  at  increased  risk  for  influenza-related  complications.  Achieving  and
sustaining high vaccination coverage 
among  HCP  will  protect  staff  and  their  patients,  and  reduce  disease  burden  and
health-care costs.
 This report summarizes recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee 
(HICPAC)  and  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  concerning
influenza vaccination of 
health-care  personnel  (HCP)*  in  the  United  States.  These  recommendations  are
targeted at health-care facility administrators, 
infection  control  professionals,  and  occupational  health  professionals  responsible  for
influenza vaccination programs and 
influenza infection control programs in their institutions. HICPAC and ACIP recommend
that all HCP be vaccinated annually 
against  influenza.  Facilities  that  employ  HCP  are  strongly  encouraged  to  provide
vaccine to their staff by using 
evidence-based approaches that maximize vaccination rates. This report supplements
ACIP's previous statement regarding use of 
influenza  vaccine  and  antiviral  agents  (1),  which  provides  details  regarding  the
epidemiology of influenza transmission in 
nonhealth-care 
settings,  influenza  vaccination  of  nonhealth-care  personnel,  composition  of  influenza
vaccines, and use of 
antiviral medications.
Summary Recommendations
 The summary recommendations contained in this report are categorized by using the
HICPAC evidence ranking 
system (Table 1). The recommendations were drafted after 
review of peer-reviewed scientific articles, and whenever possible are 
based  on  well-designed  studies;  certain  recommendations  are  based  on  strong
theoretic rationale and expert opinion. 
All  recommendations  have  been  approved  by  HICPAC  and  ACIP.  The  committees
involved in drafting and reviewing 
these recommendations included persons with expertise 
in infectious diseases, infection control, pediatrics, vaccinology, 
internal medicine, and public health. The recommendations are as follows:
 A  limited  number  of  prospective  and  cross-sectional  studies  provide  estimates  of
incidence of influenza and influenza-like 
illness  (ILI)  among  HCP  (17,19,20).  In  one  serosurvey  of  HCP,  23%  of  HCP  had
documented serologic evidence of influenza 
infection after a mild influenza season; however, of these, 59% could not recall having
influenza, and 28% could not recall any 
respiratory infection, suggesting a high proportion of asymptomatic illness 
(17). In a randomized trial of influenza vaccine among HCP, 
13% of placebo recipients subsequently had influenza 
infection (18). In a cross-sectional survey of house staff, 37% reported 
ILI  during  an  8-month  period  (September--April);  9%  reported  more  than  one  illness.
Length of illness varied (range: 1--10 
days;  mean:  7  days),  as  did  the  number  of  days  of  work  missed  (range:  0--10  days;
mean: 
0.7 days) (20).
Efficacy and Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccines Among Adults
 Trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine prevents influenza illness among approximately
70%--90% of healthy adults 
aged <65 years when the vaccine and circulating viruses are antigenically similar 
(17,21--23). The effectiveness of 
inactivated  influenza  vaccine  in  preventing  influenza  illness  might  be  lower  when
vaccine and circulating viruses are not well matched 
or  among  adults  aged  >65  years  and  persons  with  certain  chronic  conditions  (e.g.,
diabetes, human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV), or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) 
(24--28). Vaccination of healthy adults also decreases work absenteeism 
and use of health-care resources, including antibiotics, when the vaccine and circulating
viruses are well matched 
(17,21, 23,29--31). In addition, influenza vaccine prevents secondary complications and
reduces the risk for 
influenza-related hospitalization 
and death among adults aged >65 years with and without high-risk medical conditions
(e.g., heart disease and diabetes) 
(32--36).
 LAIV has demonstrated similar benefits in randomized controlled trials among healthy
working adults aged 18--64 years. 
In  one  study,  vaccination  with  LAIV  reduced  severe  febrile  illnesses  19%  and  upper
respiratory tract illnesses 24%; LAIV use 
also  was  associated  with  fewer  days  of  illness  and  of  work  lost,  fewer  health-care
provider visits, and reduced use of 
prescription antibiotics and over-the-counter medications 
(37). These results were recorded during a season in which the vaccine 
and circulating influenza A (H3N2) strains were not well matched. In the same study,
LAIV vaccination yielded similar 
benefits among a subset of healthy adults aged 18--49 years, and antibiotic use in this
age group decreased 41%--51% 
(37).  In  one  study,  overall  efficacy  of  LAIV  and  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  in
preventing laboratory-documented influenza was 85% 
and 71%, respectively (38).
Impact of HCP Vaccination on Influenza in Health-Care Settings
 Vaccination of HCP is an important component of influenza prevention programs in the
United States 
(18). Vaccination of HCP reduces transmission of influenza in health-care settings, staff
illness and absenteeism, and influenza-related 
morbidity and mortality among persons at increased risk for severe influenza illness 
(14--17). Use of antiviral drugs used 
for  chemoprophylaxis  or  treatment  of  influenza  is  an  adjunct  to  (but  not  a  substitute
for) vaccination 
(18).
Transmission of Influenza in Health-Care Settings
 Influenza outbreaks in hospitals (4,39) and long-term--care facilities 
(40) have been associated with low vaccination 
rates  among  HCP.  In  addition,  higher  vaccination  levels  among  staff  have  been
associated with a lower incidence of 
nosocomial influenza cases (14,15,39).
 In one tertiary care facility in which routine surveillance for influenza was conducted,
the relation between staff 
vaccination coverage and annual incidence of nosocomial influenza was assessed for 12
influenza seasons during 1987--2000. During 
this  period,  staff  vaccination  coverage  increased  from  4%  during  1987--1988  to  67%
during 1999--2000 (p<0.0001), and 
the proportion of laboratory-confirmed cases of influenza that 
occurred among HCP decreased from 42% during 1990--1993 
to  9%  during  1997--2000  (p<0.0001).  The  proportion  of  nosocomial  cases  among
hospitalized patients 
decreased  32%  to  0  (p<0.0001).  After  controlling  for  potential  confounders  by  using
logistic regression, a significant and 
inverse relationship was demonstrated between vaccination rates among HCP and the
rate of nosocomial influenza among 
patients, suggesting that staff vaccination contributed to the 
observed decline in the number of nosocomial influenza cases 
(39).
Staff Illness and Absenteeism
 During an influenza season, HCP might acquire influenza from infected patients with
resulting morbidity and 
absenteeism. The impact of influenza vaccination on staff illness and absenteeism has
been evaluated in two randomized, 
placebo-controlled, double-blind trials. In one trial, HCP who received vaccine had 28%
fewer documented lost work 
days attributable to respiratory infections (1.0 and 1.4, respectively; 
p = 0.02) and 28% fewer days on which they felt unable 
to work, whether they were on or off duty  (2.5 and 3.5, respectively; 
p = 0.02). Vaccination did not reduce either the number 
of  episodes  (1.8  and  2.0,  respectively)  or  the  total  number  of  days  (13.5  and  14.6,
respectively) of respiratory infection 
(16). In a second trial conducted in two large teaching hospitals for 3 consecutive years
that measured serologically confirmed 
influenza,  days  of  febrile  respiratory  illness,  and  days  absent  from  work,  HCP  who
received influenza vaccine had a substantially 
lower  incidence  of  influenza  than  controls  (1.7%  and  13.4%,  respectively)  with  an
estimated vaccine efficacy against 
serologically defined influenza A and influenza B infection 
of 88% and 89%, respectively. HCP who received influenza 
vaccine  also  tended  to  have  fewer  total  respiratory  illnesses  (28.7  and  40.6  per  100
persons, respectively; p = 0.57) and days of lost work (9.9 
and 21.1 per 100 persons, respectively; p = 0.41) than did controls 
(17).
 In  a  cross-sectional  survey,  similar  reductions  in  staff  illness  episodes  and  days  of
illness were reported 
(20). Overall, compared with unvaccinated coworkers, vaccinated house staff reported
23% fewer ILIs (42 and 54 per 100 
persons,  respectively;  p  =  0.03),  27%  fewer  days  of  illness  (80  and  115  per  100
persons, respectively; p = 0.02), and a 59% reduction 
in illness during vacation time (1.7% and 4.0% of persons, 
respectively; p = 0.08). The two groups had a similar number of 
lost 
work  days  attributable  to  ILI  (18  and  21  per  100  subjects,  respectively;  p  =  0.69).
During influenza season, vaccination 
was associated with reductions of 30% in ILI (p = 0.05), 43% in the proportion of house
staff reporting illnesses associated 
with fever and cough (p = 0.05), and 63% in illnesses associated with fever and cough
(p = 0.03). The inability to 
consistently demonstrate statistically significant decreases in absenteeism among staff
who received vaccination is likely attributable to 
the finding that HCP tend to work despite illness 
(17,41).
Patient Outcomes
 HCP  who  are  clinically  or  subclinically  infected  can  transmit  influenza  virus  to  other
persons. Decreasing transmission 
of influenza from caregivers to persons at high risk might 
reduce influenza-related deaths among persons at high risk 
for complications from influenza.
 Residents  of  long-term--care  facilities  are  particularly  vulnerable  to  influenza  and
influenza-related complications. 
In1999, an estimated 1.6 million persons resided in nursing homes in the United States 
(42). During influenza outbreaks in 
long-term--care  facilities,  attack  rates  among  residents  have  ranged  as  high  as
25%--60%, with case-fatality rates of 10%--20% 
(13,43--45). When vaccine and epidemic strains are well matched, achieving increased
vaccination rates among persons living in 
closed settings (e.g., nursing homes and other chronic-care facilities) and among staff
can reduce the risk for outbreaks by 
inducing herd immunity (32).
 Two randomized controlled trials have evaluated the 
impact of influenza vaccination of HCP on the outcomes of 
residents in nursing homes. In one study, staff vaccination was associated with a 43%
decrease in incidence of ILI (odds ratio [OR] 
= 0.6; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.3--0.9) and a 44% decrease in overall mortality
among facility residents, from 17% 
to  10%  (OR  =  0.6;  95%  CI  =  0.4--0.8)  (15).  No  virologic  data  were  provided  in  this
study. In a second study, 20 
long-term--care  facilities  were  randomized  to  have  vaccine  routinely  offered
(intervention facilities) or not offered (control facilities) 
to  their  staff  (14).  Facilities  were  paired  by  number  of  beds  and  patient  vaccination
policies. Staff vaccination coverage was 
higher in intervention facilities than in control facilities (50.9% and 4.9%, respectively).
Crude mortality rates were 42% 
lower among residents in facilities with higher staff vaccination coverage than those in
control facilities (13.6% and 
22.4%,  respectively;  OR  =  0.6;  95%  CI  =  0.4--0.8;  p  =  0.014).  Incidence  of
laboratory-confirmed influenza did not differ between 
the two groups (5.4% and 6.7%, respectively), but postmortem samples from patients
in control facilities were more likely to 
be  positive  for  influenza  by  a  polymerase  chain  reaction  test  than  samples  from
patients in intervention facilities (six [20%] of 
30 and none of 17, respectively; p = 0.055), suggesting that in this study population,
HCP vaccination reduced 
influenza-related  mortality  in  patients  despite  not  reducing  the  incidence  of  non-fatal
influenza infection. In neither study was a 
significant  association  demonstrated  between  patient  vaccination  and  mortality.
Randomized trials assessing the impact of 
staff vaccination on patient outcomes in acute care facilities have not been conducted,
but low staff vaccination coverage has 
been correlated with influenza outbreaks in hospitals 
(4,39).
Cost-Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccine
 Cost-effectiveness  studies  of  adults  aged  <65  years  indicate  that  vaccination  can
reduce both direct medical costs 
and indirect costs from work absenteeism 
(21,23,29,30,46,47), resulting in 13%--44% fewer health-care provider visits, 
18%--45%  fewer  lost  workdays,  18%--28%  fewer  days  working  with  reduced
effectiveness, and a 25% decrease in antibiotic use 
for ILI (21,29,48,49). Among healthy persons aged 18--64 years, vaccination can save
an estimated $60--$4,000 per 
illness, depending on the cost of vaccination, the influenza 
attack rate, and vaccine effectiveness against ILI 
(23).  In  another  economic  analysis,  vaccination  resulted  in  an  average  annual  cost
savings of $13.66 per person vaccinated 
(50); however, other analyses have not demonstrated cost savings 
(21). Among studies of healthy young adults, >70% of the costs prevented were 
associated with reductions in lost work productivity.
Vaccination Coverage Levels Among HCP
 During  1989--2003,  HCP  vaccination  coverage  levels  in  the  United  States  increased
substantially, from 10% to 
40%; however, coverage levels have remained relatively constant since 1997 
(18). One of the national health objectives for 2010 is 
to achieve HCP vaccination coverage levels of 60% (objective no. 14-29g) 
(51). Substantially lower vaccination rates have 
been 
reported among HCP who have contact with certain populations at high risk 
(12,52--54). In addition, HCP vaccination coverage varies by level and years of training,
age, occupational group, and facility type 
(20,55,56).
Barriers to HCP Vaccination
 Reported barriers to HCP receipt or acceptance of influenza vaccination include fear of
vaccine side effects (particularly 
ILI symptoms) (20,55,57--61), insufficient time or inconvenience 
(20), perceived ineffectiveness of the vaccine 
(20,55,58,59), medical contraindication 
(55), perceived low likelihood of contracting influenza 
(55,60,62), reliance on treatment with homeopathic medications 
(55,62), avoidance of medications 
(57), and fear of needles (57,59). Factors 
facilitating vaccine acceptance include a desire for 
self-protection (20,58,61), previous receipt of influenza vaccine 
(57,58,63--65), a desire to protect patients 
(61), and perceived effectiveness of vaccine 
(20).
Strategies for Improving HCP Vaccination Rates
 Facilities that employ HCP are strongly encouraged to provide vaccine to staff by using
evidence-based approaches 
that maximize vaccination rates. Successful HCP vaccination programs are multifaceted
and combine publicity and education 
to combat fears and misconceptions about influenza and 
influenza vaccines, use of reminder recall systems, efforts to 
remove  administrative  and  financial  barriers,  role  modeling,  and  monitoring  and
feedback on vaccination coverage 
(66). In contrast, single-component interventions will likely have minimal effectiveness
in achieving desired vaccination coverage levels 
(66,67).
Education and Campaigns
 HCP knowledge, perceptions, and attitudes regarding 
influenza and influenza vaccination vary 
(20).  Basic  knowledge  about  influenza  and  influenza  vaccination  has  been  associated
with vaccine receipt 
(57,68,69), and participation in structured 
in-service education or conferences has been associated 
with improved vaccination rates (62,65). Educational programs 
should emphasize the benefits of HCP vaccination for staff and patients 
(70). Organized campaigns that promote and make 
vaccine accessible can improve vaccination rates among HCP 
(52,71).
Role Models
 Vaccination of senior medical staff or opinion leaders has been associated with higher
vaccination acceptance among 
staff members under their leadership 
(55,69,72,73). For example, medical students who have contact with infectious 
disease specialists are more likely to be vaccinated 
(69).
Improved Access
 Removing administrative barriers (e.g., costs) 
(71) and providing vaccine in locations and at times easily accessible by 
HCP can substantially improve vaccine acceptance 
(40,52,55,72,74,75). In one survey, 33% of HCP reported that they 
would reject vaccination if they were required to pay for the vaccine 
(76).
 Making  vaccine  readily  accessible  at  congregate  areas  (e.g.,  clinics),  during
conferences, or by use of mobile carts 
(40,52,55,72)  has  been  demonstrated  to  improve  vaccination  coverage  rates.  Use  of
mobile carts has been associated with increased 
vaccine acceptance during outbreaks and nonoutbreak situations 
(75,76) . In a 3-year prospective study in a 
630-bed acute care hospital, a sustained four- to fivefold 
increase in vaccination rates was associated with using mobile carts to deliver vaccine
to staff 
rather  than  requiring  HCP  to  visit  an  employee  health  center  to  receive  vaccine.
Provision of modest incentives also has been 
associated with improved vaccine acceptance among HCP 
(77). However, the benefits of vaccine deputies or peer-vaccinators have not 
been consistently associated with improved HCP vaccination 
(52).
Measurement and Feedback
 HCP  influenza  vaccination  coverage  should  be  regularly  measured  and  reported.
Posting of vaccination coverage levels 
in different areas of the hospital is a component of successful vaccination programs 
(6). Monitoring vaccination coverage by 
facility area (e.g., ward or unit) or occupational group allows facilities to identify where
vaccination levels are low 
and interventions should be targeted. In addition, HICPAC has recommended that HCP
influenza vaccination coverage be used 
as  a  health-care  quality  measure  in  those  states  that  mandate  public  reporting  of
health-care--associated infections 
(78).
 The  independent  contribution  of  signed  declination  statements  to  improving  HCP
vaccination has not been 
studied.  However,  obtaining  declination  statements  from  HCP  who  refuse  vaccination
for reasons other than medical 
contraindications  can  assist  facilities  in  identifying  personnel  who  might  require
targeted education or other interventions to overcome 
barriers  to  vaccine  acceptance.  In  addition,  collection  of  such  information  will  allow
health-care facilities to determine 
what proportion of their staff are reached and offered 
vaccine.
Legislation and Regulation
 Legislative and regulatory efforts have favorably affected hepatitis B vaccination rates
among HCP 
(79,80). As of January 2005, a total of 13 states (Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Maine,
Maryland, New Hampshire, New York, Oklahoma, 
Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Texas, and Utah) and the District of 
Columbia were reported to have enacted 
regulations regarding influenza vaccination of staff in long-term--care facilities 
(67,81). However, because only one state 
(Pennsylvania) has monitored the impact of its laws on nursing home staff vaccination
rates, data are insufficient to assess the overall 
impact  of  these  legislative  efforts  on  HCP  influenza  vaccination  coverage  (CDC,
unpublished data, 2005).
Recommendations for Using Inactivated Influenza Vaccine and LAIV 
Among HCP
 All HCP should be vaccinated annually against influenza. Either inactivated influenza
vaccine or LAIV can be used to 
reduce the risk for influenza among HCP (Table 2). LAIV is approved for use only among
nonpregnant healthy persons aged 
5--49 years. HCP who work with severely immunocompromised patients who require a
protected environment should 
not  receive  LAIV.  Inactivated  influenza  vaccine  is  approved  for  all  persons  aged  >6
months who lack vaccine 
contraindications, including those with high-risk conditions (see Recommendations for
Prioritization of Influenza Vaccine During the 
2005--06 Influenza Season). Four influenza vaccines have been approved for use in the
United States during the 2005--06 season 
(Table 3).
Inactivated Influenza Vaccine Recommendations
 
Dosage and Route
 Because immunity declines during the year after vaccination, HCP eligible to receive
inactivated influenza vaccine should 
be administered 1 dose of the current year's vaccine each year 
(82,83). The intramuscular route is recommended for 
inactivated influenza vaccine. Adults should be vaccinated in the deltoid muscle, ideally
by using a needle of length 
>1 inch because needles of length <1 inch might not penetrate muscle tissue in certain
adults 
(84).
 
Persons Who Should Not Be Vaccinated with Inactivated 
Influenza Vaccine
 Inactivated  influenza  vaccine  should  not  be  administered  to  persons  known  to  have
anaphylactic hypersensitivity to eggs 
or to other components of the influenza vaccine without first consulting a physician (see
Side Effects and Adverse 
Reactions Associated with Vaccination). Prophylactic use of antiviral agents is an option
for preventing influenza among such 
persons.  However,  persons  who  have  a  history  of  anaphylactic  hypersensitivity  to
vaccine components but who are also at high risk 
for  complications  from  influenza  can  benefit  from  vaccine  after  appropriate  allergy
evaluation and desensitization 
(18). Information regarding vaccine components is 
located in package inserts from each manufacturer. Persons with acute 
febrile  illness  typically  should  not  be  vaccinated  until  their  symptoms  have  abated.
However, minor illnesses with or without fever 
do not contraindicate use of influenza vaccine.
LAIV Recommendations
 LAIV licensed for use in the United States 
(FluMist™ manufactured by MedImmune, Inc., Gaithersburg, 
Maryland  [http//www.medimmune.com])  is  a  live,  trivalent,  intranasally  administered
vaccine that is
 The immunogenicity of the approved LAIV has been 
assessed in multiple studies (85--91). LAIV virus strains 
replicate  primarily  in  nasopharyngeal  epithelial  cells.  The  protective  mechanisms
induced by vaccination with LAIV are not 
completely  understood  but  appear  to  involve  both  serum  and  nasal  secretory
antibodies. No single laboratory measurement 
closely correlates with protective immunity induced by LAIV.
 
Shedding and Transmission of Vaccine Viruses
 One concern regarding use of LAIV among HCP has been the potential for transmitting
vaccine virus from 
persons receiving vaccine to nonimmune patients at high risk. Available data indicate
that children and adults vaccinated with 
LAIV  can  shed  vaccine  viruses  for  >2  days  after  vaccination,  although  in  lower  titers
than typically occur with shedding of 
wild-type  influenza  viruses.  Shedding  should  not  be  equated  with  person-to-person
transmission of vaccine 
viruses,  although  transmission  of  shed  vaccine  viruses  from  vaccinated  persons  to
nonvaccinated persons has been documented in 
rare instances among children in a day care center 
(92).
 In one study of 20 healthy vaccinated adults aged 18--49 years, the majority of vaccine
virus shedding occurred within 
the first 3 days after vaccination, although in one vaccinated person, viral shedding was
detected on day 7 after vaccination 
(93). No vaccine viruses were shed >10 days after vaccination, and duration or type of
symptoms associated with 
receipt of LAIV did not correlate with duration of shedding of vaccine viruses 
(93). In another study of 14 healthy adults aged 
18--49  years,  50%  of  vaccinated  persons  had  viral  antigen  detected  by  direct
immunofluorescence or rapid antigen tests within 
7 days of vaccination; the majority of viral shedding was 
detected on day 2 or 3 (94). Person-to-person transmission of vaccine 
viruses was not assessed in either of these studies.
 One study conducted in a child care center assessed transmissibility of vaccine viruses
from 98 vaccinated persons to 
99  unvaccinated  controls  aged  8--36  months;  80%  of  vaccine  recipients  shed  one  or
more virus strains (mean duration: 7.6 
days).  One  influenza  type  B  isolate  was  recovered  from  a  placebo  recipient  and
confirmed to be vaccine-type virus; the 
isolate retained the cold-adapted, temperature-sensitive, 
attenuated phenotype and possessed the same genetic 
sequence as a virus shed from a vaccine recipient in the same children's play group.
The placebo recipient from whom the influenza type B 
vaccine virus was isolated exhibited symptoms that were 
similar to those experienced by vaccine recipients. The estimated probability 
of acquiring vaccine virus after close contact with a single LAIV recipient in this child
care population was 
0.6%--2.4% (92).
 
Using LAIV for HCP 
 LAIV may be used for vaccination of healthy, nonpregnant persons aged 5--49 years,
including HCP. When feasible, use 
of LAIV for vaccination of eligible HCP is especially encouraged during periods of limited
supply of inactivated 
influenza vaccine because use of LAIV for HCP might increase availability of inactivated
influenza vaccine for persons at high risk. 
Use of LAIV also provides an alternative vaccine strategy for HCP who avoid influenza
vaccination because of an aversion 
to intramuscular injections.
 
Persons Who Should Not Receive LAIV
 The following populations should not receive LAIV:
 
LAIV Dosage and Administration
 Eligible HCP should receive 1 dose of LAIV. LAIV is 
intended only for intranasal administration and should not 
be administered by the intramuscular, intradermal, or intravenous route. Administration
can be accomplished by holding 
an individual sprayer in the palm of the hand until thawed, with subsequent immediate
administration. 
Alternatively, the vaccine can be thawed in a refrigerator and stored at 35.6° F--46.4° F
(2° C--8° C) for 
<60 hours before use. Vaccine should not be refrozen after thawing. LAIV is supplied in
a prefilled single-use sprayer containing 0.5 mL of 
vaccine. Approximately 0.25 mL is sprayed into the first nostril while the recipient is in
the upright position. An attached 
dose-divider clip is removed from the sprayer to administer the second half of the dose
into the other nostril. If the vaccine 
recipient sneezes after administration, the dose should not be repeated.
 LAIV may be administered to persons with minor acute illnesses (e.g., diarrhea or mild
upper respiratory tract 
infection, with or without fever). However, if clinical judgment indicates the presence of
nasal congestion that might impede delivery 
of  vaccine  to  the  nasopharyngeal  mucosa,  deferral  of  administration  should  be
considered until resolution of the illness.
 Whether  concurrent  administration  of  LAIV  with  other  vaccines  affects  the  safety  or
efficacy of either LAIV or 
the simultaneously administered vaccine is unknown. In the 
absence of specific data indicating interference, adherence to 
ACIP's general recommendations for vaccination is prudent 
(95). Inactivated vaccines do not interfere with the immune response 
to  other  inactivated  vaccines  or  to  live  vaccines.  An  inactivated  vaccine  can  be
administered either simultaneously or at any 
time before or after LAIV. Whenever possible, two live vaccines not administered on the
same day should be 
administered >4 weeks apart.
Recommended Vaccines for HCP Who Have Close Contact with 
Severely Immunosuppressed Persons
 Inactivated  influenza  vaccine  is  the  preferred  vaccine  for  use  among  HCP  who  have
close contact with 
severely  immunosuppressed  persons  (e.g.,  patients  with  hematopoietic  stem  cell
transplants) during those periods in which 
the immunosuppressed person requires care in a protective environment. The rationale
for not using LAIV among HCP caring 
for  such  patients  is  the  theoretic  risk  that  a  live,  attenuated  vaccine  virus  could  be
transmitted to the severely 
immunosuppressed  person.  HCP  who  receive  LAIV  should  refrain  from  contact  with
severely immunosuppressed patients for 7 days after 
vaccine receipt. In addition, visitors who have received LAIV should refrain from contact
with severely immunosuppressed persons 
for  7  days  after  vaccination;  however,  such  persons  need  not  be  excluded  from
visitation of patients who are not 
severely immunosuppressed. Either inactivated influenza vaccine or LAIV can be used
to vaccinate HCP who have close contact 
with  persons  with  lesser  degrees  of  immunosuppression  (e.g.,  persons  with  diabetes,
persons with asthma taking corticosteroids, 
or  persons  infected  with  human  immunodeficiency  virus)  or  who  are  in  close  contact
with all other persons at high risk.
 
Personnel Who May Administer LAIV
 The risk of acquiring vaccine viruses from the environment is unknown but likely small.
Nevertheless, 
severely immunosuppressed persons should not administer LAIV because 
introduction of low levels of vaccine virus into 
the environment probably cannot be avoided when administering LAIV. However, other
persons with conditions placing them 
at  high  risk  for  influenza  complications  (e.g.,  pregnant  women,  persons  with  asthma,
and persons aged >50 years) 
may administer LAIV.
 
LAIV and Use of Influenza Antiviral Medications
 How  LAIV  coadministration  with  influenza  antiviral  medications  affects  safety  and
efficacy has not been studied. 
However,  because  influenza  antivirals  reduce  replication  of  influenza  viruses,  LAIV
should not be administered until 48 hours 
after cessation of influenza antiviral therapy, and influenza antiviral medications should
not be administered for 2 weeks 
after receipt of LAIV.
 
LAIV Storage
 LAIV  must  be  stored  at  -59°  F  (-15°  C)  or  colder.  LAIV  may  be  stored  in  frost-free
freezers without using a freezer-box. 
LAIV can be thawed in a refrigerator and stored at 
35.6° F--46.4° F (2º 
C--8º C) for <60 hours before use. It should not be 
refrozen after thawing. Additional information regarding LAIV storage is available at
http://www.FluMist.com.
Vaccination of Specific HCP Populations
 
Pregnant Women
 Pregnant women are at increased risk for influenza-related complications 
(96--103) and hospitalizations (104). Therefore, 
all  HCP  who  are  pregnant  during  the  influenza  season  should  be  vaccinated  against
influenza. However, pregnant women 
should  receive  only  inactivated  influenza  vaccine;  LAIV  is  not  recommended  for  use
during pregnancy. Inactivated influenza 
vaccine  may  be  administered  in  any  trimester.  One  study  of  influenza  vaccination  of
approximately 2,000 pregnant 
women  demonstrated  no  adverse  fetal  effects  associated  with  receipt  of  inactivated
influenza vaccine 
(105).
 
Breastfeeding Mothers
 Influenza vaccine does not affect the safety of mothers who are breastfeeding or their
infants. Breastfeeding does 
not adversely affect the immune response and is not a contraindication for vaccination.
 
Persons Infected with HIV
 Detailed information on the use of influenza vaccine among persons infected with HIV
has been published previously 
(18). Because influenza can result in serious illness and influenza vaccination can result
in the production of protective 
antibody titers, vaccination with inactivated vaccine will benefit HIV-infected persons,
including those that are pregnant.
Timing of Annual Influenza Vaccination of HCP
 
Timing of Organized Vaccination Campaigns
 Planning for influenza campaigns should begin as early as February or March 
(106).  The  optimal  time  to  vaccinate  HCP  is  during  October--November.  Beginning  in
October each year, health-care facilities should offer influenza vaccinations to 
all  full-  and  part-time  staff.  Particular  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  vaccinating  HCP
who care for persons at high 
risk.  Vaccination  programs  should  educate  HCP  regarding  the  benefits  of  vaccination
and the potential health consequences 
of influenza illness for themselves and their patients. As part of 
employee health programs, all HCP should be 
provided convenient access to free influenza vaccine at the work site 
(107).
 
Vaccination in December and Later
 To  improve  vaccine  coverage  among  HCP,  influenza  vaccine  should  continue  to  be
offered in December and throughout 
the  influenza  season  as  long  as  vaccine  supplies  are  available,  even  after  influenza
activity has been documented in the 
community.  In  the  United  States,  seasonal  influenza  activity  can  increase  as  early  as
October or November, but influenza activity has 
not  reached  peak  levels  in  the  majority  of  recent  seasons  until  late  December--early
March. Therefore, although the timing 
of influenza activity can vary by region, vaccine administered after November is likely
to be beneficial in the majority of 
influenza seasons. Adults achieve peak antibody protection against influenza infection 2
weeks after vaccination 
(108,109).
Recommendations for Prioritization of Influenza Vaccination During 
the 2005--06 Influenza Season
 As a result of influenza vaccine distribution delays or 
supply shortages in the United States during recent influenza 
seasons  (110,111),  in  September  2005,  CDC  issued  recommendations  for  prioritizing
the use of inactivated vaccine during the 
2005--06  influenza  season  to  ensure  that  early  vaccine  is  available  for  those  at  the
highest risk for complications from influenza 
(112). On the basis of uncertainties in doses and distribution, CDC recommended that
the following groups receive priority 
for inactivated influenza vaccine until October 24, 2005:
 These groups correspond to tiers 1A--1C in the table of 
inactivated influenza vaccine priority groups in the event 
of vaccination supply disruption that was published previously 
(113). After October 24, 2005, all persons were eligible 
for vaccination.
 Tiered use of prioritization was not recommended for LAIV administration. LAIV may be
administered at any time 
for vaccination of nonpregnant healthy persons aged 5--49 years, including the majority
of HCP, other persons in close 
contact  with  persons  at  high  risk  for  influenza-related  complications,  and  others
desiring protection against influenza 
(18).
Side Effects and Adverse Reactions Associated with Vaccination
Inactivated Influenza Vaccine
 When educating HCP regarding potential side effects, providers should emphasize that
1) inactivated influenza 
vaccine  contains  noninfectious  killed  viruses  and  cannot  cause  influenza;  and  2)
coincidental respiratory disease unrelated 
to influenza vaccination can occur after vaccination. The occurrence of vaccine-related
side effects has had limited to 
no impact on rates of absenteeism among HCP 
(16,17).
Local Reactions
 The  most  frequent  side  effect  of  vaccination  (affecting  10%--64%  of  patients)  is
soreness at the vaccination site, 
typically  lasting  <2  days  (21,114--116).  Local  reactions  typically  are  mild  and  rarely
interfere with a person's ability to conduct 
everyday activities. In a controlled trial, only body aches (25.1%) were reported more
frequently after inactivated 
influenza vaccine than placebo-injection (20.8%) 
(117).
Systemic Reactions
 Fever,  malaise,  myalgia,  and  other  systemic  symptoms  can  occur  after  vaccination
with inactivated vaccine and 
most  often  affect  persons  (e.g.,  infants)  with  no  previous  exposure  to  the  influenza
virus antigens in the vaccine 
(118,119). Such reactions typically begin 6--12 hours after vaccination and can persist
for 1--2 days. Recent placebo-controlled trials demonstrate that 
among older persons and healthy young adults, administration of split-virus 
(i.e., detergent-disrupted virion) influenza vaccine is 
not associated with higher rates of systemic symptoms (e.g., fever, malaise, myalgia,
and headache) compared with placebo 
injections (21,114--116). No increase in asthma exacerbations has been documented in
association with receipt of influenza vaccine 
(117).
Severe Adverse Events
 Immediate  and  presumably  allergic  reactions  (e.g.,  hives,  angioedema,  allergic
asthma, and systemic anaphylaxis) 
rarely occur after influenza vaccination 
(120). These reactions probably result from hypersensitivity to certain vaccine 
components;  the  majority  of  reactions  probably  are  caused  by  residual  egg  protein.
Although current influenza vaccines contain only 
a limited quantity of egg protein, this protein can induce 
immediate hypersensitivity reactions among persons who have 
severe egg allergy. Persons who have had hives or swelling of the lips or tongue, or who
have experienced acute respiratory distress 
or collapse after eating eggs should consult a physician for appropriate evaluation to
help determine if vaccine should 
be administered. Persons who have documented immunoglobulin 
E (IgE)-mediated hypersensitivity to eggs, including those 
who  have  had  occupational  asthma  or  other  allergic  responses  to  egg  protein,  might
also be at increased risk for allergic reactions 
to influenza vaccine, and consultation with a physician should be considered. Protocols
have been published for 
administering influenza vaccine safely to persons with egg allergies 
(121--123).
 Hypersensitivity reactions to any vaccine component can 
occur. Although exposure to vaccines containing thimerosal can 
lead to induction of hypersensitivity, the majority of 
patients do not have reactions to thimerosal when it is administered as 
a component of vaccines, even when patch or intradermal tests for thimerosal allergy
indicate hypersensitivity 
(124,125). When reported, hypersensitivity to thimerosal 
typically has consisted of local, delayed hypersensitivity reactions 
(124).
GBS
 Investigations to date indicate no substantial increase in GBS associated with influenza
vaccines (other than the 1976 
swine influenza vaccine) (126--130). If current influenza vaccines pose a risk for GBS,
the estimated risk is approximately 
one additional case per million persons vaccinated, with the total combined number of
GBS cases peaking 2 weeks 
after vaccination (131). This estimated risk for GBS is substantially less than the risk for
severe influenza, which can be 
prevented by vaccination among all age groups, especially persons aged 
>65 years and those who have medical indications for 
influenza  vaccination.  The  potential  benefits  of  influenza  vaccination  in  preventing
serious illness, hospitalization, and 
death substantially outweigh the possible risks for experiencing 
vaccine-associated GBS. The average case-fatality ratio for GBS is 
6% and increases with age (132,133). No evidence indicates that the case-fatality ratio
for GBS differs among vaccinated 
persons and those not vaccinated.
 Incidence of GBS among the general population is low, but persons with a history of
GBS have a substantially 
greater  likelihood  of  subsequently  experiencing  GBS  than  persons  without  such  a
history 
(128,134). Whether influenza vaccination might increase the risk for recurrence of GBS
is unknown; for this reason, persons who are not at high risk for severe 
influenza complications and who are known to have experienced GBS within 6 weeks
after a previous influenza vaccination should 
not  receive  vaccine.  Chemoprophylaxis  using  influenza  antivirals  might  be  an
alternative for such persons. 
Although data are limited, for the majority of persons who have a history of GBS and
who are at high risk for severe complications 
from influenza, the established benefits of influenza 
vaccination justify yearly vaccination. Health-care professionals 
should  promptly  report  all  clinically  significant  adverse  events  after  influenza
vaccination to the Vaccine 
Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), even if evidence is lacking that the vaccine
caused the event.
LAIV
 Until additional data are available, persons at high risk for experiencing complications
from influenza infection 
(e.g.,  immunocompromised  patients;  patients  with  asthma,  cystic  fibrosis,  or  chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease; or 
persons aged >65 years) should not be vaccinated with LAIV. Protection from influenza
among these groups should be 
accomplished by using inactivated influenza vaccine.
 Among adults, runny nose or nasal congestion (28%--78%), headache (16%--44%), and
sore throat (15%--27%) have 
been reported more often among vaccine recipients than placebo recipients 
(37,135,136). In one clinical trial among a subset 
of healthy adults aged 18--49 years, signs and symptoms 
reported more frequently among LAIV recipients (n = 2,548) 
than  placebo  recipients  (n  =  1,290)  within  7  days  after  each  dose  included  cough
(13.9% and 10.8%, respectively); runny 
nose  (44.5%  and  27.1%,  respectively);  sore  throat  (27.8%  and  17.1%,  respectively);
chills (8.6% and 6.0%, respectively); 
and tiredness or weakness (25.7% and 21.6%, respectively) 
(37). Pneumonia, bronchitis, bronchiolitis, or central nervous 
system  events  have  not  been  observed  more  frequently  among  LAIV  than  among
placebo recipients.
 
Severe Adverse Events
 Serious  adverse  events  associated  with  receipt  of  LAIV  among  healthy  adults  aged
18--49 years occur at a rate of <1% 
(137).  However,  surveillance  should  continue  for  adverse  events  that  might  not  have
been detected in previous studies. 
Health-care  professionals  should  promptly  report  to  VAERS  all  clinically  significant
adverse events after LAIV administration, even 
if evidence is lacking that the vaccine caused the event.
Additional Information Regarding Influenza Infection Control in 
Health-Care Settings
 Additional information on controlling and preventing 
influenza in health-care settings is available in the 
following publications:
 *  In  this  report,  the  term  HCP  refers  to  all  paid  and  unpaid  persons  working  in
health-care settings who have the potential for exposure to infectious 
materials,  including  body  substances,  contaminated  medical  supplies  and  equipment,
contaminated environmental surfaces, or contaminated air. HCP might 
include  (but  are  not  limited  to)  physicians,  nurses,  nursing  assistants,  therapists,
technicians, emergency medical service personnel, dental personnel, 
pharmacists,  laboratory  personnel,  autopsy  personnel,  students  and  trainees,
contractual staff not employed by the health-care facility, and persons (e.g., clerical, 
dietary,  housekeeping,  maintenance,  and  volunteers)  not  directly  involved  in  patient
care but potentially exposed to infectious agents that can be transmitted to 
and from HCP. The recommendations in this report apply to HCP in acute care hospitals,
nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities, physician's offices, urgent 
care centers, and outpatient clinics, and to persons who provide home health care and
emergency medical services.
 † These persons should receive inactivated influenza vaccine.
 Healthcare Infection Control Practices Committee
Membership List, June 2005
 Chairman:  Patrick  J.  Brennan,  MD,  University  of  Pennsylvania  School  of  Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
 Executive Secretary: Michele L. Pearson, MD, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
 Members: Vicki L. Brinsko, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee;
Raymond Y. W. Chinn, MD, Sharp Memorial Hospital, 
San  Diego,  California;  E.  Patchen  Dellinger,  MD,  University  of  Washington  School  of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington; Nancy E. Foster, American 
Hospital  Association,  District  of  Columbia;  Steven  M.  Gordon,  MD,  Cleveland  Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio; Lizzie J. Harrell, PhD, Duke 
University  Medical  Center,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  Carol  O'Boyle,  PhD,  University  of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Dennis M. Perrotta, PhD,  
Texas Department of Health, Austin, Texas; Harriett M. Pitt, MS, Long Beach Memorial
Medical Center, Long Beach, California; Robert J. Sherertz, 
MD,  Wake  Forest  University  School  of  Medicine,  Wake  Forest,  North  Carolina;  Nalini
Singh, MD, Children's National Medical Center, District 
of Columbia; Kurt B. Stevenson, MD, Qualis Health, Boise, Idaho; Philip W. Smith, MD,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
 Liaison  Representatives:  William  Baine,  MD,  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research  and
Quality, District of Columbia; Joan Blanchard, MSS, Association 
of  periOperative  Registered  Nurses,  Denver,  Colorado;  Georgia  Dash,  MS,  Association
for Professionals of Infection Control and Epidemiology, 
Inc.,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  Sandra  L.  Fitzler,  American  Healthcare  Association,
District of Columbia; David Henderson, MD, National Institutes 
of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Lorine  Jay,  Health  Services  Resources  Administration,
Atlanta, Georgia; Stephen F. Jencks, MD, Center for Medicare 
and  Medicaid  Services,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Chiu  S.  Lin,  PhD,  Food  and  Drug
Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Mark Russi, MD, American 
College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; Rachel
Stricoff, MPH, Advisory Committee for the Elimination 
of  Tuberculosis,  New  York,  New  York;  Michael  Tapper,  MD,  Society  for  Healthcare
Epidemiology of America, Inc., New York, New York; and 
Robert Wise, MD, Joint Commisssion on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations,
Oakbrooke, Illinois.
 
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
Membership List, June 2005 
 Chairman:  Myron  J.  Levin,  MD,  Professor  of  Pediatrics  and  Medicine,  University  of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado.
 Executive  Secretary:  Larry  Pickering,  MD,  National  Immunization  Program,  CDC,
Atlanta, Georgia.
 Members:  Jon  S.  Abramson,  MD,  Wake  Forest  University  School  of  Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Ban Mishu Allos, MD, 
Vanderbilt  University  School  of  Medicine,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  Guthrie  S.  Birkhead,
MD, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York; 
Judith Campbell, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Reginald Finger, MD,
Focus on the Family, Colorado Springs, Colorado; Janet 
Gildsdorf,  MD,  University  of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan;  Tracy  Lieu,  MD,  Harvard
Pilgrim Health Care and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston,  Massachusetts;  Edgar  Marcuse,  MD,  Children's  Hospital  and  Regional  Medical
Center, Seattle, Washington; Julia Morita, MD, Chicago Department 
of  Health,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Gregory  Poland,  MD,  Mayo  Clinic  College  of  Medicine,
Rochester, Minnesota; John B. Salamone, National Italian 
American Foundation, District of Columbia; Patricia Stinchfield, Children's Hospital and
Clinics, St. Paul, Minnesota; John J. Treanor, MD, University 
of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York; Robin Womeodu,
MD, University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center, 
Memphis, Tennessee.
 Ex-Officio  Members:  James  E.  Cheek,  MD,  Indian  Health  Service,  Albuquerque,  New
Mexico; Stephen Phillips, DO, Department of Defense, 
Falls  Church,  Virginia;  Geoffrey  S.  Evans,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services
Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Bruce Gellin, MD, National 
Vaccine Program Office, District of Columbia; Linda Murphy, Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; George T. Curlin, 
MD,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Norman  Baylor,  MD,  Food  and
Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland; Kristin Lee 
Nichol, MD, Department of Veterans Affairs, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
 Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians, Jonathan Temte, MD,
Clarence, New York, and Richard Clover, MD, 
Louisville, Kentucky; American Academy of Pediatrics, Margaret Rennels, MD, Baltimore,
Maryland, and Carol Baker, MD, Houston, Texas; 
American Association of Health Plans, Robert Scalettar, MD, North Haven, Connecticut;
American College Health Association, James C. Turner, 
MD,  Charlottesville,  Virginia;  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,
Stanley Gall, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; American College 
of Physicians, Kathleen Neuzil, MD, Seattle, Washington; American Medical Association,
Litjen Tan, PhD, Chicago, Illinois; American 
Pharmacists Association, Stephan L. Foster, PharmD, Memphis, Tennessee; Association
of Teachers of Preventive Medicine, W. Paul McKinney, MD, 
Louisville,  Kentucky;  Biotechnology  Industry  Organization,  Clement  Lewin,  PhD,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; Canadian National Advisory Committee 
on Immunization, Monica Naus, MD, Vancouver, British Columbia; Healthcare Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee, Steve Gordon, 
MD,  Cleveland,  Ohio;  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America,  Samuel  L.  Katz,  MD,
Durham, North Carolina, and William Schaffner, MD, 
Nashville, Tennessee; London Department of Health, David M. Salisbury, MD, London,
United Kingdom; National Association of County and City 
Health Officials, Nancy Bennett, MD, Rochester, New York; National Coalition for Adult
Immunization, David A. Neumann, PhD, Bethesda, 
Maryland;  National  Immunization  Council  and  Child  Health  Program,  Mexico,  Romeo
Rodriguez, Mexico City, Mexico; National Medical Association, Dennis 
A.  Brooks,  MD,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  National  Vaccine  Advisory  Committee,  Charles
Helms, MD, PhD, Iowa City, Iowa; Pharmaceutical Research 
and  Manufacturers  of  America,  Damian  A.  Braga,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania,  Peter
Paradiso, PhD, Collegeville, Pennsylvania; and Society for 
Adolescent Medicine, Amy Middleman, MD, Houston, Texas.
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Date last reviewed: 2/14/2006
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5502a1.htm
