Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. This content provides clinicians and public health professionals
with  key  information  and  evidence  for  clinical  considerations  when  diagnosing  and
managing pediatric patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
For  evidence-based  treatment  recommendations  for  COVID-19,  visit  the  National
Institutes  of  Health  (NIH)  COVID-19  Treatment  Guidelines  prepared  by  the  COVID-19
Treatment Guidelines Panel. Also see the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Critical
Updates  on  COVID-19  and  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention’s  (CDC’s)
Variants  of  the  Virus  and  Vaccines  for  COVID-19.  View  Previous  Updates  The
epidemiology of COVID-19 in the pediatric population has been challenging to establish
for  several  reasons,  including  the  high  prevalence  of  asymptomatic  infection  and
differences  in  testing  rates  between  children  and  adults1,2.  Studies  have  found  that
compared  with  adults,  children  may  have  similar  or  higher  incidence  rates  of
SARS-CoV-2  infection  but  more  frequently  experience  asymptomatic  infection  or  less
severe symptoms3,4,5. Visit the Pediatric Data page of the COVID Data Tracker to view
updated  case  trends  and  other  epidemiological  data  related  to  children  and  adults,
including seroprevalence data. The incubation period for COVID-19 is thought to extend
to  14  days,  but  studies  suggest  that  incubation  periods  may  differ  by  variant  of  the
virus.  A  study  conducted  during  high  levels  of  Delta  variant  transmission  reported  a
mean incubation period of 4.3 days, but the mean incubation periods of other variants,
including  Alpha  and  Beta,  was  5  days6.  Studies  performed  during  high  levels  of
Omicron variant transmission reported a median incubation period of 3 - 4 days7,8. The
most  common  symptoms  of  COVID-19  in  children  are  fever  and  cough,  but  many
children can experience sore throat, rhinorrhea, headache, fatigue, shortness of breath,
or gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea9,10,11,12. Some
case  studies  conducted  during  high  levels  of  Omicron  variant  transmission  have
reported a substantial increase in croup during a decline in the prevalence of all other
respiratory  viral  pathogens  known  to  cause  croup13,14.  The  signs  and  symptoms  of
COVID-19  in  children  can  be  similar  to  those  of  other  infections  and  noninfectious
processes,  making  symptom-based  screening  for  identification  of  SARS-CoV-2  in
children particularly challenging15. Testing for SARS-CoV-2 should be considered, even
in  children  with  mild  symptoms.  Most  children  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection  experience
asymptomatic or mild illness, but some children are at risk of developing severe illness,
including  hospitalization,  admission  to  an  ICU,  placement  on  invasive  mechanical
ventilation, and death16. Studies have found that some underlying medical conditions
including  obesity;  diabetes;  cardiac,  lung,  and  neurologic  disorders;  and  medical
complexity  increase  the  risk  of  severe  outcomes  from  COVID-1917,18,19,20,  and
having more than one pre-existing comorbidity is associated with an increased risk of
severe  illness18,21.  Studies  have  found  that  age  may  also  be  associated  with  risk  of
severe illness, and an evaluation of surveillance data from children aged >7 days and
<18  years  reported  that  infants  made  up  a  disproportionate  number  of  severe  acute
COVID-19 cases22. Similarly, a study of hospitalization rates among children aged 0-17
years  found  that  COVID-19–associated  hospitalization  rates  among  children  and
adolescents during the Omicron period were four times as high as rates during the peak
of  the  Delta  period,  and  children  aged  0-4  years  experienced  the  largest  increase  in
hospitalization rates23. The rate of hospitalization among infants may be increased by
the greater need for evaluation in young infants with fever, prematurity, the propensity
for  very  young  children  to  develop  viral  co-infection,  and  ineligibility  for  vaccination,
among  other  factors24,17,19.  Adolescents  aged  12-17  years  also  have  experienced
higher  COVID-19–associated  hospitalization  rates  compared  to  children  aged  5-11
years17. In addition to individual risk factors, the COVID-19 variant that is circulating at
the  time  of  infection  could  have  an  impact  on  disease  severity.  Compared  to  prior
periods,  studies  among  children  aged  0-17  years  conducted  during  the  Delta  variant
predominant  period  found  increased  rates  of  hospitalization25,26.  Studies  that
compared  the  Delta-  to  the  Omicron-  predominant  period  found  increased  rates  of
hospitalization  during  the  Omicron-predominant  period,  but  pediatric  patients
experienced  less  severe  disease  during  the  Omicron-predominant  period  than  in
previous  waves23,27,28.  Studies  have  found  that  vaccination  is  effective  at  reducing
risk  of  hospitalization29  in  children  and  adolescents  and  critical  illness  in
adolescents29,30.  A  study  conducted  during  Omicron  predominance  found  that  the
effectiveness  of  a  2-dose  mRNA  vaccine  against  symptomatic  infection  decreased
rapidly,  and  among  adolescents,  vaccine  effectiveness  increased  after  a  booster
dose31. Completion of a 2-dose mRNA COVID-19 vaccination series during pregnancy
was associated with a reduced risk of hospitalization for COVID-19, including for critical
illness, among infants younger than 6 months of age32. Recommendations and clinical
considerations  for  administration  of  COVID-19  vaccination  can  be  found  at  CDC’s
Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines. Some children who are at
risk for severe disease and have mild to moderate COVID-19 may benefit from antiviral
treatment.  Information  on  Testing  Strategies:  Information  on  Antiviral  Treatment
Options:  EVUSHELD™,  a  monoclonal  antibody  combination  that  was  used  for
pre-exposure  prophylaxis  to  protect  against  SARS-CoV-2  infection,  is  not  currently
authorized for emergency use in the United States because it is unlikely to be active
against certain SARS-CoV-2 variants. According to the most recent CDC Nowcast data,
these variants are projected to be responsible for more than 90% of current infections
in the U.S. This means that EVUSHELD™ is not expected to provide protection against
developing  COVID-19  if  exposed  to  those  variants.  Healthcare  facilities  and  providers
with EVUSHELD™ should retain all products in the event that SARS-CoV-2 variants that
are neutralized by EVUSHELD™ become more prevalent in the U.S. in the future. For
more  information,  see  FDA’s  announcement.  Viral  tests,  including  nucleic  acid
amplification  tests  (NAATs)  and  antigen  tests,  are  recommended  to  diagnose  acute
infection  with  SARS-CoV-2.  Testing  is  important  to  identify  infection  and  prevent
transmission of COVID-19. People who have symptoms of COVID-19 and close contacts
of people with COVID-19 should be tested. More information on testing guidelines and
strategies can be found at the CDC’s Overview of Testing for SARS-CoV-2, the Virus that
Causes  COVID-19  webpage  and  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration’s  (FDA’s)
recommendations  for  At-Home  COVID-19  Antigen  Testing.  Recommendations  can  be
found at the CDC’s Preventing Spread of Respiratory Viruses When You’re Sick and the
Isolation  and  Precautions  for  People  with  COVID-19  webpage.  Most  infants  born  to
people  with  COVID-19  do  not  test  positive  for  the  virus  at  birth33,  so  the  American
Academy of Pediatrics recommends testing healthy infants born to people infected with
SARS-CoV-2  at  least  once  before  hospital  discharge,  and  as  close  to  discharge  as
practical.  Newborns  with  signs  and  symptoms  of  COVID-19  should  be  tested  for
SARS-CoV-2  immediately.  Schools  may  offer  diagnostic  testing  for  students  and  staff
with symptoms of COVID-19 or who were exposed to someone with COVID-19. Testing,
along with COVID-19 vaccination, proper masking, and other mitigation strategies can
help  prevent  transmission  among  students,  staff,  and  family  members.  More
information on testing and other recommendations for prevention of COVID-19 in the
school setting can be found on the CDC’s Operational Guidance for K-12 Schools and
Early  Care  and  Education  Programs  to  Support  Safe  In-Person  Learning  webpage.  For
CDC’s  current  recommendations  for  prevention  of  COVID-19  in  healthcare  and
community settings see: In addition to viral testing, many hospitalized and ambulatory
patients will be evaluated with laboratory tests and radiographic studies. Many children
will  have  abnormal  vital  signs  and  markers  of  inflammation  when  hospitalized  for
COVID-1916.  A  study  of  over  10,000  hospitalized  children  found  that  lower  blood
pressure,  higher  heart  and  respiratory  rate,  and  abnormal  markers  of  inflammation,
including D-dimers and ferritin were associated with severe illness in children16. Chest
radiographs  and  computed  tomography  (CT)  images  of  children  with  COVID-19  are
frequently  normal34,35,  but  chest  radiographs  may  demonstrate  patchy  infiltrates  or
opacities34,36.  The most common CT finding is patchy ground-glass opacification35.
Most children with COVID-19 experience asymptomatic or mild to moderate infections
that can be managed in the outpatient setting.  Outpatient management can include
supportive care, consideration of therapeutics in eligible patients at risk for progression
to  severe  illness,  and  education  on  measures  to  decrease  the  risk  of  transmission.
Recommendations  on  clinical  management:  Some  children  with  COVID-19  will
experience  severe  to  critical  illness  that  will  require  hospitalization.  Management  of
severe  to  critical  COVID-19  may  include  treatment  of  hypoxemic  respiratory  failure,
acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome  (ARDS),  septic  shock,  cardiac  dysfunction,
thromboembolic disease, hepatic or renal dysfunction, central nervous system disease,
and  exacerbation  of  underlying  comorbidities.  Some,  but  not  all,  of  the  medications
authorized  for  the  treatment  of  severe  to  critical  COVID-19  in  adults,  have  been
authorized  for  use  in  children.  More  information  on  therapeutic  and  clinical
management  of  children  with  severe  to  critical  COVID-19  can  be  found  in  the  NIH
COVID-19  Treatment  Guidelines.  MIS-C  generally  occurs  2-6  weeks  following
SARS-CoV-2 infection, and it presents with fever, multisystem organ involvement, and
elevated laboratory markers of inflammation. Patients with MIS-C are often critically ill,
and studies suggest that more than 50% of patients can require ICU admission37,38,39.
Diagnosing MIS-C can be difficult because the presentation of MIS-C may overlap with
that of other conditions, including Kawasaki Disease, toxic shock syndrome, and severe
acute COVID-1938,39. It is important to consider alternative diagnoses when evaluating
children  suspected  of  having  MIS-C  and  to  pursue  testing  to  evaluate  multisystem
involvement  as  indicated.  Studies  suggest  that  being  vaccinated  provides  protection
from MIS-C41,42, and it is thus important to encourage all families to keep children who
are eligible for the COVID-19 vaccine up to date on vaccination41.  Clinical treatment
guidelines  for  MIS-C  that  describe  diagnosis  and  treatment  options  have  been
developed by the American College of Rheumatology, the National Institutes of Health,
and the American Academy of Pediatrics. For information to assist providers in speaking
with patients and families about MIS-C, see Talking with Families and Caregivers. More
information on MIS-C diagnosis and treatment considerations: PCCs are a wide range of
new, returning, or ongoing symptoms or health conditions people can experience 4 or
more weeks after first being infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.  Symptoms
can last for extended periods of time. Children experience post-COVID conditions, but
they appear to be affected less frequently than adults. Estimates of the proportion of
children  who  experience  COVID-19  and  later  develop  post-COVID  conditions  range
widely42.  Rates  of  post-COVID  conditions  seem  to  increase  with  age  among  children
and  adolescents,  and  PCCs  are  found  more  often  in  people  who  had  severe  acute
COVID-19  illness  than  in  people  with  mild  or  asymptomatic  illness42,43.   Commonly
reported  symptoms  in  children  can  include  headache  and  fatigue,  but  many  organ
systems  can  be  involved  and  some  children  experience  multiple  symptoms42,43.
 Some studies of post-COVID conditions in children report that symptoms typically do
not persist beyond 12 weeks42, while others have found that symptoms can linger for
longer  periods43,44.  Additional  research  is  needed  to  learn  more  about  symptoms
associated  with  post-COVID  conditions  in  the  pediatric  population.  When  caring  for
patients  with  post-COVID  conditions,  clinicians  can  consult  CDC’s  General  Clinical
Considerations  for  suggestions  on  initial  diagnostic  and  follow-up  evaluation.  More
information  on  PCCs:  During  2020–2021,  there  were  significant  declines  in  outpatient
pediatric visits and well-child check-ups, and many children have missed recommended
screenings and vaccinations45,46,47, 48. The CDC recommends Healthcare providers
use the Catch-up Immunization schedule to immunize children who are more than one
month  behind  on  immunizations,  and  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP)
provides  clinical  Guidance  on  Providing  Pediatric  Well-Care  During  COVID-19.  For
general guidance on pediatric preventive care, see the Bright Futures/AAP’s Periodicity
Schedule for Recommendations for Preventive Pediatric Health Care and screenings by
age and the CDC’s Immunization Schedule for ages 18 years or younger.  As of October
17,  2022  As  of  December  30,  2020  As  of  August  14,  2020  To  receive  email  updates
about COVID-19, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/pediatric-hcp.html
