Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. View Previous Updates CDC has guidance for who should be
tested, but decisions about who should be tested are at the discretion of State, Tribal,
Local, and Territorial (STLT) health departments and/or healthcare providers. Testing for
other  pathogens  by  the  provider  should  be  done  as  part  of  the  initial  evaluation,  as
indicated, but should not delay testing for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
For  healthcare  providers  collecting  specimens  or  working  within  6  feet  of  patients
suspected  to  be  infected  with  SARS-CoV-2,  maintain  proper  infection  control  and  use
recommended  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE),  which  includes  an  N95  or
higher-level  respirator  (or  face  mask  if  a  respirator  is  not  available),  eye  protection,
gloves, and a gown. For healthcare providers who are handling specimens, but are not
directly involved in collection (e.g. handling self-collected specimens) and not working
within 6 feet of the patient, follow Standard Precautions. Healthcare providers should
wear a form of source control (face mask) at all times while in the healthcare facility.
Healthcare providers can minimize PPE use if patients collect their own specimens while
maintaining at least 6 feet of separation. For example, the provider should wear a face
mask,  gloves,  and  a  gown.  Respiratory  specimens  should  be  collected  as  soon  as  a
decision has been made to test someone, regardless of the time of symptom onset. The
guidance below addresses options for collecting specimens. Proper specimen collection
is  the  most  important  step  in  the  laboratory  diagnosis  of  infectious  diseases.  A
specimen that is not collected correctly may lead to false or inconclusive test results.
The
 following
 specimen
 collection
 guidelines
 follow
 standard
 recommended
procedures.  For diagnostic testing for current SARS-CoV-2 infections, CDC recommends
collecting and testing an upper respiratory specimen. Contact the testing laboratory to
confirm  accepted  specimen  types  and  follow  the  manufacturer  instructions  for
specimen collection. Sterile swabs should be used for the collection of upper respiratory
specimens.  This  is  important  both  to  ensure  patient  safety  and  preserve  specimen
integrity. Note that nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal specimens are not appropriate
for  self-collection.  Testing  lower  respiratory  tract  specimens  is  also  an  option.  For
patients  who  develop  a  productive  cough,  sputum  can  be  collected  and  tested  for
SARS-CoV-2 when available. However, the induction of sputum is not recommended due
to  the  possibility  of  aerosol  production  during  the  procedure.  Under  certain  clinical
circumstances  (e.g.,  for  those  receiving  invasive  mechanical  ventilation),  a  lower
respiratory  tract  aspirate  or  bronchoalveolar  lavage  specimen  can  be  collected  and
tested as a lower respiratory tract specimen. Nasopharyngeal specimen (NP) collection
/Oropharyngeal  (OP)  (throat)  specimen  collection  (performed  by  a  trained  healthcare
provider, only) Use only synthetic fiber swabs with thin plastic or wire shafts that have
been designed for sampling the nasopharyngeal mucosa. Do not use calcium alginate
swabs  or  swabs  with  wooden  shafts,  as  they  may  contain  substances  that  inactivate
some viruses and may inhibit molecular tests. CDC recommends collecting only the NP
specimen, although an OP specimen is an acceptable specimen type. If both NP and OP
specimens are collected, combine them in a single tube to maximize test sensitivity and
limit use of testing resources. Instructions for collecting an NP specimen (performed by
a trained healthcare provider):  Instructions for collecting an OP specimen (performed
by a trained healthcare provider):  Nasal mid-turbinate (NMT) specimen (performed by
a  healthcare  provider  or  the  patient  after  reviewing  and  following  collection
instructions):  Visual  guides  Anterior  nasal  specimen  (performed  by  a  healthcare
provider or the patient after reviewing and following the collection instructions): For a
visual guide, see the How To Collect An Anterior Nasal Swab Specimen For COVID-19
Testing  infographic  [371  KB,  2  pages].  Nasopharyngeal  wash/aspirate  or  nasal
wash/aspirate  (performed  by  a  trained  healthcare  provider)   For  an  additional  visual
guide, see the Nasopharyngeal/Nasal Aspirate or Nasopharyngeal/Nasal Wash sections
in  the  Influenza  Specimen  Collection  infographic.  Saliva  (collected  by  patient  with  or
without supervision) Collect 1-5 mL of saliva in a sterile, leak-proof screw cap container.
No preservative is required. Follow additional instructions from the healthcare provider
or  manufacturer.  Breath  (performed  by  a  qualified,  trained  operator  under  the
supervision  of  a  healthcare  provider  licensed  or  authorized  by  state  law  to  prescribe
tests)  Follow  the  instructions  as  explicitly  described  within  the  test’s  Emergency  Use
Authorization  (EUA)  Instructions  for  Use.  Bronchoalveolar  lavage,  tracheal  aspirate,
pleural  fluid,  lung  biopsy  (generally  performed  by  a  physician  in  the  hospital  setting)
Sputum (collected under the guidance of a trained healthcare professional) Note: This is
an  aerosol-generating  procedure  and  likely  to  generate  higher  concentrations  of
infectious
 respiratory
 aerosols.
 Aerosol-generating
 procedures
 potentially
 put
healthcare  providers  and  others  at  an  increased  risk  for  pathogen  exposure  and
infection.  Healthcare  providers  should  maintain  proper  infection  control,  including
standard  precautions,  and  wear  an  N95  or  equivalent  or  higher-level  respirator,  eye
protection,  gloves,  and  a  gown,  when  collecting  specimens.  The  US  Department  of
Health and Human Services (HHS) is directly distributing nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs,
based  on  state  and  territory  testing  plans  that  were  submitted  in  response  to  the
Coronavirus  Aid,  Relief,  and  Economic  Security  (CARES)  Act  requirements.  Allocations
were  predetermined  to  maximize  state  and  territory  testing  using  a  data-driven
algorithm  based  on  population,  high  incidence  areas,  and  COVID-19  Task  Force’s
directives. A monthly web-based survey goes out to each state and territory where they
can request the number of swabs required. For swab requests, delivery site changes, or
other  related  requests  contact  COVID19.TestSupplies@hhs.gov.  HHS  is  no  longer
distributing  viral  transport  media  (VTM).  If  it  is  unavailable  for  purchase,  CDC  has
posted  a  standard  operating  procedure  for  the  preparation  of  VTM.  Saline  is  also  an
acceptable transport medium for some COVID-19 viral assays, including the Influenza
SARS-CoV-2 (Flu SC2) Multiplex Assay. Check the Instructions for Use (IFU) to see which
transport  medium  is  acceptable.  Self-collection  of  specimens,  both  unsupervised  and
supervised  by  a  medical  professional,  is  currently  available  for  specific  tests
authorized  by  the  FDA.  Additional  authorized  diagnostic  tests  for  the  detection  of
SARS-CoV-2  will  likely  have  this  capability  as  well.  Laboratories  should  confirm  the
specimen  has  been  obtained  correctly  and  from  the  individual  that  is  being  tested.
Generally, Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) requires laboratories to
ensure positive specimen identification and optimum integrity of a patient’s specimen
using at least two separate (distinct) or unique identifiers, such as patient’s name or
another  unique  identifier.  Other  information  that  must  be  provided  to  the  laboratory
when  requesting  a  test  includes  the  sex  and  age  or  date  of  birth  of  the  patient;  the
test(s) to be performed; the specimen source; the date and, if appropriate, the time of
specimen  collection.  Sterile  swabs  for  upper  respiratory  specimen  collection  may  be
packaged  in  one  of  two  ways:  When  individually  wrapped  swabs  are  not  available,
bulk-packaged  swabs  may  be  used  for  specimen  collection;  however,  care  must  be
exercised to avoid SARS-CoV-2 contamination of any of the swabs in the bulk-packaged
container. Store respiratory specimens at 2-8°C for up to 72 hours after collection. If a
delay  in  testing  or  shipping  is  expected,  store  specimens  at  -70°C  or  below.  Store
extracted  nucleic  acid  samples  at  -70°C  or  lower.  Pack  and  ship  suspected  and
confirmed  SARS-CoV-2  patient  specimens,  cultures,  or  isolates  as  UN  3373  Biological
Substance, Category B, in accordance with the current edition of the International Air
Transport  Association  (IATA)  Dangerous  Goods  Regulations  and  U.S.  Department  of
Transportation’s  (DOT)  Transporting  Infectious  Substances  Safely.  Personnel  must  be
trained to pack and ship according to the regulations and in a manner that corresponds
to  their  function-specific  responsibilities.  Additional  information  on  packing,  shipping,
and transporting specimens can be found at Interim Laboratory Biosafety Guidelines for
Handling  and  Processing  Specimens  Associated  with  Coronavirus  Disease  2019
(COVID-19).  If  necessary,  and  with  advance  approval,  specimens  may  be  shipped  to
CDC  if  repeated  testing  results  remain  inconclusive  or  if  other  unusual  results  are
obtained.  Please  contact  CDC  at  respvirus@cdc.gov  prior  to  submitting  specimens  to
confirm. Additional information, including the specimen submission form and shipping
address,  can  be  found  at  Submitting  Specimens  to  CDC.  CDC  recommends  that  each
laboratory  perform  a  risk  assessment  before  using  the  pneumatic  tube  system  to
transport suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 specimens. Each facility should conduct a
site- and activity-specific risk assessment of the procedures performed, identifying the
hazards involved in the process, the competency level of the personnel performing the
methods, and the laboratory facility. An institution’s biosafety professional, laboratory
management,  scientific/clinical,  and  safety  staff  should  be  involved  in  conducting  the
risk assessment process to determine the appropriate specimen transport practices to
implement  at  the  facility.  Facilities  should  ensure  that  all  personnel  who  transport
specimens  via  pneumatic  tubes  are  trained  in  safe  handling  practices,  specimen
management,  and  spill  decontamination  procedures.  For  additional  information  about
performing  a  risk  assessment,  refer  to  the  Biological  Risk  Assessment:  General
Considerations  for  Laboratories  and  the  Biosafety  in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical
Laboratories (BMBL) 6th Edition. Blood specimens are used for antibody (or serological)
tests and, for some tests authorized by the US Food and Drug Administration that are
used at the point-of-care, specimens are collected by pricking the skin with a fingerstick
device.  Anyone  performing  fingerstick  procedures  should  review  the  following
recommendations to ensure that they are not placing persons in their care at risk for
infection.  Fingerstick  devices  should  never  be  used  for  more  than  one  person  due  to
risk  of  transmission  of  other  bloodborne  infectious  diseases.  These  recommendations
apply  not  only  to  healthcare  facilities  but  also  to  any  setting  where  fingerstick
procedures  are  performed.  Instructions  for  collecting  a  capillary  blood  specimen  by
fingerstick:  For  an  additional  visual  guide,  see  the  Steps  for  Collecting  Finger  Stick
Capillary  Blood  Using  a  Microtainer®.  Note:  Follow  manufacturer’s  instructions  when
using another collection device. As of February 26, 2020 As of December 30, 2020 To
receive email updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/guidelines-clinical-specimens.html
