A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. This guidance refers only to the following
viral  hemorrhagic  fevers:  Ebola,  Marburg,  Lassa,  Crimean  Congo  Hemorrhagic  Fever
(CCHF)  and  the  South  American  Hemorrhagic  Fevers  (i.e.,  those  caused  by  Junin,
Machupo, Chapare, Guanarito and Sabia viruses). Refer to the pathogen-specific pages
for  further  information  about  the  individual  pathogens  (e.g.,  signs  and  symptoms,
incubation periods, routes of transmission, diagnosis, treatments). VHF spreads through
direct contact (such as through broken skin or mucous membranes in the eyes, nose, or
mouth) with blood or body fluids of a person who is sick with or has died from VHF or
direct  contact  with  objects  (such  as  needles  and  syringes)  contaminated  with  body
fluids from a person sick with VHF or the body of a person who died from the selected
VHF.  Signs  and  Symptoms  can  vary  depending  on  the  VHF.  Examples  that  can  occur
across  all  of  the  VHFs  addressed  in  this  guidance  include  fever,  severe  headache,
muscle  pain,  weakness,  fatigue,  diarrhea,  vomiting,  abdominal  (stomach)  pain,  and
unexplained  hemorrhage  (e.g.,  bleeding  from  gums,  blood  in  urine,  or  bruising).  The
timing  of  symptom  onset  depends  on  the  incubation  period  of  the  virus.  For  Ebola,
Marburg,  Lassa,  and  the  South  American  Hemorrhagic  Fevers,  the  outer  limit  of  the
incubation period is 21 days; however, for Crimean Congo Viral Hemorrhagic Fever this
period is 14 days. Attention is needed when coming into direct contact with a recent
traveler from a country experiencing an outbreak of VHF or where VHF is endemic and
who also has signs and symptoms of VHF. The initial signs and symptoms of VHF are
often nonspecific and similar to other infectious diseases, such as malaria and typhoid.
VHF should be considered in anyone with a fever who has traveled to, or lived in, an
area where VHF is present; however, most of these patients in the United States will not
have VHF. Transport by emergency medical services (EMS) presents unique challenges
because  of  the  uncontrolled  nature  of  the  work,  the  potential  for  resuscitation
procedures  being  needed,  enclosed  space  during  transport,  and  a  varying  range  of
patient  acuity.   Key  safe  work  practices  include  avoiding:  Coordination  among  9-1-1
ECC/PSAPs,  the  EMS  system,  healthcare  facilities,  and  the  public  health  system  is
important.  Educating,  training,  and  exercising  with  all  stakeholders  is  critical  when
preparing  to  respond  to  PUIs.  Each  9-1-1  and  EMS  system  should  include  an  EMS
medical director to provide appropriate medical oversight. If a community is considered
at  higher  risk  for  having  patients  with  VHF,  state  and  local  EMS  authorities  should
coordinate  with  state  and  local  public  health,  ECC/PSAPs,  and  other  emergency  call
centers  to  use  modified  caller  queries  about  VHF,  outlined  below.  This  should  be
decided from information provided by local, state, and federal public health authorities,
including the city or county health department(s), state health department(s), and CDC.
It will be important for ECC/PSAPs to question callers and determine the possibility of
anyone having signs or symptoms and risk factors for VHF. This information should be
communicated  immediately  to  EMS  clinicians  before  arrival  in  order  to  assign  the
appropriate EMS resources. Local or state public health officials should also be notified.
ECC/PSAPs  should  utilize  medical  dispatch  procedures  that  are  coordinated  with  their
EMS medical director and with the local public health department. For the purposes of
this section, "EMS clinician" means prehospital EMS and medical first responders. These
EMS
 clinician
 practices
 should
 be
 based
 on
 the
 most
 up-to-date
 clinical
recommendations and information from appropriate public health authorities and EMS
medical direction. When state and local EMS authorities determine there is an increased
risk, they may direct EMS clinicians to modify their practices as described below. Based
on the clinical presentation of the patient, there are two PPE options. EMS clinicians can
safely manage a patients suspected to have VHF by following the recommendations for
appropriate  PPE  and  following  these  recommendations:  EMS  systems  should  design
their procedures to accommodate their local operational challenges while still following
the  principles  of  CDC  PPE  guidance.  People  who  may  have  an  exposure  history  and
signs and symptoms suggestive of VHF should be transported to a healthcare facility
prepared  to  further  evaluate  and  manage  the  patient  as  instructed  by  EMS  medical
direction and local/regional protocols. These should be consistent with the predefined
transportation/destination  plan  developed  by  public  health  officials,  hospital,  medical,
and  EMS  personnel.  EMS  personnel  involved  in  the  interfacility  transfer  of  patients
suspected or confirmed to have VHF should follow donning and doffing procedures as
recommended  in  CDC  guidance.  Provide  patient  care  as  needed  to  minimize  contact
with the patient and follow infection control guidelines noted below. The following are
general guidelines for cleaning or maintaining EMS transport vehicles (i.e., ambulances)
and equipment after transporting the patient:  Except for Chapare virus, the selected
hemorrhagic fever viruses are Category A infectious substances regulated by the U.S.
Department of Transportation's Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR, 49 C.F.R., Parts
171-180). Any item transported for disposal that is contaminated or suspected of being
contaminated  with  a  Category  A  infectious  substance  must  be  packaged  and
transported in accordance with the HMR. This includes: disposable medical equipment;
sharps;  linens;  and  used  healthcare  products  such  as  soiled  absorbent  pads  or
dressings, emesis pans, portable toilets; used PPE such as, gowns or coveralls, masks,
gloves,  goggles,  face  shields,  respirators,  and  booties;  and  contaminated  waste  from
cleaning.  EMS  systems  should  work  with  designated  receiving  hospitals  to  dispose  of
waste from these patients. Viral hemorrhagic fevers are rare, but serious viral diseases.
Learn how to care for patients and control and prevent outbreaks. Languages Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/viral-hemorrhagic-fevers/hcp/emergency-guidance/ems-911.html
