A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. This guidance provides recommendations
for  infection  prevention  and  control  in  healthcare  settings  for  patients  who  may  be
infected with a novel influenza A virus (i.e., an influenza A virus of animal origin that
has not recently been circulating among humans) associated with severe disease. The
prevention measures outlined in this guidance will help prevent transmission to health
care personnel,  other patients,  and  visitors.  Patients who  may  be infected  with  novel
influenza A viruses include confirmed cases, probable cases, and suspect cases/cases
under investigation for infection with a novel influenza A virus associated with severe
disease.   These  recommendations  will  be  updated  as  additional  information  on
transmissibility,  epidemiology,  available  treatment,  or  vaccine  options  for  novel
influenza A viruses becomes available. These interim recommendations are based upon
current  available  information  and  assume  the  following:  This  interim  guidance
recommends  a  level  of  infection  prevention  and  control  measures  for  patients  with
suspected  or  confirmed  novel  influenza  A  virus  infection  that  is  different  from  that
recommended  for  patients  with  seasonal  influenza,  as  outlined  in  the  Prevention
Strategies for Seasonal Influenza in Healthcare Settings. Among important differences
from  seasonal  influenza  guidance  are  recommendations  for  Contact  and  Airborne
Precautions.  Note  that  recommendations  in  this  guidance  are  in  addition  to  Standard
Precautions.  Information  on  Standard  Precautions  (can  be  found  in  the  following
documents:  This  interim  guidance  was  developed  based  on  existing  infection
prevention  and  control  guidelines,  currently  available  scientific  evidence,  and  expert
opinion.  Definition  of  Healthcare  Settings  —  Refers  to  places  where  healthcare  is
delivered.  Healthcare  settings  include  but  are  not  limited  to  acute-care  hospitals;
long-term  acute  care  facilities,  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities,  long-term  care
facilities,  such  as  nursing  homes  and  skilled  nursing  facilities;  physicians'  offices;
urgent-care centers; outpatient clinics; home healthcare (i.e., care provided at home by
professional  healthcare  providers),  and  vehicles  where  healthcare  is  delivered  (e.g.,
mobile  clinics).  They  also  include  specific  sites  within  non-healthcare  settings  where
healthcare is routinely delivered (e.g., a medical clinic embedded within a workplace or
school).  Definition  of  Healthcare  Personnel  (HCP)  –  HCP  refers  to  all  paid  and  unpaid
persons  serving  in  healthcare  settings  who  have  the  potential  for  direct  or  indirect
exposure  to  patients  or  infectious  materials,  including  body  substances  (e.g.,  blood,
tissue,  and  specific  body  fluids);  contaminated  medical  supplies,  devices,  and
equipment;  contaminated  environmental  surfaces;  or  contaminated  air.  These  HCP
include, but are not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, nurses, nursing
assistants,  physicians,  technicians,  therapists,  phlebotomists,  pharmacists,  students
and trainees, contractual staff not employed by the healthcare facility, and persons not
directly  involved  in  patient  care,  but  who  could  be  exposed  to  infectious  agents  that
can  be  transmitted  in  the  healthcare  setting  (e.g.,  clerical,  dietary,  environmental
services,  laundry,  security,  engineering  and  facilities  management,  administrative,
billing,  and  volunteer  personnel).  Implement  policies  and  practices  to  minimize
exposures  before  arrival,  upon  arrival,  and  throughout  the  duration  of  the  affected
patient's  presence  in  the  healthcare  setting.  Measures  include  prompt  screening  and
triage  of  symptomatic  patients,  implementation  of  respiratory  hygiene  and  cough
etiquette, placement of a facemask (Appendix) on symptomatic patients upon entry to
the  facility,  placement  in  a  single-patient  airborne  infection  isolation  room  (or  if
unavailable,
 a
 single
 room
 with
 door
 closed
 pending
 transfer),
 and
 rapid
implementation of Airborne and Contact Precautions with the use of eye protection, in
additional to Standard Precautions. Use of source control for exposed but asymptomatic
patients  (e.g.,  household  contacts)  can  also  be  considered.  For  more  information  on
ways to minimize potential exposures: Prevention Strategies for Seasonal Influenza in
Healthcare Settings. Consider designing and installing engineering controls to reduce or
eliminate  exposures  by  shielding  HCP  and  other  patients  from  infected  individuals.
Examples of engineering controls include installing physical barriers such as partitions
in  triage  areas  or  curtains  that  are  drawn  between  patients  in  shared  areas.
Engineering  controls  may  also  be  important  to  reduce  exposures  related  to  specific
procedures  such  as  using  closed  suctioning  systems  for  airways  suction  in  intubated
patients.  Another  important  engineering  control  is  ensuring  that  appropriate
air-handling systems (with appropriate directionality, filtration, exchange rate, etc.) are
installed and maintained in healthcare facilities. AND AND Provide all HCP with job- or
task-specific  education  and  training  on  preventing  transmission  of  infectious  agents,
including refresher training when an outbreak of respiratory disease is detected in the
healthcare facility. HCP (review section 7 for measures for non-HCP visitors) who enter
the  room  or  care  area  of  patients  covered  by  this  guidance  with  suspected  or
laboratory-confirmed  novel  influenza  A  virus  infection  should  adhere  to  all  of  the
following (follow recommended sequence for donning and doffing of personal protective
equipment): Avian influenza or bird flu refers to the disease caused by infection with
avian (bird) influenza (flu) Type A viruses. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/bird-flu/hcp/novel-flu-infection-control/index.html
