Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  New  Testing  and  Management  Considerations  for  Nursing
Home  Residents  with  Acute  Respiratory  Illness  Symptoms  when  SARS-CoV-2  and
Influenza  Viruses  are  Co-circulating  The  following  guidance  is  current  for  the
2023-2024 influenza season. Please see Recommendations of the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices – United States, 2023-2024 Season [523 KB, 32 pages] for
the latest information regarding recommended influenza vaccines. Please see Antiviral
Drugs:  Information  for  Healthcare  Professionals  for  the  current  summary  of
recommendations  for  clinical  practice  regarding  the  use  of  influenza  antiviral
medications. Please also refer to the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 2018
Update  on  Diagnosis,  Treatment,  Chemoprophylaxis,  and  Institutional  Outbreak
Management  of  Seasonal  Influenza.   Long-term  care  facilities  may  be  defined  as
institutions, such as nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities that provide healthcare
to  people  (including  children)  who  are  unable  to  manage  independently  in  the
community.  This  care  may  represent  custodial  or  chronic  care  management  or
short-term  rehabilitative  services.  Influenza  can  be  introduced  into  a  long-term  care
facility  by  newly  admitted  residents,  healthcare  personnel  and  by  visitors.  Spread  of
influenza can occur between and among residents, healthcare personnel and visitors.
Residents  of  long-term  care  facilities  can  experience  severe  and  fatal  illness  during
influenza outbreaks. Preventing transmission of influenza viruses and other infectious
agents  within  healthcare  settings,  including  in  long-term  care  facilities,  requires  a
multi-faceted  approach  that  includes  the  following:  If  possible,  all  residents  should
receive inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV) annually before influenza season. For persons
aged  ≥65  years,  the  following  quadrivalent  influenza  vaccines  are  recommended:
high-dose  IIV,  adjuvanted  IIV,  or  recombinant  influenza  vaccine.  If  not  available,
standard-dose  IIV  may  be  given.  In  the  majority  of  seasons,  influenza  vaccines  will
become  available  to  long-term  care  facilities  beginning  in  September,  and  influenza
vaccination should be offered by the end of October. Informed consent is required to
implement  a  standing  order  for  vaccination,  but  this  does  not  necessarily  mean  a
signed  consent  must  be  present.  Although  vaccination  by  the  end  of  October  is
recommended, influenza vaccine administered in December or later, even if influenza
activity has already begun, is likely to be beneficial in the majority of influenza seasons
because the duration of the season is variable, and influenza activity might not occur in
certain communities until February or March. In the event that a new patient or resident
is  admitted  after  the  influenza  vaccination  program  has  concluded  in  the  facility,  the
benefits of vaccination should be discussed, educational materials should be provided,
and  an  opportunity  for  vaccination  should  be  offered  to  the  new  resident  as  soon  as
possible after admission to the facility. Since October 2005, the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMS) has required nursing homes participating in Medicare and
Medicaid programs to offer all residents influenza and pneumococcal vaccines and to
document  the  results.  According  to  requirements,  each  resident  is  to  be  vaccinated
unless  contraindicated  medically,  the  resident  or  legal  representative  refuses
vaccination, or the vaccine is not available because of shortage. This information is to
be reported as part of the CMS Minimum Data Set, which tracks nursing home health
parameters.  Top of Page CDC and the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP), recommend that all U.S. healthcare personnel get vaccinated annually against
influenza.  When  there  is  influenza  activity  in  the  local  community,  active  daily
surveillance  (defined  below)  for  influenza  illness  should  be  conducted  among  all  new
and  current  residents,  healthcare  personnel,  and  visitors  of  long-term  care  facilities,
and continued until the end of influenza season. Healthcare personnel, and visitors who
are identified with any illness symptoms should be excluded from the facility until their
illness  has  resolved.  Older  adults  and  other  long-term  care  residents,  including  those
who are medically fragile and those with neurological or neurocognitive conditions, may
manifest  atypical  signs  and  symptoms  of  influenza  virus  infection  (e.g.,  behavior
change), and may not have fever. Ill residents should be placed on droplet precautions
with room restriction and exclusion from participating in group activities as described
below.  Even  if  it’s  not  influenza  season,  influenza  testing  should  occur  when  any
resident  has  signs  and  symptoms  of  acute  respiratory  illness  or  influenza-like  illness.
Information
 about
 influenza
 testing
 is
 available
 at:
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/index.htm
 More
 information
 about
testing  is  included  below.  If  one  laboratory-confirmed  influenza  positive  case  is
identified along with other cases of acute respiratory illness in a unit of a long-term care
facility,  an  influenza  outbreak  might  be  occurring.  Active  surveillance  for  additional
cases
 should
 be
 implemented
 as
 soon
 as
 possible
 once
 one
 case
 of
laboratory-confirmed
 influenza
 is
 identified
 in
 a
 facility.
 When
 2
 cases
 of
laboratory-confirmed influenza are identified within 72 hours of each other in residents
on  the  same  unit,  outbreak  control  measures  should  be  implemented  as  soon  as
possible. Implementation of outbreak control measures can also be considered as soon
as possible when one or more residents have acute respiratory illness with suspected
influenza and the results of influenza molecular tests are not available the same day of
specimen  collection.  While  unusual,  an  influenza  outbreak  can  occur  outside  of  the
normal influenza season; therefore, testing for influenza viruses and other respiratory
pathogens  should  also  be  performed  during  non-influenza  season  periods.  *Note  that
older  adults  and  other  long-term  care  residents,  including  those  who  are  medically
fragile and those with neurological or neurocognitive conditions, may manifest atypical
signs and symptoms of influenza virus infection (e.g., behavior change), and may not
have
 fever
(https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciy866/5251935).   Top
of Page  Top of Page CDC’s guidance titled Prevention Strategies for Seasonal Influenza
in  Healthcare  Settings  contains  details  on  the  prevention  strategies  for  all  healthcare
settings.  Specific  recommendations  are  highlighted  below.  Standard  Precautions  are
intended to be applied to the care of all patients in all healthcare settings, regardless of
the  suspected  or  confirmed  presence  of  an  infectious  agent.  Implementation  of
Standard  Precautions  constitutes  the  primary  strategy  for  the  prevention  of
healthcare-associated transmission of infectious agents among patients and healthcare
personnel. Examples of standard precautions include:  Top of Page Droplet Precautions
are intended to prevent transmission of pathogens spread through close respiratory or
mucous membrane contact with respiratory secretions. Droplet Precautions should be
implemented for residents with suspected or confirmed influenza for 7 days after illness
onset  or  until  24  hours  after  the  resolution  of  fever  and  respiratory  symptoms,
whichever  is  longer,  while  a  resident  is  in  a  healthcare  facility.  Examples  of  Droplet
Precautions  include:   Top  of  Page  These  Precautions  are  part  of  the  overall  infection
control strategy to protect against influenza in healthcare settings and should be used
along  with  other  infection  control  measures,  such  as  isolation  or  cohorting  of  ill
residents,  screening  employees  and  visitors  for  illness,  furloughing  ill  healthcare
personnel,  and  discouraging  ill  visitors  from  entering  the  facility.  In  some  cases,
facilities may choose to apply Standard Precautions and Droplet Precautions for longer
periods based on clinical judgment, such as in the case of young children or severely
immunocompromised  residents,  who  may  shed  influenza  virus  for  longer  periods  of
time. Because residents with influenza may continue to shed influenza viruses while on
antiviral  treatment,  infection  control  measures  to  reduce  transmission,  including
following Standard and Droplet Precautions, should continue while the resident is taking
antiviral therapy. This will also reduce transmission of viruses that may have become
resistant  to  antiviral  drugs  during  therapy.  Initiation  of  antiviral  treatment  should  not
wait  for  laboratory  confirmation  of  influenza.  Antiviral  treatment  works  best  when
started within the first 2 days of symptoms. However, these medications can still help
when  given  after  48  hours  to  those  that  are  very  sick,  such  as  those  who  are
hospitalized, or those who have progressive illness, or those who are at higher risk for
complications
 of
 influenza.
 
(https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-clinicians.htm) ​Four influenza
antiviral drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration are recommended
for treatment of uncomplicated influenza in the United States: neuraminidase inhibitors:
oral oseltamivir (available as a generic version or under the trade name Tamiflu®), as a
pill  or  suspension;  zanamivir  (trade  name  Relenza®),  available  as  an  inhaled  powder
using a disk inhaler device; and intravenous peramivir (trade name Rapivab®); and a
cap-dependent  endonuclease  inhibitor:  baloxavir  marboxil  (trade  name  Xofluza®)
available as a tablet. It should be noted that some long-term care residents may have
difficulty  using  the  inhaler  device  for  zanamivir.  Amantadine  and  rimantadine
are NOT recommended for use because of high levels of antiviral resistance to these
drugs among circulating influenza A viruses. The recommended dosing and duration of
antiviral  treatment  is  twice  daily  for  5  days  for  neuraminidase  inhibitors  (oseltamivir
and zanamivir), and one dose for intravenous peramivir. Oseltamivir is recommended
for  treatment  of  influenza  in  people  of  all  ages.  Baloxavir  is  approved  for  early
treatment  of  uncomplicated  influenza  in  people  5  years  and  older  who  are  otherwise
healthy  or  in  people  aged  12  years  and  older  who  are  at  higher  risk  for  influenza
complications and have been ill for no more than 2 days. A single oral dose of baloxavir
is equivalent to 5 days of twice daily oral oseltamivir. Inhaled zanamivir is approved for
early treatment of influenza in persons aged 7 years and older. Peramivir is approved
for  early  treatment  of  influenza  in  persons  aged  6  months  and  older.  Dosage
adjustment  may  be  required  for  children  and  persons  with  certain  underlying
conditions.  Clinicians  should  consult  the  manufacturers’  package  insert  for  approved
ages, recommended drug dosing adjustments and contraindications. In the setting of an
influenza outbreak, empiric antiviral treatment should be given as soon as possible to
residents  with  suspected  influenza  without  waiting  for  influenza  testing  results,
especially if results will not be available on the day of specimen collection. There are no
data  on  use  of  baloxavir  to  control  influenza  outbreaks  in  long-term  care  facilities.
Baloxavir  is  not  recommended  for  pregnant  women,  severely  immunosuppressed
persons,  those  with  severe  disease,  or  hospitalized  influenza  patients.  There  are  no
data on baloxavir in these populations. Having preapproved orders from physicians or
plans  to  obtain  orders  for  antiviral  medications  on  short  notice  can  substantially
expedite administration of antiviral medications. For more information on the antiviral
agents see CDC’s influenza antiviral medication page for health professionals.  Top of
Page lf exposed residents on units or wards with influenza cases in the long-term care
facility  (currently  impacted  wards)  should  receive  antiviral  chemoprophylaxis  as  soon
as
 an
 influenza
 outbreak
 is
 determined
(https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciy866/5251935).  When
at least 2 patients are ill within 72 hours of each other and at least one resident has
laboratory-confirmed
 influenza,
 the
 facility
 should
 promptly
 initiate
 antiviral
chemoprophylaxis with oral oseltamivir to all non-ill residents living on the same unit as
the resident with laboratory-confirmed influenza (outbreak affected units), regardless of
whether they received influenza vaccination during the current season. Consideration
may be given for extending antiviral chemoprophylaxis to residents on other unaffected
units or wards in the long-term care facility based upon other factors (e.g., unavoidable
mixing of residents or healthcare personnel from affected units and unaffected units).
Antiviral chemoprophylaxis is meant for residents who are not exhibiting influenza-like
illness but who may be exposed or who may have been exposed to an ill person with
influenza,  to  prevent  transmission.  Use  of  antiviral  drugs  for  chemoprophylaxis  of
influenza  is  a  key  component  of  influenza  outbreak  control  in  institutions  that  house
residents  at  higher  risk  of  influenza  complications.  While  highly  effective,  antiviral
chemoprophylaxis is not 100% effective in preventing influenza illness. Oseltamivir is
the  recommended  antiviral  drug  for  chemoprophylaxis  of  influenza  in  long-term  care
settings.  Baloxavir  is  approved  for  post-exposure  antiviral  chemoprophylaxis  of
influenza in persons aged 5 years and older but no data are available from clinical trials
of  baloxavir  chemoprophylaxis  of  influenza  in  long  term  care  facility  residents.  CDC
recommends antiviral chemoprophylaxis with oseltamivir for a minimum of 2 weeks and
continuing for at least 7 days after the last known laboratory-confirmed influenza case
was identified on affected units. Persons whose need for antiviral chemoprophylaxis is
attributed to potential exposure to a person with laboratory-confirmed influenza should
receive oral oseltamivir or inhaled zanamivir. Zanamivir should be used when persons
require  chemoprophylaxis  as  a  result  of  exposure  to  influenza  virus  strains  that  are
suspected
 or
 known
 to
 be
 oseltamivir-resistant.
 (For
 more
 information
see  Recommended  Dosage  and  Duration  of  Treatment  or  Chemoprophylaxis  for
Influenza
 Antiviral
 Medications
 and
(https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciy866/5251935).   Top
of  Page  While  CDC  recommends  judicious  use  of  antiviral  medications  for
chemoprophylaxis  to  reduce  the  possibility  of  development  and  spread  of  antiviral
resistant  influenza  viruses,  chemoprophylaxis  may  be  considered  for  healthcare
personnel, regardless of their influenza vaccination status, if the outbreak is caused by
a strain of influenza virus that is not well matched by the vaccine, or based upon other
factors (e.g., to reduce the risk of short staffing in facilities and units where clinical staff
are limited and to reduce staff reluctance to provide care to residents with suspected or
laboratory-confirmed influenza). Antiviral chemoprophylaxis should also be considered
in  personnel  for  whom  influenza  vaccine  is  contraindicated.  An  emphasis  on  close
monitoring
 and
 early
 initiation
 of
 antiviral
 treatment
 is
 an
 alternative
 to
chemoprophylaxis in managing certain persons who have had a suspected exposure to
influenza  virus.  Healthcare  personnel  who  have  occupational  exposures  can  be
counseled about the early signs and symptoms of influenza and advised to contact their
health-care provider immediately for evaluation and possible early initiation of antiviral
treatment  if  clinical  signs  or  symptoms  develop.  For  newly  vaccinated  healthcare
personnel,  antiviral  chemoprophylaxis  can  be  considered  for  up  to  2  weeks  following
inactivated  influenza  vaccination  until  vaccine-induced  immunity  is  acquired.  Persons
receiving antiviral chemoprophylaxis should not receive live attenuated influenza virus
vaccine  (LAIV),  and  persons  receiving  LAIV  should  not  receive  antiviral  treatment  or
chemoprophylaxis  until  14  days  after  LAIV  administration.  The  latest  CDC  antiviral
recommendations  are  available  on  CDC’s  influenza  antiviral  drugs  page  for  health
professionals.   Top  of  Page  Residents  receiving  antiviral  medications  who  do  not
respond
 to
 treatment
 or
 who
 become
 sick
 with
 influenza
 after
 starting
chemoprophylaxis  might  have  an  infection  with  an  antiviral-resistant  influenza  virus.
Persons receiving chemoprophylaxis who become sick should be switched to treatment
dosing. If infection with an antiviral-resistant influenza virus is suspected, the local or
state  public  health  department  should  be  notified  promptly.  To  limit  the  potential
transmission of antiviral drug-resistant influenza virus, whether in chronic or acute-care
settings or other closed settings, measures should be taken to reduce contact between
ill  persons  taking  antiviral  drugs  for  treatment  and  other  persons,  including  those
receiving  antiviral  chemoprophylaxis.  Infection  prevention  and-control  measures  are
especially important for patients who are immunocompromised to reduce the risk for
transmission of oseltamivir-resistant viruses. Notify the health department if a resident
develops influenza while on or after receiving antiviral chemoprophylaxis.  Top of Page
*Patients  with  illness  associated  with  influenza  virus  infection  often  have  fever  or
feverishness with cough, chills, headache, myalgias, sore throat, or runny nose. Some
patients,  such  as  older  adults,  children  with  neuromuscular  disorders,  and  young
infants, may have atypical clinical presentations. Older adults and other long-term care
residents,  including  those  who  are  medically  fragile  and  those  with  neurological  or
neurocognitive conditions, may manifest atypical signs and symptoms of influenza virus
infection
 (e.g.,
 behavior
 change),
 and
 may
 not
 have
 fever
(https://academic.oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciy866/5251935).   Top
of  Page   CDC.  Immunization  of  Health-Care  Personnel.  Recommendations  of  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  MMWR  2011:60(RR07);1-45
Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza with Vaccines: Recommendations of the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices—United  States,  2022–23  Influenza
Season  [523  KB,  32  pages]  Seasonal  Influenza  Vaccination  Resources  for  Health
Professionals Interim Guidance for Routine and Influenza Immunization Services During
the COVID-19 Pandemic Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society
of America: 2018 Update on Diagnosis, Treatment, Chemoprophylaxis, and Institutional
Outbreak  Management  of  Seasonal  Influenza  Influenza  Antiviral  Medications  Influenza
Antiviral  Medications:  Summary  for  Clinicians  Information  for  Clinicians  on  Influenza
Virus  Testing   Influenza  Testing  Methods  Influenza  virus  testing  in  investigational
outbreaks  in  institutional  or  other  closed  settings  Information  on  Rapid  Molecular
Assays, RT-PCR, and other Molecular Assays for Diagnosis of Influenza Virus Infection 
Healthcare-associated infections and long-term care settings Prevention Strategies for
Seasonal Influenza in Healthcare Settings CDC. Outbreaks of 2009 Pandemic Influenza
A  (H1N1)  Among  Long-Term  Care  Facility  Residents  —  Three  States,  2009.  MMWR
2010:59(03):74-77  Clinical  Practice  Guidelines  by  the  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of
America:  2018  Update  on  Diagnosis,  Treatment,  Chemoprophylaxis,  and  Institutional
Outbreak  Management  of  Seasonal  Influenza  Booy  R,  Lindley  RI,  Dwyer  DE,  et  al.
Treating  and  preventing  influenza  in  aged  care  facilities:  a  cluster  randomised
controlled trial. PLoS One 2012; 7:e46509. Bowles SK, Lee W, Simor AE, et al. Use of
oseltamivir  during  influenza  outbreaks  in  Ontario  nursing  homes,  1999–2000.  J  Am
Geriatr Soc 2002; 50:608–16. Bush KA, McAnulty J, McPhie K, et al; Southern New South
Wales  Public  Health  Unit.  Antiviral  prophylaxis  in  the  management  of  an  influenza
outbreak in an aged care facility. Commun Dis Intell Q Rep 2004; 28:396–400. Chang
YM, Li WC, Huang CT, et al. Use of oseltamivir during an outbreak of influenza A in a
long-term  care  facility  in  Taiwan.  J  Hosp  Infect  2008;  68:83–7.  Cheng  HY,  Chen  WC,
Chou  YJ,  Huang  AS,  Huang  WT.  Containing  influenza  outbreaks  with  antiviral  use  in
long-term  care  facilities  in  Taiwan,  2008–2014.  Influenza  Other  Respir  Viruses  2018;
12:287–92. Drinka PJ, Gravenstein S, Schilling M, Krause P, Miller BA, Shult P. Duration
of antiviral prophylaxis during nursing home outbreaks of influenza A: a comparison of
2 protocols. Arch Intern Med 1998; 158:2155–9. Gorišek Miksić N, Uršič T, Simonović Z,
et  al.  Oseltamivir  prophylaxis  in  controlling  influenza  outbreak  in  nursing  homes:  a
comparison  between  three  different  approaches.  Infection  2015;  43:73–81.  Childs  A,
Zullo  AR,  Joyce  NR  et  al.  The  burden  of  respiratory  infections  among  older  adults  in
long-term  care:  a  systematic  review.  BMC  Geriatr.  2019  Aug  5;19(1):210.  doi:
10.1186/s12877-019-1236-6.  Merritt  T,  Hope  K,  Butler  M,  et  al.  Effect  of  antiviral
prophylaxis on influenza outbreaks in aged care facilities in three local health districts
in New South Wales, Australia, 2014. Western Pac Surveill Response J 2016; 7:14–20.
Monto  AS,  Rotthoff  J,  Teich  E,  et  al.  Detection  and  control  of  influenza  outbreaks  in
well-vaccinated  nursing  home  populations.  Clin  Infect  Dis  2004;  39:459–64.  Murti  M,
Fung CK, Chan K, Bigham M. Duration of influenza outbreaks in long-term care facilities
after  antiviral  prophylaxis  initiation:  Fraser  Health,  British  Columbia,  2014-2017.  Am  J
Infect Control. 2018 Sep;46(9):1077-1079. O’Neil CA, Kim L, Prill MM et al. Respiratory
viral  surveillance  of  healthcare  personnel  and  patients  at  an  adult  long-term  care
facility.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol.  2019  Nov;40(11):1309-1312.  Peters  PH  Jr,
Gravenstein  S,  Norwood  P,  et  al.  Long-term  use  of  oseltamivir  for  the  prophylaxis  of
influenza  in  a  vaccinated  frail  older  population.  J  Am  Geriatr  Soc  2001;  49:1025–31.
Rainwater-Lovett  K,  Chun  K,  Lessler  J.  Influenza  outbreak  control  practices  and  the
effectiveness of interventions in long-term care facilities: a systematic review. Influenza
Other  Respir  Viruses  2014;  8:74–82.  Shijubo  N,  Yamada  G,  Takahashi  M,  Tokunoh  T,
Suzuki T, Abe S. Experience with oseltamivir in the control of nursing home influenza A
outbreak. Intern Med 2002; 41:366–70. van der Sande MA, Ruijs WL, Meijer A, Cools HJ,
van  der  Plas  SM.  Use  of  oseltamivir  in  Dutch  nursing  homes  during  the  2004–2005
influenza season. Vaccine 2006; 24:6664–9. van der Sande MA, Meijer A, Sen-Kerpiclik
F, et al. Effectiveness of post-exposition prophylaxis with oseltamivir in nursing homes:
a randomised controlled trial over four seasons. Emerg Themes Epidemiol 2014; 11:13.
Ye M, Jacobs A, Khan MN, et al. Evaluation of the use of oseltamivir prophylaxis in the
control  of  influenza  outbreaks  in  long-term  care  facilities  in  Alberta,  Canada:  a
retrospective  provincial  database  analysis.  BMJ  Open  2016;  6:e011686.   Top  of  Page
Interim Guidance for Influenza Outbreak Management in Long-term Care Facilities [153
KB,  7  pages]  To  receive  weekly  email  updates  about  Seasonal  Flu,  enter  your  email
address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/infectioncontrol/ltc-facility-guidance.htm
