A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. The National Respiratory and Enteric Virus
Surveillance System (NREVSS) is a laboratory-based system that monitors respiratory
and  enteric  virus  activity.   The  National  Respiratory  and  Enteric  Virus  Surveillance
System  (NREVSS)  monitors  the  following  viruses:  In  this  surveillance  system,
participating  U.S.  laboratories  voluntarily  report  weekly  to  CDC  the  total  number  of
tests performed to detect these viruses and the total number of those tests that were
positive. They also report the specimen type, location, and week of collection. NREVSS
allows for timely analysis of data to monitor viral seasons and circulation patterns. All
data  graphs  on  this  site  are  updated  weekly.  NREVSS  was  created  in  the  1980s  to
monitor seasonal trends in respiratory virus activity and was later expanded to include
select enteric viruses. Influenza testing data reported to NREVSS is integrated with CDC
Influenza  Surveillance.  Each  week,  participating  U.S.  laboratories  from  university  and
community  hospitals,  state  and  county  public  health  departments,  and  commercial
entities  voluntarily  report:  Reports  on  the  dashboard  only  include  results  from  either
virus  antigen  detection  or  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  detection  methods.  CDC
makes  NREVSS  data  available  through  this  website.  CDC  also  publishes  periodic
summaries and alerts based on NREVSS data in CDC's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report  and  other  peer-reviewed  journals.  We  anticipate  that  NREVSS  will  continue  to
play an important role in describing the temporal and geographic circulation patterns of
respiratory  and  enteric  viruses—including  changes  in  the  typical  annual  circulation
patterns and identifying viral outbreaks. NREVSS has proven to be a relatively simple
and  practical  surveillance  system  that  will  continue  to  be  an  important  part  of  CDC's
efforts to treat, prevent, and control respiratory and enteric viral diseases. The National
Respiratory  and  Enteric  Virus  Surveillance  System  (NREVSS)  is  a  laboratory-based
system  that  monitors  respiratory  and  enteric  virus  activity.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nrevss/php/dashboard/index.html
