A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Introduction  from  the  Management  of
Multidrug-Resistant
 Organisms
 in
 Healthcare
 Settings
 Guidelines
 (2006).
Multidrug-resistant  organisms  (MDROs),  including  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus
aureus  (MRSA),  vancomycin-resistant  enterococci  (VRE)  and  certain  gram-negative
bacilli  (GNB)  have  important  infection  control  implications  that  either  have  not  been
addressed  or  received  only  limited  consideration  in  previous  isolation  guidelines.
Increasing experience with these organisms is improving understanding of the routes of
transmission  and  effective  preventive  measures.  Although  transmission  of  MDROs  is
most frequently documented in acute care facilities, all healthcare settings are affected
by  the  emergence  and  transmission  of  antimicrobial-resistant  microbes.  The  severity
and extent of disease caused by these pathogens varies by the population(s) affected
and  by  the  institution(s)  in  which  they  are  found.  Institutions,  in  turn,  vary  widely  in
physical and functional characteristics, ranging from long-term care facilities (LTCF) to
specialty  units  (e.g.,  intensive  care  units  [ICU],  burn  units,  neonatal  ICUs  [NICUs])  in
tertiary  care  facilities.  Because  of  this,  the  approaches  to  prevention  and  control  of
these  pathogens  need  to  be  tailored  to  the  specific  needs  of  each  population  and
individual institution. The prevention and control of MDROs is a national priority – one
that requires that all healthcare facilities and agencies assume responsibility (1, 2). The
following discussion and recommendations are provided to guide the implementation of
strategies and practices to prevent the transmission of MRSA, VRE, and other MDROs.
The  administration  of  healthcare  organizations  and  institutions  should  ensure  that
appropriate strategies are fully implemented, regularly evaluated for effectiveness, and
adjusted such that there is a consistent decrease in the incidence of targeted MDROs.
Successful  prevention  and  control  of  MDROs  requires  administrative  and  scientific
leadership and a financial and human resource commitment (3-5). Resources must be
made  available  for  infection  prevention  and  control,  including  expert  consultation,
laboratory support, adherence monitoring, and data analysis. Infection prevention and
control  professionals  have  found  that  healthcare  personnel  (HCP)  are  more  receptive
and  adherent  to  the  recommended  control  measures  when  organizational  leaders
participate  in  efforts  to  reduce  MDRO  transmission  (3).  CDC  provides  information  on
infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among
healthcare workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/mdro-management/introduction.html
