A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Healthcare-associated infections (HAI) are a significant burden globally, with millions of
patients  affected  each  year.1  These  infections  affect  both  high-  and  limited-resource
healthcare settings, but in limited-resource settings, rates are approximately twice as
high (15 out of every 100 patients versus 7 out of every 100 patients). Furthermore,
infection rates within certain patient populations, including surgical patients, patients in
intensive-care
 units
 (ICU),
 and
 neonatal
 units,
 are
 significantly
 higher
 in
limited-resource  settings.  It  is  well  documented  that  environmental  contamination  in
healthcare settings plays a role in the transmission of HAIs.23 Therefore, environmental
cleaning is a fundamental intervention for infection prevention and control (IPC). It is a
multifaceted intervention that involves cleaning and disinfection (when indicated) of the
environment alongside other key program elements (e.g., leadership support, training,
monitoring,  and  feedback  mechanisms).  To  be  effective,  environmental  cleaning
activities must be implemented within the framework of the facility IPC program, and
not as a standalone intervention. It is also essential that IPC programs advocate for and
work  with  facility  administration  and  government  officials  to  budget  and  operate  and
maintain adequate water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) infrastructure to ensure that
environmental  cleaning  can  be performed  according  to  best practices.  In  a  variety  of
healthcare  settings,  environmental  contamination  has  been  significantly  associated
with
 transmission
 of
 pathogens
 in
 major
 outbreaks
 of
 methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), Clostridioides
difficile (C. diff), and more recently in protracted outbreaks of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Outbreak  investigations  have  determined  that  the  risk  of  patient  colonization  and
infection increased significantly if the patient occupied a room that had been previously
occupied by an infected or colonized patient. Therefore, the role of immediate patient
care environment—particularly, environmental surfaces within the patient zone that are
frequently touched by or in direct physical contact with the patient such as bed rails,
bedside  tables  and  chairs—in  facilitating  survival  and  subsequent  transfer  of
microorganisms  was  established.45678910  However,  it  is  important  to  note  that
environmental transmission of HAIs can occur by different pathways. It has also been
documented that some healthcare-associated pathogens can survive on environmental
surfaces for months.3 In 2006, a laboratory-based study documented the survival times
of  a  range  of  significant  healthcare-associated  pathogens,  including  gram-negative
bacilli,  and  found  that  they  could  persist  much  longer  in  the  environment  than  was
previously understood. For example, Acinetobacter spp. survived up to 5 months and
Klebsiella spp. up to 30 months.1112 The actual survival times in healthcare settings
vary  considerably  based  on  factors  such  as  temperature,  humidity,  and  surface type.
Figure 1 (below) illustrates the environmental transmission pathway in general terms.
Microorganisms  are  transferred  from  the  environment  to  a  susceptible  host  through:
Contaminated hands or gloves will also continue to spread microorganisms around the
environment.  Figure  1  also  shows  how  these  pathways  can  be  broken  and  highlights
that  environmental  cleaning  and  hand  hygiene  (preceded  by  glove  removal,  as
applicable)  can  break  this  chain  of  transmission.  As  seen  in  Figure  1,  colonized  or
infected  patients  can  contaminate  environmental  surfaces  and  noncritical  equipment.
Microorganisms  from  these  contaminated  environmental  surfaces  and  noncritical
equipment  can  be  transferred  to  a  susceptible  patient  in  two  ways:  Contaminated
hands or gloves of healthcare personnel, caretakers, and visitors can also contaminate
environmental surfaces in this way. Proper hand hygiene and environmental cleaning
can  prevent  transfer  of  microorganisms  to  healthcare  personnel,  caretakers,  and
visitors  and  to  susceptible  patients.  Evidence  is  increasing  but  remains  limited  that
effective  environmental  cleaning  strategies  reduce  the  risk  of  transmission  and
contribute  to  outbreak  control.713141516171819202122  Consequently,  the  use  of
multiple (i.e., a bundle) interventions as well as an overall multi-modal approach to IPC
activities  and  programs  is  recommended,  for  both  the  outbreak  and  routine  settings.
Environmental cleaning is part of Standard Precautions, which should be applied to all
patients in all healthcare facilities. It is important to implement environmental cleaning
programs within the framework of facility level IPC programs. Where possible—during
staff  training  and  education,  for  example—consider  generating  synergies  and
highlighting  the  relationship  between  environmental  cleaning  and  hand  hygiene
activities in preventing environmental transmission of HAIs. Facility level IPC programs
include multiple elements, ranging from surveillance for HAIs to training and education
for  all  healthcare  workers  on  IPC.  The  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  has  defined
core  components  of  IPC  programs  in  Guidelines  on  core  components  of  infection
prevention and control programmes at the national and acute health care facility level.
Environmental  cleaning  is  addressed  explicitly  within  Core  Component  8:  Built
environment,  materials  and  equipment  for  IPC  at  the  facility  level.  But  other
components  include  important  aspects  for  the  implementation  of  environmental
cleaning  as  well,  such  as:  At  the  national  level,  it  is  important  that  these  Core
Components  (2,  3  and  6)  include  frameworks  and  guidance  to  inform  facility  level
approaches to environmental cleaning. Given the wide range of IPC responsibilities at
acute healthcare facilities, implementation of robust IPC programs requires a dedicated,
trained  IPC  team  (or  at  least  a  focal  person).  The  IPC  team  should  consult  and  be
involved in the technical aspects of the environmental cleaning program (e.g., training,
policy  development).  A  separate  team  is  recommended  for  the  overall  management
and  implementation  of  the  environmental  cleaning  program.  In  small  primary  care
facilities with limited inpatient services, the IPC team or focal person might be directly
responsible  for  managing  environmental  cleaning  activities.  Healthcare  facilities  must
have  adequate  water  supply  and  sanitation  infrastructure  (e.g.,  safe  wastewater
disposal)  to  perform  environmental  cleaning  according  to  best  practices.  A  recent
global  report  summarized  the  critical  lack  of  access  to  basic  water,  sanitation,  and
hygiene  (WASH)  services  in  healthcare  facilities  in  resource-limited  settings,  which
hinders  the  ability  of  facilities  to  implement  effective  environmental  cleaning
programs.23  In  response  to  the  identified  need  to  improve  WASH  in  Healthcare
facilities,  WHO  and  UNICEF  have  engaged  partners  and  proposed  practical  steps  to
improve  WASH  services.  Notably,  this  includes  using  and  reporting  on:  The  following
best practices for environmental cleaning in resource-limited settings are proposed as a
standard reference and a resource to: These best practices are derived directly from a
variety
 of
 best
 practices
 and
 cleaning
 standard
 documents
 from
 several
English-speaking  high-resource  settings,  most  notably,  the  United  States  of  America,
Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia. These documents have been generated by
a  combination  of  expert  opinion  and  ranking  of  the  current  evidence.  See  Further
reading for a list of the documents that have been used extensively in the development
of these best practices. These best practices were developed by a committee of experts
in  environmental  cleaning  in  resource-limited  settings.  Using  a  consensus-driven
process,  we  have  included  the  best  practices  most  relevant  and  achievable  for  the
target context. For example, the best practices in ICUs in this document include more
frequent  environmental  cleaning  than  recommended  in  several  of  the  referenced
documents  because  of  the  increased  HAI  risk  and  burden  in  ICUs  in  resource-limited
settings.  Alternatively,  the  use  of  no-touch  and  novel  disinfection  devices,  which  are
increasingly  common  in  high-resource  settings,  were  excluded  from  this  document
because of their prohibitive cost and limited evidence on their effectiveness in reducing
HAIs  in  resource-limited  settings.  This  is  a  living  document  that  will  be  updated  and
improved as new evidence becomes available. The purpose of these best practices is to
improve and standardize the implementation of environmental cleaning in patient care
areas in all healthcare facilities in resource-limited settings. This document is intended
for  healthcare  facility  staff  who  have  a  role  in  the  development,  management,  or
oversight of environmental cleaning services (internal or contracted) for the healthcare
facility. The best practices are divided into three chapters, described below and shown
relationally in Figure 2 below. HAIs are associated with medical devices, complications
following  surgery,  transmission  between  patients  and  healthcare  workers,  antibiotic
overuse, and more. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/hcp/cleaning-global/introduction.html
