Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  June  8,  2018  /  67(22);625–628  Kelly  A.  Jackson,
MPH1; Michele K. Bohm, MPH2; John T. Brooks, MD3; Alice Asher, PhD4; Joelle Nadle,
MPH5; Wendy M. Bamberg, MD6; Sue Petit, MPH7; Susan M. Ray, MD8; Lee H. Harrison,
MD9; Ruth Lynfield, MD10; Ghinwa Dumyati, MD11; William Schaffner, MD12; John M.
Townes, MD13; Isaac See, MD1 (View author affiliations) What is already known about
this  topic?  The  ongoing  opioid  epidemic  is  associated  with  increases  in  human
immunodeficiency  virus  and  hepatitis  C  infections  and  infection  syndromes  such  as
endocarditis. What is added by this report? Persons who inject drugs were an estimated
16.3 times more likely to develop invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) infections than others. Invasive MRSA from injecting drugs increased from 4.1%
of  invasive  MRSA  cases  to  9.2%  (2011–2016).  What  are  the  implications  for  public
health practice? Increases in nonsterile injection drug use can cause increases in MRSA
infections,  underscoring  the  importance  of  public  health  interventions,  including
prevention of opioid misuse, providing medication-assisted treatment, syringe services
programs,  and  education  on  safer  injection  practices  to  prevent  infections  from  skin
flora. Views equals page views plus PDF downloads In the United States, age-adjusted
opioid  overdose  death  rates  increased  by  >200%  during  1999–2015,  and  heroin
overdose death rates increased nearly 300% during 2011–2015 (1). During 2011–2013,
the  rate  of  heroin  use  within  the  past  year  among  U.S.  residents  aged  ≥12  years
increased  62.5%  overall  and  114.3%  among  non-Hispanic  whites,  compared  with
2002–2004 (2). Increases in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus
(HCV)  infections  related  to  increases  in  injection  drug  use  have  been  recently
highlighted  (3,4);  likewise,  invasive  bacterial  infections,  including  endocarditis,
osteomyelitis,  and  skin  and  soft  tissue  infections,  have  increased  in  areas  where  the
opioid  epidemic  is  expanding  (5–7).  To  assess  the  effects  of  the  opioid  epidemic  on
invasive
 methicillin-resistant
 Staphylococcus
 aureus
 (MRSA)
 infections
 during
2005–2016,  surveillance  data  from  CDC’s  Emerging  Infections  Program  (EIP)  were
analyzed (8). Persons who inject drugs were estimated to be 16.3 times more likely to
develop invasive MRSA infections than others. The proportion of invasive MRSA cases
that occurred among persons who inject drugs increased from 4.1% in 2011 to 9.2% in
2016.  Infection  types  were  frequently  those  associated  with  nonsterile  injection  drug
use. Continued increases in nonsterile injection drug use are likely to result in increases
in invasive MRSA infections, underscoring the importance of public health measures to
curb  the  opioid  epidemic.  Active,  population-,  and  laboratory-based  surveillance  data
collected  through  the  Healthcare-Associated  Infections/Community  Interface  (HAIC)
component of CDC’s EIP during 2005–2016 were analyzed to assess the effects of the
opioid  epidemic  on  invasive  MRSA  infection.  A  case  was  defined  as  the  isolation  of
MRSA  from  a  normally  sterile  site  (e.g.,  blood,  cerebrospinal  fluid,  or  bone)  from  a
surveillance  area  resident.  National  invasive  MRSA  disease  prevalence  (adjusted  for
age,  race,  sex,  and  dialysis)  among  persons  aged  ≥13  years  who  inject  drugs  and
among persons aged ≥13 years who do not inject drugs were estimated for 2011 from
EIP/HAIC  data  using  a  previously  described  method  (8);  invasive  MRSA  rates  per
100,000 persons in both groups (and the corresponding rate ratio) were calculated in
conjunction with a published population point estimate of the U.S. population aged ≥13
years  who  injected  drugs  in  the  previous  year  for  2011  (9).  The  six-site  surveillance
area  used  for  the  remainder  of  this  report  included  California  (three  counties);
Connecticut  (statewide);  Georgia  (eight  counties);  and  Minnesota,  New  York,  and
Tennessee  (one  county  each).  Demographic  characteristics  and  clinical  diagnoses  of
invasive  MRSA  cases  among  persons  who  inject  drugs  were  compared  with  those
among  persons  who  do  not  inject  drugs.  The  proportion  of  invasive  MRSA  cases  that
occurred  among  persons  who  injected  drugs  (among  all  invasive  MRSA  cases)  was
calculated overall and by site for each year; significance of trends was analyzed using
linear  regression.  P  values  <0.05  were  considered  statistically  significant.  Among
invasive MRSA cases occurring in persons who inject drugs, demographics and health
care–associated  risk  factors  for  cases  ascertained  during  2005–2010  were  compared
with  those  that  occurred  during  2011–2016  to  describe  changes  over  time.  Health
care–associated  risk  factors  include  specimen  collection  for  culture  >3  days  after
hospital admission; dialysis, hospitalization, surgery, or long-term care residency in the
12  months  preceding  culture;  and/or  presence  of  a  central  venous  catheter  ≤2  days
before invasive MRSA culture collection. Cases among persons with none of these risk
factors  were  considered  community-associated.  Trends  in  the  proportion  of  invasive
MRSA cases that occurred among persons who inject drugs also were assessed in three
sites  that  reported  data  from  2005–2014  only  (Colorado  and  Maryland  [one  county
each]; Oregon [three counties]). Among 39,050 invasive MRSA cases reported from six
sites during 2005–2016, a total of 2,093 (5.4%) occurred in persons who injected drugs.
The  estimated  rate  of  invasive  MRSA  among  persons  aged  ≥13  years  who  injected
drugs  in  the  previous  year  was  472.2  per  100,000  in  2011,  and  the  estimated  rate
among persons aged ≥13 who did not inject drugs in the previous year was 29.0 per
100,000  (rate  ratio  [RR]  =  16.3;  95%  confidence  interval  [CI]  =  15.7–16.8).  Overall,
cases of invasive MRSA among persons who inject drugs were more likely than cases
among persons who did not inject drugs to occur in persons who were younger (median
age = 45 versus 63 years; p<0.05) and to be community-associated infections (odds
ratio  [OR]  =  4.4,  95%  CI  =  4.0–4.8).  Clinical  diagnoses  frequently  associated  with
injection drug use were more common among patients with invasive MRSA who injected
drugs than among those who did not (Table), including septic embolism, endocarditis,
abscess  (skin  and  internal),  cellulitis,  and  osteomyelitis.  The  proportion  of  invasive
MRSA cases that occurred among persons who inject drugs approximately doubled in
some sites (counties in Connecticut, Georgia, Minnesota, and Tennessee) after 2011. In
the  six-site  catchment  area,  the  percentage  of  invasive  MRSA  cases  among  persons
who  inject  drugs  declined  from  6.4%  in  2005  to  3.5%  in  2010  (p<0.05),  but
subsequently  increased  steadily  to  9.2%  in  2016  (p<0.05)  (Figure).  Among  invasive
MRSA  cases  that  occurred  among  persons  who  inject  drugs,  cases  during  2011–2016
were more likely to occur in persons who were white (OR = 1.7; 95% CI = 1.4–2.0) and
be  community-associated  (OR  =  1.3;  95%  CI  =  1.1–1.6)  than  were  cases  during
2005–2010.  In  two  of  three  sites  (Colorado  and  Oregon)  that  reported  data  from
2005–2014  only,  similar  increases  in  the  proportion  of  invasive  MRSA  cases  that
occurred  among  persons  who  inject  drugs  after  an  initial  decrease  (2005:  11.1%  of
cases;  2011:  10.6%;  2014:  15.2%)  were  observed.  Top  In  six  sites,  invasive  MRSA
infections  disproportionately  affected  persons  who  inject  drugs.  In  this  analysis,
invasive  MRSA  infections  that  occurred  among  persons  who  inject  drugs  were  those
frequently  associated  with  nonsterile  injection  drug  use;  demographic  shifts  in  the
population  of  invasive  MRSA  infections  among  injection  drug  users  mirror  those
observed  in  the  ongoing  opioid  epidemic,  such  as  the  increased  proportion  of  cases
among whites. A decline and subsequent rise in the proportion of invasive MRSA cases
among  persons  who  inject  drugs  was  observed  in  the  six-site  catchment  area  during
2005–2016  and  in  two  additional  sites  for  which  data  were  available  through  2014;
similar  patterns  were  seen  in  the  incidence  of  acute  HCV*  and  in  the  rate  of  drug
overdose deaths involving heroin (1), with notable increases in both beginning around
2010. The findings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First, injection
drug  use  status  in  medical  records  is  possibly  misclassified,  which  could  result  in  an
under- or overestimation of the percentage of MRSA infections in injection drug users.
Second, rates were based on national estimates of both invasive MRSA case counts and
the population of persons who inject drugs that might not be accurate. Third, the rates
are based on 2011 data because this is the only year for which population estimates for
the number of persons who inject drugs is available. This might be an underestimate if
current  injection  drug  use  practices  are  higher  risk.  Fourth,  site-specific  counts  of
persons who inject drugs were not available, precluding the calculation of site-specific
rates. Finally, invasive methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus surveillance began in
2016  and  could  not  be  included  in  this  report  to  describe  the  impact  of  the  opioid
epidemic on these infections. Although much attention has focused on the transmission
of blood-borne pathogens such as HIV and hepatitis B and C viruses related to injection
drug use, infections from skin flora such as Staphylococcus aureus are also important
and  might  not  be  prevented  solely  by  programs  focused  on  preventing  blood-borne
pathogen transmission. Increases in nonsterile injection drug use are likely to result in
increases  in  the  occurrence  of  invasive  MRSA  infections  among  persons  who  inject
drugs,  underscoring  the  importance  of  public  health  measures  to  curb  the  opioid
epidemic. Effective interventions include primary prevention of opioid misuse through
guideline-concordant  opioid  prescribing;  treatment  of  opioid  use  disorder  with
medication-assisted  therapies;  community-based  comprehensive  syringe  services
programs  that  provide  access  to  sterile  equipment  used  to  inject  drugs  and  its  safe
disposal;  and  education  on  safer  injection  practices,  wound  care,  and  early  warning
signs  of  serious  infections  associated  with  injection  drug  use.  Top  Shirley  Zhang,
Anthony  Fiore,  Shelley  Magill,  CDC;  Emerging  Infections  Programs  (EIP),  CDC;  Erin
Epson,  David  Lopez-Rodriguez,  Gretchen  Rothrock,  California  EIP;  Deborah  Aragon,
Claire  Reisenauer,  Colorado  EIP;  Carmen  Marquez,  Daniel  Wurm,  Connecticut  EIP;
Monica Farley, Amy Tunali, Stepy Thomas, Rahsaan Overton, Tori Dusse, Georgia EIP;
Joanne  Benton,  Lindsay  Bonner,  Rosemary  Hollick,  Terresa  Carter,  Kathleen  Shutt,
Michelle  Wilson,  Maryland  EIP;  Kathy  Como-Sabetti,  Carmen  Bernu,  MacKenzie  Koeck,
Minnesota EIP; Christina Felsen, Anita Gellert, New York EIP; Heather Jamieson, Tasha
Poissant, Mark Schmidt, Jamie Thompson, Oregon EIP; Danielle Ndi, Katie Dyer, Karen
Leib,  Tiffanie  Markus,  Brenda  Barnes,  Tennessee  EIP.  Top  William  Schaffner  reports
personal fees from Pfizer, Merck, Dynavax, Seqirus, SutroVax, and Shionogi outside the
submitted work. No other conflicts of interest were reported. Top Corresponding author:
Kelly  A.  Jackson,  gqv8@cdc.gov,  404-639-4603.  Top  1Division  of  Healthcare  Quality
Promotion,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;
2Division of Unintentional Injury Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control, CDC; 3Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; 4Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV/AIDS,
Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC;  5California  Emerging  Infections  Program,
Oakland, California; 6Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Denver,
Colorado;  7Connecticut  Department  of  Health,  Hartford,  Connecticut;  8Georgia
Emerging Infections Program and the Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Decatur,
Georgia; 9Maryland Emerging Infections Program and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School
of  Public  Health,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  10Minnesota  Department  of  Health,  St.  Paul,
Minnesota;  11New  York-Rochester  Emerging  Infections  Program  and  University  of
Rochester, Rochester, New York; 12Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee;  13Oregon  Health  &  Science  University,  Portland,  Oregon.  Top  *
https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2015surveillance/commentary.htm.
 Top
 Top
Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; OR = odds ratio.
*  California  (three  counties),  Connecticut  (statewide),  Georgia  (eight  counties),
Minnesota (one county), New York (one county), and Tennessee (one county).
† Cases can have more than one infection type.
§ Variable added to surveillance in 2008. For persons who inject drugs n = 1,395; for
persons who do not inject drugs n = 24,987.
¶ Variable added to surveillance in 2007. For persons who inject drugs n = 1,589; for
persons who do not inject drugs n = 28,860.
** Variable added to surveillance in 2009. For persons who inject drugs n = 1,201; for
persons who do not inject drugs n = 21,334.
†† Variable added to surveillance in 2010. For persons who inject drugs n = 1,039; for
persons  who  do  not  inject  drugs  n  =  17,668.  Top  *  California  (three  counties),
Connecticut  (statewide),  Georgia  (eight  counties),  Minnesota  (one  county),  New  York
(one county), and Tennessee (one county). The figure above is a bar chart showing the
percentage  of  invasive  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  cases  among
persons  who  inject  drugs,  by  year  at  six  surveillance  sites  during  2005–2016.  Top
Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Jackson  KA,  Bohm  MK,  Brooks  JT,  et  al.  Invasive
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Infections Among Persons Who Inject Drugs
—  Six  Sites,  2005–2016.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  2018;67:625–628.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6722a2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6722a2.htm
