Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Posted July 19, 2024 CDC, public health and regulatory officials
in several states, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Food Safety and Inspection
Service (USDA-FSIS) are collecting different types of data to identify the food source of
a multistate outbreak of Listeria monocytogenes infections. Epidemiologic information
shows that many people in this outbreak report eating meats sliced at deli counters. We
do  not  have  information  to  show  that  people  are  getting  sick  from  prepackaged  deli
meats.  As  of  July  19,  2024,  a  total  of  28  people  infected  with  the  outbreak  strain  of
Listeria  have  been  reported  from  12  states  (see  map).  Sick  people’s  samples  were
collected  from  May  29,  2024,  to  July  5,  2024  (see  timeline).  Of  28  people  with
information  available,  all  have  been  hospitalized.  One  person  got  sick  during  their
pregnancy and remained pregnant after recovering. Two deaths have been reported, 1
in Illinois and 1 in New Jersey. The true number of sick people in this outbreak is likely
higher than the number reported, and the outbreak may not be limited to the states
with  known  illnesses.  This  is  because  some  people  recover  without  medical  care  and
are not tested for Listeria. In addition, recent illnesses may not yet be reported as it
usually takes 3 to 4 weeks to determine if a sick person is part of an outbreak. Public
health officials collect many different types of information from sick people, including
their  age,  race,  ethnicity,  other  demographics,  and  the  foods  they  ate  in  the  month
before they got sick. This information provides clues to help investigators identify the
source  of  the  outbreak.  The  table  below  has  information  about  sick  people  in  this
outbreak  (“n”  is  the  number  of  people  with  information  available  for  each
demographic). State and local public health officials are interviewing people about the
foods they ate in the month before they got sick. People are reporting eating a variety
of  meats  sliced  at  deli  counters.  Of  the  18  people  able  to  be  interviewed,  16  (89%)
reported  eating  meats  sliced  at  a  deli,  most  commonly  deli-sliced  turkey,  liverwurst,
and ham. Meats were sliced at a variety of supermarket and grocery store delis. CDC
conducted  an  analysis  comparing  foods  reported  by  people  in  this  outbreak  to  foods
reported  by  people  who  got  sick  with  Listeria  but  were  not  part  of  an  outbreak.  The
analysis showed that people in this outbreak were more likely to eat deli-sliced turkey
and  liverwurst.  This  information  suggests  that  meats  sliced  at  the  deli  are  a  likely
source of this outbreak. However, at this time CDC doesn’t have enough information to
say  which  deli  meats  are  the  source  of  this  outbreak.  Public  health  investigators  are
using the PulseNet system to identify illnesses that may be part of this outbreak. CDC
PulseNet  manages  a  national  database  of  DNA  fingerprints  of  bacteria  that  cause
foodborne illnesses. DNA fingerprinting is performed on bacteria using a method called
whole genome sequencing (WGS).
WGS showed that bacteria from sick people’s samples are closely related genetically.
This suggests that people in this outbreak may have gotten sick from eating this food.
USDA-FSIS  is  working  to  identify  the  suppliers  of  deli  meats,  sliced  at  deli  counters,
purchased by people in this outbreak. CDC advises people who are pregnant, aged 65
or  older,  or  have  a  weakened  immune  system  to  contact  their  healthcare  provider  if
they  have  any  Listeria  symptoms.   Additionally,  CDC  advises  people  to  take  steps  to
protect  themselves  from  getting  Listeria  from  deli  meats  by  avoiding  eating  meats
sliced  at  the  deli  unless  they  are  heated  before  eating.  CDC,  public  health  and
regulatory officials in several states, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
are  collecting  different  types  of  data  to  investigate  a  multistate  outbreak  of  Listeria
monocytogenes  infections.  CDC  investigated  this  outbreak  in  2017  and  2021.
Epidemiologic  evidence  in  previous  investigations  identified  queso  fresco  and  other
similar  cheeses  as  a  potential  source  of  the  outbreak,  but  there  was  not  enough
information to identify a specific brand. CDC reopened the investigation in January 2024
after new illnesses were reported in December 2023 and the outbreak strain was found
in  a  cheese  sample  from  Rizo-López  Foods.  Epidemiology  and  recent  laboratory  data
show that queso fresco and cotija made by Rizo-López Foods are making people in this
outbreak sick. As of February 6, 2024, a total of 26 people infected with the outbreak
strain  of  Listeria  have  been  reported  from  11  states  (see  map).  Illnesses  started  on
dates ranging from June 15, 2014, to December 10, 2023 (see timeline). Of 26 people
with information available, 23 have been hospitalized. Two deaths have been reported,
one from California and one from Texas. Among people who are pregnant, Listeria can
cause pregnancy loss, premature birth, or a life-threatening infection in their newborn.
In  this  outbreak,  two  people  got  sick  during  their  pregnancy  and  one  person  had  a
pregnancy  loss.  There  are  also  two  newborns  in  the  case  count  for  this  outbreak
because Listeria can be passed to newborns during pregnancy. The true number of sick
people in this outbreak is likely higher than the number reported, and the outbreak may
not be limited to the states with known illnesses. This is because some people recover
without medical care and are not tested for Listeria. In addition, recent illnesses may
not yet be reported as it usually takes 3 to 4 weeks to determine if a sick person is part
of an outbreak. Public health officials collect many different types of information from
sick people, including their age, race, ethnicity, other demographics, and the foods they
ate  in  the  month  before  they  got  sick.  This  information  provides  clues  to  help
investigators identify the source of the outbreak. The table below has information about
sick people in this outbreak (“n” is the number of people with information available for
each demographic). State and local public health officials are interviewing people about
the foods they ate in the month before they got sick. Of the 22 people interviewed, 16
(73%) reported eating queso fresco, cotija, or other similar cheeses. Among people who
remembered  specific  brands,  three  people  who  got  sick  between  2014  and  2022
reported Don Francisco brand queso fresco or cotija. Don Francisco is one of the brands
of  recalled  cheeses.  Public  health  investigators  are  using  the  PulseNet  system  to
identify illnesses that may be part of this outbreak. CDC PulseNet manages a national
database  of  DNA  fingerprints  of  bacteria  that  cause  foodborne  illnesses.  DNA
fingerprinting  is  performed  on  bacteria  using  a  method  called  whole  genome
sequencing (WGS). WGS showed that bacteria from sick people’s samples from 2014 to
present are closely related genetically. This suggests that people in this outbreak got
sick  from  the  same  food.  In  January  2024,  the  Hawaii  State  Department  of  Health’s
Food  and  Drug  Branch  collected  a  sample  of  aged  cotija  cheese  product  made  by
Rizo-López  Foods  during  routine  sampling.  Testing  identified  the  outbreak  strain  of
Listeria in the product. FDA conducted inspections at the Rizo-López Foods facility and
collected food and environmental samples for testing. FDA found the outbreak strain of
Listeria on a container where cheeses are kept before they are packaged. On January
11, 2024, Rizo-López Foods, Inc. recalled the aged cotija cheese product after Hawaii
state officials found Listeria in it. On February 6, 2024, Rizo-López Foods, Inc. recalled
all cheese and other dairy products made in their facility. They have also temporarily
stopped producing and distributing these products while their investigation is ongoing.
Do not eat, sell, or serve any recalled products. Sign up for RSS Feed  
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/listeria/outbreaks/delimeats-7-24/details.html
