Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Posted July 2, 2024 CDC, public health and regulatory officials
in  several  states,  and  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  are  collecting
different types of data to investigate a multistate outbreak of Salmonella Africana and
Salmonella Braenderup infections. Epidemiologic, traceback and laboratory data show
that  cucumbers  were  contaminated  with  Salmonella  and  made  people  sick.  CDC  and
FDA  combined  these  two  outbreak  investigations  as  they  shared  several  similarities,
including  where  and  when  illnesses  occurred,  the  demographics  of  ill  people  and  the
foods they reported eating before they became sick. As of July 2, a total of 449 people
infected  with  one  of  the  outbreak  strains  of  Salmonella  Africana  and  Salmonella
Braenderup have been reported from 31 states and the District of Columbia (see map).
Of  these  illnesses,  215  people  were  infected  with  the  newly  added  Salmonella
Braenderup strain. Illnesses started on dates ranging from March 11, 2024, to June 4,
2024  (see  timeline).  Of  360  people  with  information  available,  125  have  been
hospitalized and no deaths have been reported. The true number of sick people in this
outbreak is likely much higher than the number reported, and the outbreak may not be
limited to the states with known illnesses. This is because many people recover without
medical care and are not tested for Salmonella. In addition, recent illnesses may not yet
be reported as it usually takes 3 to 4 weeks to determine if a sick person is part of an
outbreak.  Public  health  officials  collect  many  different  types  of  information  from  sick
people, including their age, race, ethnicity, other demographics, and the foods they ate
in the week before they got sick. This information provides clues to help investigators
identify the source of the outbreak. The table below has information about sick people
in  this  outbreak  (“n”  is  the  number  of  people  with  information  available  for  each
demographic). State and local public health officials are interviewing people about the
foods  they  ate  in  the  week  before  they  got  sick.  Of  the  188  people  interviewed,  129
(69%)  reported  eating  cucumbers.  This  percentage  was  significantly  higher  than  the
50%  of  respondents  who  reported  eating  cucumbers  in  the  FoodNet  Population
Survey—a  survey  that  helps  estimate  how  often  people  eat  various  foods  linked  to
diarrheal  illness.  This  difference  suggests  that  people  in  this  outbreak  got  sick  from
eating  cucumbers.  Public  health  investigators  used  the  PulseNet  system  to  identify
illnesses that may have been part of this outbreak. CDC PulseNet manages a national
database  of  DNA  fingerprints  of  bacteria  that  cause  foodborne  illnesses.  DNA
fingerprinting  is  performed  on  bacteria  using  a  method  called  whole  genome
sequencing  (WGS).WGS  showed  that  bacteria  from  sick  people’s  samples  are  closely
related  genetically.  This  means  that  people  in  this  outbreak  likely  got  sick  from  the
same  type  of  food.  WGS  analysis  of  bacteria  from  214  people’s  samples  had  no
predicted resistance; bacteria from 235 people’s samples predicted resistance to one or
more  of  the  following  antibiotics:  amoxicillin-clavulanic  acid,  ampicillin,  azithromycin,
cefoxitin,  ceftiofur,  ceftriaxone,  ciprofloxacin,  fosfomycin,  and  tetracycline.  More
information  is  available  at  the  National  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Monitoring  System
(NARMS) site. Most people with Salmonella illness recover without antibiotics. However,
if antibiotics are needed, some illnesses in this outbreak may be difficult to treat with
some commonly recommended antibiotics and may require a different antibiotic choice.
FDA’s traceback investigation identified Bedner Growers, Inc., in Florida as a supplier of
cucumbers in this outbreak. This one grower does not account for all illnesses in this
outbreak.  FDA  collected  samples  at  the  grower  in  Florida  and  identified  Salmonella
Braenderup in untreated canal water. WGS determined that the Salmonella found in the
water is the same strain of Salmonella Braenderup that made people in this outbreak
sick. Additional soil and water samples collected at Bedner Growers, Inc. were positive
for other strains of Salmonella. CDC and FDA are looking to see if these strains have
caused illness in people. Bedner Growers, Inc. in Florida, where the positive sample was
collected, is no longer growing and harvesting cucumbers for the season. CDC, public
health  and  regulatory  officials  in  several  states,  and  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug
Administration  (FDA)  are  collecting  different  types  of  data  to  investigate  a  multistate
outbreak  of  Salmonella  Africana  infections.  Epidemiologic  data  show  that  cucumbers
may be contaminated with Salmonella and may be making people sick. CDC and FDA
are  also  investigating  an  outbreak  of  Salmonella  Braenderup  infections,  with  185
illnesses in 24 states. The two outbreaks share several similarities, including where and
when illnesses occurred and the demographics of ill people. Investigators are working
to determine whether the two outbreaks could be linked to the same food. Information
will be provided on the source of the Salmonella Braenderup outbreak as it becomes
available.  As  of  June  12,  a  total  of  196  people  infected  with  the  outbreak  strain  of
Salmonella  Africana  have  been  reported  from  28  states  and  the  District  of  Columbia
(see map). Illnesses started on dates ranging from March 11, 2024, to May 23, 2024
(see timeline). Of 164 people with information available, 68 have been hospitalized and
no deaths have been reported. The true number of sick people in this outbreak is likely
much  higher  than  the  number  reported,  and  the  outbreak  may  not  be  limited  to  the
states with known illnesses. This is because many people recover without medical care
and are not tested for Salmonella. In addition, recent illnesses may not yet be reported
as it usually takes 3 to 4 weeks to determine if a sick person is part of an outbreak.
Public  health  officials  collect  many  different  types  of  information  from  sick  people,
including their age, race, ethnicity, other demographics, and the foods they ate in the
week before they got sick. This information provides clues to help investigators identify
the source of the outbreak. The table below has information about sick people in this
outbreak  (“n”  is  the  number  of  people  with  information  available  for  each
demographic). State and local public health officials are interviewing people about the
foods they ate in the week before they got sick. Of the 85 people interviewed, 63 (74%)
reported eating cucumbers. This percentage was significantly higher than the 50% of
respondents  who  reported  eating  cucumbers  in  the  FoodNet  Population  Survey—a
survey  that  helps  estimate  how  often  people  eat  various  foods  linked  to  diarrheal
illness.  This  difference  suggests  that  people  in  this  outbreak  got  sick  from  eating
cucumbers. WGS analysis of bacteria from 196 people’s samples predicted resistance
to fosfomycin. Among these, bacteria from 6 people’s samples also predicted resistance
to  one  or  more  of  the  following  antibiotics:  amoxicillin-clavulanic  acid,  ampicillin,
azithromycin,  cefoxitin,  ceftiofur,  ceftriaxone,  ciprofloxacin,  and  tetracycline.  More
information  is  available  at  the  National  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Monitoring  System
(NARMS) site. Most people with Salmonella illness recover without antibiotics. However,
if antibiotics are needed, some illnesses in this outbreak may be difficult to treat with
some commonly recommended antibiotics and may require a different antibiotic choice.
As  part  of  the  Salmonella  Africana  investigation,  officials  in  the  Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture collected samples of cucumbers from several retail locations
in the state. Testing identified Salmonella Bareilly, a different strain of Salmonella than
the  one  making  people  sick  in  this  outbreak.  CDC  is  not  currently  investigating  an
outbreak  of  illnesses  with  this  strain.  CDC  advises  people  not  to  eat,  sell,  or  serve
recalled cucumbers while the investigation is ongoing. The Florida grower that supplied
the recalled cucumbers to Fresh Start is no longer growing and harvesting cucumbers
for the season. CDC, public health and regulatory officials in several states, and the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) are collecting different types of data to investigate
a multistate outbreak of Salmonella Africana infections. Epidemiologic data show that
cucumbers may be contaminated with Salmonella and may be making people sick. CDC
and FDA are also investigating an outbreak of Salmonella Braenderup infections, with
158 illnesses in 23 states. The two outbreaks share several similarities, including where
and  when  illnesses  occurred  and  the  demographics  of  ill  people.  Investigators  are
working  to  determine  whether  the  two  outbreaks  could  be  linked  to  the  same  food.
Information will be provided on the source of the Salmonella Braenderup outbreak as it
becomes available. As of June 4, a total of 162 people infected with the outbreak strain
of Salmonella Africana have been reported from 25 states and the District of Columbia
(see map). Illnesses started on dates ranging from March 11, 2024, to May 16, 2024
(see timeline). Of 127 people with information available, 54 have been hospitalized and
0 deaths have been reported. The true number of sick people in this outbreak is likely
much  higher  than  the  number  reported,  and  the  outbreak  may  not  be  limited  to  the
states with known illnesses. This is because many people recover without medical care
and are not tested for Salmonella. In addition, recent illnesses may not yet be reported
as it usually takes 3 to 4 weeks to determine if a sick person is part of an outbreak.
Public  health  officials  collect  many  different  types  of  information  from  sick  people,
including their age, race, ethnicity, other demographics, and the foods they ate in the
week before they got sick. This information provides clues to help investigators identify
the source of the outbreak. The table below has information about sick people in this
outbreak  (“n”  is  the  number  of  people  with  information  available  for  each
demographic). State and local public health officials are interviewing people about the
foods they ate in the week before they got sick. Of the 65 people interviewed, 47 (72%)
reported eating cucumbers. This percentage was significantly higher than the 50% of
respondents  who  reported  eating  cucumbers  in  the  FoodNet  Population  Survey—a
survey  that  helps  estimate  how  often  people  eat  various  foods  linked  to  diarrheal
illness.  This  difference  suggests  that  people  in  this  outbreak  got  sick  from  eating
cucumbers.  Public  health  investigators  used  the  PulseNet  system  to  identify  illnesses
that may have been part of this outbreak. CDC PulseNet manages a national database
of  DNA  fingerprints  of  bacteria  that  cause  foodborne  illnesses.  DNA  fingerprinting  is
performed on bacteria using a method called whole genome sequencing (WGS). WGS
showed  that  bacteria  from  sick  people’s  samples  are  closely  related  genetically.  This
means  that  people  in  this  outbreak  likely  got  sick  from  the  same  type  of  food.  WGS
analysis  of  bacteria  from  162  people’s  samples  predicted  resistance  to  fosfomycin.
Among  these,  bacteria  from  5  people’s  samples  also  predicted  resistance  to  one  or
more  of  the  following  antibiotics:  amoxicillin-clavulanic  acid,  ampicillin,  azithromycin,
cefoxitin,  ceftiofur,  ceftriaxone,  ciprofloxacin,  and  tetracycline.  More  information  is
available  at  the  National  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Monitoring  System  (NARMS)  site.
Most people with Salmonella illness recover without antibiotics. However, if antibiotics
are  needed,  some  illnesses  in  this  outbreak  may  be  difficult  to  treat  with  some
commonly  recommended  antibiotics  and  may  require  a  different  antibiotic  choice.  As
part  of  this  investigation,  officials  in  the  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Agriculture
collected  samples  of  cucumbers  from  several  retail  locations  in  the  state.  Testing
identified Salmonella in one sample of these cucumbers. Further testing is underway to
determine if the strain of Salmonella from the cucumber sample is the same strain that
is making people sick. CDC advises people not to eat, sell, or serve recalled cucumbers
while the investigation is ongoing. Cucumbers distributed by Fresh Start Produce Sales,
Inc.  are  from  a  variety  of  growers.  The  grower  that  likely  supplied  potentially
contaminated  cucumbers  is  no  longer  growing  and  harvesting  cucumbers  for  the
season. Sign up for RSS Feed  
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/salmonella/africana-06-24/details.html
