Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  March  13,  2020  /  69(10);260–264  Bridget  J.
Anderson, PhD1; Ernest Clement, MSN2; Randall Collura, PhD1; Abigail Gallucci1; Emily
Westheimer,  MSc3;  Sarah  Braunstein,  PhD3;  Karen  Southwick,  MD2;  Eleanor  Adams,
MD2;  Emily  Lutterloh,  MD2,4;  Charles  Gonzalez,  MD5;  Robert  McDonald,  MD2,6;
Hongwei Jia7; William M. Switzer7; Priti R. Patel, MD8; M. Patricia Joyce, MD7; Alexandra
M. Oster, MD7 (View author affiliations) What is already known about this topic? Health
care–associated human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission is uncommon in the
United  States.  Adherence  to  Standard  Precautions  can  help  to  prevent  health
care–related  spread  of  bloodborne  pathogens.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  In  this
investigation  of  an  acute  HIV  infection  in  a  patient  with  chronic  kidney  disease  who
received care in a hospital and other health care settings, epidemiologic and nucleotide
sequence  data  support  likely  health  care–associated  transmission.  What  are  the
implications for public health practice? Investigators of acute HIV infection in persons
with recent health care exposure and no known risk factors for HIV might consider the
possibility  of  health  care–associated  transmission  and  conduct  nucleotide  sequence
analysis.  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads  Figure  1  Figure  2  Since
implementation  of  Standard  Precautions*  for  the  prevention  of  bloodborne  pathogen
transmission in 1985, health care–associated transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) in the United States has been rare (1). In October 2017, the New York City
Department  of  Health  and  Mental  Hygiene  (NYCDOHMH)  and  the  New  York  State
Department of Health (NYSDOH) were notified by a clinician of a diagnosis of acute HIV
infection in a young adult male (patient A) without recognized risk factors (i.e., he was
monogamous,  had  an  HIV-negative  partner,  and  had  no  injection  drug  use)  who  had
recently been hospitalized for a chronic medical condition. The low risk coupled with the
recent  hospitalization  and  medical  procedures  prompted  NYSDOH,  NYCDOHMH,  and
CDC  to  investigate  this  case  as  possible  health  care–associated  transmission  of  HIV.
Among  persons  with  known  HIV  infection  who  had  hospitalization  dates  overlapping
those of patient A, one person (patient B) had an HIV strain highly similar to patient A’s
strain by nucleotide sequence analysis. The sequence relatedness, combined with other
investigation
 findings,
 indicated
 a
 likely
 health
 care–associated
 transmission.
Nucleotide sequence analysis, which is increasingly used for detecting HIV clusters (i.e.,
persons  with  closely  related  HIV  strains)  and  to  inform  public  health  response  (2,3),
might  also  be  used  to  identify  possible  health  care–associated  transmission  of  HIV  to
someone  with  health  care  exposure  and  no  known  HIV  risk  factors  (4).  Top  Medical
record review and interview of patient A by NYCDOHMH and NYSDOH revealed a low
risk for HIV acquisition (i.e., monogamous sex with an HIV-negative female partner and
no injection drug use). In July 2017, upon admission to hospital 1 for complications of
chronic  kidney  disease  (99  days  before  diagnosis  of  HIV),  patient  A’s  HIV
antigen/antibody rapid test was negative (Figure 1). In October 2017 (25 days before
HIV diagnosis), patient A was readmitted to hospital 1 and started hemodialysis. During
this  admission,  patient  A  underwent  vascular  access  placement  by  outpatient
interventional  radiology  at  hospital  2,  and  hemodialysis  was  begun  at  hospital  1  the
same day (22 days before diagnosis). Patient A was discharged 10 days later (12 days
before diagnosis) and began hemodialysis at an outpatient dialysis facility 2 days later
(10 days before diagnosis). Patient A was readmitted to the same hospital 9 days later
with a 5-day history of fever, sore throat, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The next day,
a  diagnosis  of  acute  HIV  infection  was  laboratory-confirmed  (i.e.,  HIV-1  and  HIV-2
antibody plus HIV-1 p24 antigen test, a negative HIV-1/2 differentiation antibody test,
and  a  detectable  HIV-1  RNA  qualitative  test).  The  finding  of  detectable  antigen  and
HIV-1  virus  without  detectable  antibody  indicated  acute  HIV  infection  (5,6)  and
suggested that infection likely occurred 10–22 days earlier, coinciding with the period
from  his  admission  to  hospital  1  (day  −22)  (Figure  1)  to  beginning  outpatient
hemodialysis  (day  −10)  (Figure  1).  Patient  A  was  referred  to  HIV  care  but  was  not
prescribed antiretroviral treatment (ART). Sixty-six days after the HIV diagnosis, patient
A died from complications related to chronic kidney disease (Figure 1). Given the likely
period when infection occurred was during patient A’s hospitalization, NYSDOH initiated
an  infection  control  investigation.  A  total  of  232  patients  were  identified  who  had
undergone treatment at the same time as patient A on either the hospital 1 inpatient
ward or in the hemodialysis unit, or the hospital 2 interventional radiology unit, or the
outpatient hemodialysis unit. Using all of the person-identifying information provided by
the  facilities  (i.e.,  first  name,  last  name,  and  date  of  birth)  and  matching  that
information  against  the  statewide  NYSDOH  HIV  registry,  of  the  232,  investigators
identified 10 persons with previously diagnosed HIV infection. Three were inpatients on
the  hospital  1  ward  with  at  least  one  coincident  day  with  patient  A’s  admission,  five
received outpatient hemodialysis in the same outpatient hemodialysis unit as patient A,
and two received inpatient hemodialysis at hospital 1. Nine of the 10 had documented
sustained  HIV  viral  suppression  with  all  viral  load  results  <200  HIV  RNA  copies/mL
throughout 2017. One person with HIV infection diagnosed decades earlier (patient B)
was  identified  as  having  an  increasing  HIV  viral  load  between  spring  and  fall  2017.
Patient B’s HIV diagnosis was known to hospital 1, and patient B received antiretroviral
drugs while in hospital 1. Patient B subsequently died in November 2017. Comparison
with the HIV registry of a list of direct care staff members from 1) the hospital 1 ward
and  hemodialysis  unit,  2)  the  hospital  2  interventional  radiology  unit,  and  3)  the
outpatient  hemodialysis  unit  yielded  no  matches.  HIV-1  polymerase  (pol)  sequences
generated  through  standard  HIV  drug  resistance  testing  and  reported  as  part  of  HIV
surveillance were analyzed by NYSDOH to identify molecular relatedness (2,3). Patient
A and eight of the 10 matched persons, including patient B, had at least one HIV pol
sequence reported to NYSDOH. Patient A had a November 2017 sequence, and patient
B  had  pol  sequences  available  from  2006  and  2010.  CDC  also  generated  HIV  pol
sequences from remnant specimens from patients A and B collected in 2017 less than
30 days apart (6,7). All pol sequences from patients A and B showed >98% nucleotide
identity,  with  the  patient  A  and  patient  B  sequences  from  2017  sharing  over  99%
identity. HIV-1 sequences for the other nine patients were not closely related to those
from  patients  A  or  B,  showing  <96%  nucleotide  identity  (Figure  2).  HIV-1  sequences
from  samples  collected  from  patients  A  and  B  were  not  closely  genetically  related  to
those of the 295,000 NYSDOH sequences, 400,000 pol sequences available to CDC, or
800,000 HIV sequences at GenBank (as of May 9, 2019). Phylogenetic analysis of the 15
sequences from all 11 patients using maximum likelihood methods showed that all five
sequences from patients A and B clustered together strongly in a monophyletic clade
with high confidence and with the three 2017 sequences also forming a tight subcluster
with high confidence (Figure 2)  (7). Medical record review established that, in October
2017,  patients  A  and  B  were  on  the  same  inpatient  ward  of  hospital  1  for  25  hours
(shared ward time) (Figure 1). Patients A and B also received inpatient hemodialysis in
the same hemodialysis unit. However, they never received hemodialysis on the same
day,  nor  did  patient  A  follow  patient  B  on  the  same  hemodialysis  machine.  Patient  B
had  no  interventional  radiology  procedures  during  the  hospitalization.  NYSDOH
conducted  site  visits  focused  on  infection  control  practices  at  hospital  1’s  inpatient
ward  and  hemodialysis  unit,  hospital  2’s  interventional  radiology  unit,  and  the
outpatient  hemodialysis  unit.  Observations  made  on  hospital  1’s  inpatient  ward  and
hemodialysis  unit  and  hospital  2’s  interventional  radiology  unit  did  not  identify  any
directly  observed  infection  control  lapses,  nor  were  opportunities  for  transmission
identified  in  the  hemodialysis  unit  or  interventional  radiology  unit.  The  site  visits
included  interviews  with  clinical  providers  and  other  key  personnel.  Hospital  1
pharmacy  records  indicated  the  only  medications  prescribed  to  both  patients  were
intravenous  saline  flushes  and  injectable  darbepoetin.  Patient  A  did  not  receive
narcotics  on  the  hospital  1  ward.  Hospital  1  used  3  mL  and  10  mL  prefilled,
plastic-wrapped,  sealed,  saline  syringes  stored  in  locked  clean  utility  rooms.
Darbepoetin (used to treat anemia related to chronic kidney disease) was supplied in
patient-specific,  prefilled,  single-use  syringes  of  various  strengths  delivered  by  the
hospital A pharmacy to the hemodialysis unit. All other medications were tracked and
dispensed  via  a  biometric-controlled  and  password-controlled  automated  dispensing
system. Patients A and B had no known social contact, and no specific mechanism for
transmission  between  these  patients  was  confirmed.  However,  the  epidemiologic
evidence  and  high  degree  of  viral  genetic  relatedness  were  most  compatible  with
transmission  having  occurred  at  hospital  1  during  mid-October  2017  (Figure  1).  Top
NYSDOH recommended a notification of potential exposure to bloodborne pathogens at
hospital 1 for any patient who had an injection, infusion, or other invasive procedure
while an inpatient on the same unit in hospital 1 or who received inpatient hemodialysis
at hospital 1 during the period when both patients A and B were inpatients at hospital 1
(days  −20  to  −12  before  patient  A  tested  positive  for  HIV)  (Figure  1).  The  hospital
mailed letters to the 36 living patients meeting NYSDOH criteria; the letters described
potential HIV exposure and offered free testing for HIV as well as for hepatitis B and
hepatitis  C  viruses,  although  neither  patient  had  hepatitis  B  or  hepatitis  C  infections.
Ongoing  surveillance  has  not  identified  any  additional  cases  related  to  this
investigation. Top In this investigation of acute HIV infection with a narrow transmission
window,  low  reported  behavioral  risks  associated  with  HIV  acquisition  and  the  timing
and  results  of  HIV  testing  indicate  the  infection  likely  occurred  when  patient  A  was
hospitalized.  Analysis  of  HIV  nucleotide  sequence  data  for  persons  with  overlapping
health  care  exposures  helped  to  identify  a  possible  source  of  infection.  The  inpatient
hemodialysis unit, interventional radiology unit, and outpatient hemodialysis unit were
excluded as likely transmission locations because of an absence of a source patient or
opportunity for transmission. Although no specific infection control lapses were directly
observed, the epidemiologic data and nucleotide sequence analyses provide support for
possible  health  care–associated  transmission  while  both  patients  were  hospital  1
inpatients  on  the  same  ward.  However,  the  possibility  cannot  be  excluded  that
transmission involved a person (hospitalized or not) with undiagnosed HIV infection or a
person  with  diagnosed  HIV  infection  without  an  available  HIV-1  pol  sequence  for
comparison. This incident serves as a reminder of the importance of strict adherence to
Standard  Precautions  within  health  care  settings.  It  also  underscores  the  utility  of
sequence  analysis  to  identify  transmission  to  persons  with  no  known  HIV  risk  factors
through  uncommon  health  care  routes  that  might  otherwise  go  unrecognized.  Top
Joanne  Gerber,  staff  members,  Laboratory  Analysis  and  Follow-up  Unit,  Bureau  of
HIV/AIDS
 Epidemiology,
 NYSDOH;
 Brenda
 Moncur,
 staff
 members,
 Systems
Development  and  Maintenance  Program,  Bureau  of  HIV/AIDS  Epidemiology,  NYSDOH;
Monica  Parker,  Renee  Hallack,  Bloodborne  Viruses  Laboratory,  Wadsworth  Center,
NYSDOH;  HIV  Surveillance  Unit  staff  members,  HIV  Epidemiology  Program,  Bureau  of
HIV,  NYCDOHMH;  Ruth  Link-Gelles,  Duc  B.  Nguyen,  Division  of  Healthcare  Quality
Promotion,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.  Top
Corresponding
 author:
 Bridget
 J.
 Anderson,
 Bridget.Anderson@health.ny.gov,
518-474-4284. Top 1Bureau of HIV/AIDS Epidemiology, New York State Department of
Health;  2Bureau  of  Healthcare  Associated  Infections,  New  York  State  Department  of
Health;  3HIV  Epidemiology  and  Field  Services  Program,  New  York  City  Department  of
Health  and  Mental  Hygiene;  4University  at  Albany  School  of  Public  Health,  State
University of New York; 5Office of the Medical Director, AIDS Institute, New York State
Department  of  Health;  6Epidemic  Intelligence  Service,  CDC;  7Division  of  HIV/AIDS
Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC;
8Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the
International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential
conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *
https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/basics/standard-precautions.html.
 Top
 Top
Abbreviations:  HD(1)  =  hemodialysis  machine  1;  HD(2)  =  hemodialysis  machine  2;
Hosp = hospital; IR = interventional radiology; OP = outpatient; Pt A = patient A; Pt B =
patient  B.  *  Estimated  from  the  period  during  which  acute  HIV  infection  can  be
detected. Top Abbreviations: BLAST = Basic Local Alignment Search Tool; HIV = human
immunodeficiency  virus;  NYSDOH  =  New  York  State  Department  of  Health.  *  Branch
length  is  related  to  the  number  of  nucleotide  substitutions.  The  more  substitutions  a
sequence  has,  the  longer  its  branch  will  be.  More  evolved  sequences  will  be  further
from their ancestor. Some nodes are collapsed for better visualization of the whole tree
and are depicted as triangles with the number of taxa shown in parentheses. GenBank
accession  numbers  for  sequences  identified  by  BLAST  analysis  are  provided  when
nodes  are  not  collapsed.  Confidence  values  for  the  branching  pattern  were  assessed
with  the  Shimodaira-Hasegawa  (SH)  test  and  are  given  as  probabilities  to  the  left  of
each  branching  node.  SH  values  <0.8  are  not  shown.  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this
article:  Anderson  BJ,  Clement  E,  Collura  R,  et  al.   Investigation  of  Presumptive  HIV
Transmission  Associated  with  Hospitalization  Using  Nucleotide  Sequence  Analysis  —
New
 York,
 2017.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2020;69:260–264.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6910a2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6910a2.htm
