A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Foods  may  be  unsafe  to  eat  after  a  disaster  or  emergency.  To  prevent  foodborne
illness,  prepare  for  emergencies  and  take  key  steps  during  and  after  power  outages,
floods,  and  other  emergencies.   If  you  are  in  a  disaster  or  emergency,  it's  important
that  you  take  steps  to  prevent  illness  from  unsafe  food.  Refrigerated  or  frozen  foods
may not be safe to eat after the loss of power. Food that may have had contact with
floodwater or storm water may also be unsafe to eat. Find out what you can do to keep
food  safe  in  the  case  of  an  emergency  or  disaster.   Throw  away  the  following  food:
Unsafe food can make you sick even if it looks and smells normal. When in doubt, throw
it out!  Throw out wooden cutting boards, baby bottle nipples, and pacifiers if they have
come into contact with floodwaters. Sanitizing methods are not effective for removing
floodwater  contaminants  from  these  items.  Clean  and  sanitize  dishes,  utensils,  and
other  surfaces  that  touch  food  (like  refrigerator  drawers  or  kitchen  countertops)  in  a
four-step process: 1. Remove labels if possible. Note the expiration date.  2. Brush or
wipe away dirt or silt.  3. Wash cans and pouches with hot, soapy water.  4. Rinse cans
and pouches with clean, safe water.  5. Sanitize cans and pouches in one of two ways:
a. Place them in a solution of 1 cup (8 oz/240 mL) of unscented household bleach in 5
gallons of water for 15 minutes, OR b. Put in a pot of water, bring to a boil, and continue
boiling for 2 minutes.  6. Re-label cans or pouches with a marker. Include the expiration
date.  7. Use food in cans or pouches as soon as possible. Printable Fact Sheet: Eat Safe
Food  after  a  Power  Outage  (English)  (Spanish)  (Additional  Languages)   Prevent  Food
Poisoning Higher Risk for Food Poisoning Get information from CDC on preventing food
poisoning, food poisoning symptoms, foodborne disease outbreaks, and recalled food.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/food-safety/foods/keep-food-safe-after-emergency.html
