Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / June 12, 2020 / 69(23);705–709 On June 5, 2020,
this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. Radhika Gharpure, DVM1,2;
Candis  M.  Hunter,  PhD1;  Amy  H.  Schnall,  MPH3;  Catherine  E.  Barrett,  PhD1;  Amy  E.
Kirby,  PhD1;  Jasen  Kunz,  MPH1;  Kirsten  Berling,  MPH1;  Jeffrey  W.  Mercante,  PhD1;
Jennifer  L.  Murphy,  PhD1;  Amanda  G.  Garcia-Williams,  PhD1  (View  author  affiliations)
What is already known about this topic? Calls to poison centers regarding exposures to
cleaners and disinfectants have increased since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
What  is  added  by  this  report?  An  Internet  panel  survey  identified  gaps  in  knowledge
about safe preparation, use, and storage of cleaners and disinfectants. Approximately
one third of survey respondents engaged in nonrecommended high-risk practices with
the  intent  of  preventing  SARS-CoV-2  transmission,  including  using  bleach  on  food
products, applying household cleaning and disinfectant products to skin, and inhaling or
ingesting  cleaners  and  disinfectants.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health
practice?  Public  messaging  should  continue  to  emphasize  evidence-based,  safe
cleaning and disinfection practices to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission in households,
including  hand  hygiene  and  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  high-touch  surfaces.  Views
equals page views plus PDF downloads Figure 1 Figure 2 A recent report described a
sharp  increase  in  calls  to  poison  centers  related  to  exposures  to  cleaners  and
disinfectants since the onset of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic (1).
However, data describing cleaning and disinfection practices within household settings
in  the  United  States  are  limited,  particularly  concerning  those  practices  intended  to
prevent  transmission  of  SARS-CoV-2,  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19.  To  provide
contextual and behavioral insight into the reported increase in poison center calls and
to inform timely and relevant prevention strategies, an opt-in Internet panel survey of
502 U.S. adults was conducted  in  May  2020 to  characterize knowledge and  practices
regarding  household  cleaning  and  disinfection  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.
Knowledge gaps were identified in several areas, including safe preparation of cleaning
and  disinfectant  solutions,  use  of  recommended  personal  protective  equipment  when
using  cleaners  and  disinfectants,  and  safe  storage  of  hand  sanitizers,  cleaners,  and
disinfectants.
 Thirty-nine
 percent
 of
 respondents
 reported
 engaging
 in
nonrecommended  high-risk  practices  with  the  intent  of  preventing  SARS-CoV-2
transmission, such as washing food products with bleach, applying household cleaning
or  disinfectant  products  to  bare  skin,  and  intentionally  inhaling  or  ingesting  these
products. Respondents who engaged in high-risk practices more frequently reported an
adverse health effect that they believed was a result of using cleaners or disinfectants
than did those who did not report engaging in these practices. Public messaging should
continue  to  emphasize  evidence-based,  safe  practices  such  as  hand  hygiene  and
recommended cleaning and disinfection of high-touch surfaces to prevent transmission
of SARS-CoV-2 in household settings (2). Messaging should also emphasize avoidance
of high-risk practices such as unsafe preparation of cleaning and disinfectant solutions,
use  of  bleach  on  food  products,  application  of  household  cleaning  and  disinfectant
products  to  skin,  and  inhalation  or  ingestion  of  cleaners  and  disinfectants.  Survey
questions were administered by Porter Novelli Public Services and ENGINE Insights on
May  4,  2020,  through  PN  View:  360,*  a  rapid  turnaround  survey  that  can  be  used  to
provide  insights  into  knowledge  and  practices  of  targeted  audiences.  This  opt-in
Internet panel survey was administered to 502 U.S. adults aged ≥18 years using the
Lucid  platform  (3);  panel  members  who  had  not  taken  a  survey  in  the  previous  20
waves  of  survey  administration  were  eligible  to  participate.  Quota  sampling  and
statistical  weighting  were  employed  to  make  the  panel  representative  of  the  U.S.
population  by  gender,  age,  region,  race/ethnicity,  and  education.  Respondents  were
informed that their answers were being used for market research and could refuse to
answer any question at any time. No personally identifying information was included in
the  data  file  provided  to  CDC.†  Survey  questions  asked  about  general  knowledge,
attitudes,  and  practices  related  to  use  of  household  cleaners  and  disinfectants§  and
about specific information regarding cleaning and disinfection strategies for prevention
of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Weighted response frequencies were calculated using SAS
statistical  software  (version  9.4;  SAS  Institute).  Because  respondents  were  recruited
from an opt-in panel rather than by probability sampling, no inferential statistical tests
were performed.¶ Differences were noted when a difference of ≥5 percentage points
was  found  between  any  estimates  being  compared.  The  median  age  of  respondents
was  46  years  (range  =  18–86  years),  and  52%  of  respondents  were  female.  Overall,
63% of respondents were non-Hispanic white, 16% were Hispanic (any race), 12% were
non-Hispanic  black,  and  8%  were  multiracial  or  of  other  race/ethnicity.  Respondents
represented all U.S. Census regions,** with 38% from the South, 24% from the West,
21%  from  the  Midwest,  and  18%  from  the  Northeast.  Participants  had  limited
knowledge of safe preparation of cleaning and disinfectant solutions (Figure 1). Overall,
23%  responded  that  only  room  temperature  water  should  be  used  for  preparation  of
dilute  bleach  solutions,  35%  that  bleach  should  not  be  mixed  with  vinegar,  and  58%
that bleach should not be mixed with ammonia. In comparison, a higher percentage of
respondents  had  knowledge  about  use  of  recommended  personal  protective
equipment:  64%  responded  that  eye  protection  was  recommended  for  use  of  some
cleaners and disinfectants, and 71% responded that gloves were recommended for use.
Similarly,  68%  responded  that  handwashing  was  recommended  after  using  cleaners
and  disinfectants  and  73%  that  adequate  ventilation  was  recommended  when  using
these products. Regarding safe storage of cleaners, disinfectants, and hand sanitizers,
79% of respondents said that cleaners and disinfectants should be kept out of the reach
of children, and 54% that hand sanitizers should be kept out of the reach of children.
Respondents reported engaging in a range of practices during the previous month with
the  intent  of  preventing  SARS-CoV-2  transmission  (Figure  2).  Sixty  percent  of
respondents reported more frequent home cleaning or disinfection compared with that
in preceding months. Thirty-nine percent reported intentionally engaging in at least one
high-risk practice not recommended by CDC for prevention of SARS-CoV-2 transmission
(2), including application of bleach to food items (e.g., fruits and vegetables) (19%); use
of  household  cleaning  and  disinfectant  products  on  hands  or  skin  (18%);  misting  the
body with a cleaning or disinfectant spray (10%); inhalation of vapors from household
cleaners or disinfectants (6%); and drinking or gargling diluted bleach solutions, soapy
water, and other cleaning and disinfectant solutions (4% each). One quarter (25%) of
respondents reported at least one adverse health effect during the previous month that
they believed had resulted from using cleaners or disinfectants, including nose or sinus
irritation (11%); skin irritation (8%); eye irritation (8%); dizziness, lightheadedness, or
headache  (8%);  upset  stomach  or  nausea  (6%);  or  breathing  problems  (6%).
Respondents who reported engaging in at least one high-risk practice more frequently
reported an adverse health effect than did those who did not report engaging in such
practices (39% versus 16%). Approximately half (51%) of respondents strongly agreed
and  31%  somewhat  agreed  that  they  knew  how  to  clean  and  disinfect  their  home
safely. Similarly, 42% strongly agreed and 35% somewhat agreed that they knew how
to clean and disinfect their home to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission. When asked who
their most trusted sources of SARS-CoV-2-related cleaning and disinfection information
were,  the  top  three  responses  were  CDC  (65%),  state  or  local  health  departments
(49%),  and  doctors,  nurses,  or  medical  providers  (48%).  Top  This  survey  identified
important  knowledge  gaps  in  the  safe  use  of  cleaners  and  disinfectants  among  U.S.
adults;  the  largest  gaps  were  found  in  knowledge  about  safe  preparation  of  cleaning
and  disinfectant  solutions  and  about  storage  of  hand  sanitizers  out  of  the  reach  of
children. Mixing of bleach solutions with vinegar or ammonia, as well as application of
heat,  can  generate  chlorine  and  chloramine  gases  that  might  result  in  severe  lung
tissue  damage  when  inhaled  (4,5).  Furthermore,  exposures  of  children  to  hand
sanitizers,  particularly  via  ingestion,  can  be  associated  with  irritation  of  mucous
membranes, gastrointestinal effects, and in severe cases, alcohol toxicity (6). The risk
of ingestion and consequent toxicity from improperly stored hand sanitizers, cleaners,
and disinfectants can also extend to pets (7). Consistent with current guidance for daily
cleaning and disinfection of frequently touched surfaces (2), a majority of respondents
reported  increased  frequency  of  cleaning  in  the  home.  However,  approximately  one
third  reported  engaging  in  high-risk  practices  such  as  washing  food  products  with
bleach,  applying  household  cleaning  and  disinfectant  products  to  bare  skin,  and
intentionally inhaling or ingesting cleaners or disinfectants. These practices pose a risk
of  severe  tissue  damage  and  corrosive  injury  (8,9)  and  should  be  strictly  avoided.
Although  adverse  health  effects  reported  by  respondents  could  not  be  attributed  to
their engaging in high-risk practices, the association between these high-risk practices
and  reported  adverse  health  effects  indicates  a  need  for  public  messaging  regarding
safe and effective cleaning and disinfection practices aimed at preventing SARS-CoV-2
transmission  in  households.  COVID-19  prevention  messages  should  continue  to
emphasize evidence-based, safe practices such as frequent hand hygiene and frequent
cleaning  and  disinfection  of  high-touch  surfaces  (2).  These  messages  should  include
specific recommendations for the safe use of cleaners and disinfectants, including the
importance  of  reading  and  following  label  instructions,  using  water  at  room
temperature  for  dilution  (unless  otherwise  stated  on  the  label),  avoiding  mixing  of
chemical products, wearing skin protection and considering eye protection for potential
splash  hazards,  ensuring  adequate  ventilation,  and  storing  and  using  chemicals  and
hand sanitizers out of the reach of children and pets (10). Despite the knowledge gaps
and  high-risk  practices  identified  in  this  survey,  most  respondents  believed  that  they
knew how to clean and disinfect their homes safely; thus, prevention messages should
highlight identified gaps in knowledge about safe and effective practices and provide
targeted  information  using  innovative  communication  strategies  (e.g.,  digital,  social
media)  regarding  safe  cleaning  and  disinfection.  These  messages  about  cleaning  and
disinfection  practices  for  COVID-19  prevention  can  be  coordinated  and  disseminated
through trusted sources of information such as national, state, and local public health
agencies and medical providers. The findings in this report are subject to at least four
limitations.  First,  although  survey  responses  were  weighted  to  be  nationally
representative  of  U.S.  demographics,  whether  responses  among  this  opt-in  panel
sample  are  truly  representative  of  knowledge,  attitudes,  and  practices  shared  by  the
broader U.S. population is difficult to determine. Second, social desirability bias might
have affected responses, with some respondents potentially overstating their perceived
knowledge  or  underreporting  engagement  in  high-risk  practices;  thus,  these  findings
might  underestimate  the  risk  for  exposures.  Third,  cross-sectional  data  captured  in
survey  responses  do  not  allow  for  direct  attribution  of  specific  outcomes,  such  as
adverse health effects, to specific knowledge gaps or practices. Finally, responses were
recorded at a single point in time and might not reflect ongoing shifts in public opinion
or cleaning and disinfection practices by the public throughout the national COVID-19
response.  Efforts  are  ongoing  to  collect  these  data  over  time  and  to  characterize
knowledge  gaps  and  practices  among  specific  demographic  and  geographic  groups.
These data will allow for development and evaluation of further targeted messaging to
ensure safe cleaning and disinfection practices in U.S. households during and after the
COVID-19  pandemic.  Top  Survey  respondents;  Fred  Fridinger,  Office  of  the  Associate
Director for Communication, CDC; Deanne Weber, Porter Novelli Public Services; Kayla
Vanden Esschert, CDC COVID-19 Response Team. Top Corresponding author: Radhika
Gharpure,  rgharpure@cdc.gov,  404-718-7213.  Top  1COVID-19  Response  Team,  CDC;
2Epidemic  Intelligence  Service,  CDC;  3Division  of  Environmental  Health  Science  and
Practice,  National  Center  for  Environmental  Health,  CDC.  Top  All  authors  have
completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form
for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were
disclosed.  Top  *  http://styles.porternovelli.com/pn-view-panels/.  †  CDC  obtained  the
survey  data  from  Porter  Novelli  Public  Services  through  a  subscription  license.  Porter
Novelli Public Services and its vendors are not subject to review by CDC’s Institutional
Review Board; they adhere to professional standards and codes of conduct set forth by
the
 Insights
 Association
(https://www.insightsassociation.org/issues-policies/insights-association-code-standards
-and-ethics-market-research-and-data-analytics-0).  §  Questions  regarding  storage  of
hand  sanitizers  were  included  with  questions  regarding  storage  of  cleaners  and
disinfectants.
 ¶
https://www.aapor.org/AAPOR_Main/media/MainSiteFiles/NPS_TF_Report_Final_7_revised
_FNL_6_22_13.pdf.
 **
https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/maps-data/maps/reference/us_regdiv.pdf.  Top  Top  *
In response to the question ”Which of the following have you heard is true about using
household  cleaning  products  (such  as  bleach  or  Lysol)?”;  response  options  reflected
CDC
 recommendations
 for
 safe
 cleaning
 and
 disinfection.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/disinfecting-your-hom
e.html.  †  In  survey  questions,  the  term  “cleaning”  referred  to  using  a  cleaner  or
disinfectant on surfaces or objects. Questions regarding storage of hand sanitizers were
included  with  questions  regarding  storage  of  cleaners  and  disinfectants.  §  Survey
administered by Porter Novelli Public Services through PN View: 360; respondents could
select multiple responses to the question (all response options shown). Selection of the
response  “none  of  these”  was  exclusive  (i.e.,  respondents  could  not  select  this
response option in addition to other responses). Top * In response to the question “In
the  past  month,  which  of  the  following  cleaning  behaviors  have  you  or  a  household
member engaged in to prevent coronavirus?” † In survey questions, the term “cleaning”
referred to using a cleaner or disinfectant on surfaces or objects. § Survey administered
by  Porter  Novelli  Public  Services  through  PN  View:  360;  respondents  could  select
multiple  responses  to  the  question  (nine  of  11  possible  response  options  shown).
Selection  of  the  response  “none  of  these”  was  exclusive  (i.e.,  respondents  could  not
select this response option in addition to other responses). Top Suggested citation for
this  article:  Gharpure  R,  Hunter  CM,  Schnall  AH,  et  al.  Knowledge  and  Practices
Regarding Safe Household Cleaning and Disinfection for COVID-19 Prevention — United
States,
 May
 2020.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2020;69:705–709.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6923e2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6923e2.htm
