A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 To  survive,  germs  can  develop  defense  strategies,  called  resistance  mechanisms
against  treatment  drugs,  like  antibiotics  and  antifungals.  Germs  can  share  their
resistance  mechanisms  with  other  germs  and  can  carry  genes  for  many  types  of
resistance. All VRSA have contained the vancomycin resistance gene vanA, commonly
found  in  vancomycin-resistant  enterococci  (VRE).  The  VanA  gene  typically  confers
(provides) high-level vancomycin resistance (MICs= 512-1024 µg/ml).  All VRSA isolates
detected
 and
 confirmed
 in
 the
 U.S.
 to
 date
 have
 also
 been
 methicillin
(oxacillin)-resistant (MRSA) due to the mecA gene. Some VRSA-positive patients have a
history  of  infections  caused  by  both  VRE  containing  vanA  and  MRSA.  The  vanA
determinant  likely  transferred  from  the  VRE  to  the  MRSA  strain  via  plasmids  or
transposons,  resulting  in  the  VRSA.  For  vancomycin-intermediate  S.  aureus  (VISA),
vancomycin must bind to the growing cell wall complex and reach the cell membrane to
inhibit  cell  growth.  Most  VISA  isolates  are  methicillin  (oxacillin)-resistant.  Both
automated and non-automated susceptibility testing methods can detect VISA/VRSA. It
should  be  noted  that  disk  diffusion  is  not  a  recommended  method  for  testing
vancomycin susceptibility in S. aureus. Information about susceptibility testing methods
and  their  limitations  should  be  made  available  to  healthcare  providers.  Providers  can
request  additional  testing  when  they  suspect  reduced  susceptibility  to  vancomycin.
Tests typically used to detect VRSA
 Tests typically used to detect VISA
 Laboratorians should perform broth microdilution and agar dilution according to Clinical
and  Laboratory  Standards  Institute  (CLSI)  guidelines,  which  include  the  following
recommendations:  Laboratorians  should  perform  vancomycin  agar  screening  for  S.
aureus  according  to  CLSI  guidelines.  The  vancomycin  agar  screen  test  uses
commercially prepared agar plates to screen pure cultures of bacteria for vancomycin
resistance.  These  plates  contain  BHI  agar  and  6  µg/ml  of  vancomycin.  Spot  10µl
inoculum  of  a  0.5  McFarland  suspension  on  the  agar  using  a  micropipette  (final
concentration=106  CFU/ml).  Alternatively,  dip  a  swab  in  the  McFarland  suspension,
express the excess liquid, and spot an area of 10-15 mm in diameter or streak a portion
of  the  plate.  For  quality  control,  laboratories  should  use  Enterococcus  faecalis  ATCC
29212 as the susceptible control and E. faecalis ATCC 51299 as the resistant control. 
You  can  test  up  to  eight  isolates  per  plate  but  should  always  perform  quality  control
each day of testing.  Plates prepared in-house using various lots of media performed
inconsistently  and  were  inferior  to  those  obtained  commercially  (CDC  unpublished
data). Performance of commercially prepared plates varies by individual manufacturer.
There  are  several  antimicrobial  agents  that  usually  retain  activity  against  VISA  and
VRSA isolates (e.g., daptomycin, linezolid and ceftaroline). Laboratories should perform
AST for these agents and any others considered for clinical treatment. The laboratory of
the  Division  of  Healthcare  Quality  Promotion  at  CDC  can  perform  this  testing.   It  is
essential to send probable isolates of VRSA to health departments and CDC as quickly
as possible, even if the laboratory has the capability to test additional agents in-house;
to facilitate organism confirmation and enhance infection control efforts. Laboratorians
should send isolates to CDC by their local or state health department. Keep repeated
subcultures  to  a  minimum  before  storage  and  shipping.  See  CDC  Test  Directory  for
specific  shipping  guidance.  •Vancomycin-intermediate  S.  aureus:  MIC  =  4-8
μg/mL•Vancomycin-resistant  S.  aureus:  MIC  =  ≥16  μg/mL1    The  vast  majority  of
suspected  VRSA  are  due  to  a  mixed  culture  of  VRE  and  MRSA.  Verify  any
vancomycin-intermediate  or  vancomycin-resistant  result  for  S.  aureus  by  restreaking
the isolate for purity and repeating a validated MIC method and organism identification.
Send any S. aureus for which the vancomycin MIC is >=8 µg/ml to a referral laboratory.
When  laboratorians  suspect  VISA/VRSA,  it's  critical  they  promptly:   VISA  and  VRSA
should be reported to CDC through the National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System
(NNDSS). Suspected VRSA (i.e., isolates that have been confirmed to be pure and are
vancomycin-resistant on repeat AST) should be promptly reported to state/local health
authorities and subsequently to CDC for public health investigation.  CLSI is a global,
interdisciplinary,  nonprofit,  standards-developing  and  educational  organization  that
promotes  the  development  and  use  of  voluntary  consensus  standards  and  guidelines
within  the  healthcare  community.   Definition  of  term:  glycopeptide   The  term
glycopeptide  refers  to  a  group  of  antimicrobial  agents  that  includes  vancomycin  and
teicoplanin. Since the first two VISA isolates in the United States were also resistant to
teicoplanin, the term glycopeptide-intermediate S. aureus (GISA) indicates this broader
resistance profile. While GISA may be a more specific term for strains intermediate to
both vancomycin and teicoplanin, not all VISA strains are intermediate to teicoplanin;
therefore,  VISA  is  a  more  accurate  and  widely  used  term.  Staphylococcus  aureus
(staph) is a germ found on people’s skin. Most of the time, staph does not cause any
harm  but  sometimes  staph  causes  infections.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/staphylococcus-aureus/php/laboratories/index.html
