A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 When an isolate carries an altered penicillin-binding protein (PBP2a) encoded by the
mecA gene, the protein binds beta-lactams with lower avidity, resulting in resistance to
this class of antimicrobial agents. Mechanisms other than mecA are rare.  All cells in a
culture  may  carry  the  genetic  information  (mecA)  for  resistance,  but  only  a  small
number  may  express  the  resistance  in  vitro  (i.e.,  heteroresistance).  Heteroresistance
occurs  in  staphylococci  resistant  to  penicillinase-stable  penicillins,  such  as  oxacillin.
Methicillin (oxacillin)-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a type of bacteria that
is  resistant  to  most  beta-lactam  agents,  including  cephalosporins  and  carbapenems,
with
 the
 exception
 of
 ceftaroline,
 a
 fifth-generation
 cephalosporin.
 
Healthcare-associated MRSA isolates are frequently resistant to other commonly used
antimicrobial
 agents,
 including
 erythromycin,
 clindamycin,
 tetracycline
 and
fluoroquinolones. Community-associated MRSA are typically more susceptible to these
agents.   Since  1996,  MRSA  strains  with  decreased  susceptibility  to  vancomycin
(minimum  inhibitory  concentration  [MIC],  4-8  μg/ml)  and  strains  fully  resistant  to
vancomycin (MIC ≥ 16 μg/ml) have been reported, although these isolates remain rare. 
Although laboratorians used methicillin as the agent of choice for testing staphylococci
in  the  early  1990s,  it  is  no  longer  commercially  available  in  the  U.S.  We  now  use
oxacillin  or  cefoxtin.  Oxacillin  maintains  its  activity  during  storage  better  than
methicillin  and  is  more  likely  to  detect  heteroresistant  strains.  Cefoxitin  is  a  better
inducer of the mecA gene, gives clearer endpoints and is easier to read than tests with
oxacillin. However, we still use the acronym MRSA to describe these isolates because of
the historic role of methicillin. For methods of inoculation and interpretive criteria, see
most recent version of CLSI M100. Phenotypic methods recommended for the detection
of MRSA include: A screening agar containing 6 μg/ml of oxacillin in Mueller-Hinton agar
supplemented  with  NaCl  (4%  w/v;  0.68  mol/L)  is  an  alternative  method  of  testing  for
MRSA. It should be noted that oxacillin disk diffusion testing is not a reliable method for
S. aureus. Accurate detection of oxacillin/methicillin resistance can be difficult due to
the  presence  of  two  subpopulations  (one  susceptible  and  one  resistant)  that  may
coexist within a culture of staphylococci.2 CLSI M100 recommends incubation at 35°C
+/-  2°C  with  the  caveat  that  testing  at  temperatures  above  35°C  may  not  detect  all
methicillin-resistant  staphylococci.   Isolates  that  test  positive  for  mecA  or  PBP2a  or
resistant  by  any  of  the  recommended  phenotypic  methods  should  be  reported  as
methicillin  (oxacillin)  resistant.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  CLSI  susceptibility
breakpoints for S. aureus are different than those for other Staphylococcus species.1 2
Bannerman,  TL.  2003.  Staphylococcus,  Micrococcus  and  other  catalase-positive  cocci
that grow aerobically. In P.R. Murray, E.J. Baron, J.H. Jorgensen, M.A. Pfaller, R.H. Yolken
[eds.], Manual of Clinical Microbiology 8th ed. ASM Press, Washington, D.C. N/A = not
applicable*
 Report
 as
 oxacillin/methicillin-susceptible
 **
 Report
 as
oxacillin/methicillin-resistant †There is no intermediate category with the disk diffusion
test  MRSA  is  a  germ  that  is  resistant  to  some  antibiotics.  It  can  spread  in  hospitals,
other  healthcare  facilities,  and  in  the  community.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/php/laboratories/index.html
