A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. The Secretary of the Department of Health
and  Human  Services  has  statutory  responsibility  for  preventing  the  introduction,
transmission,  and  spread  of  communicable  diseases  from  foreign  countries  into  the
United  States  and  between  U.S.  states  and  territories.  Under  its  delegated  authority,
the  Division  of  Global  Migration  Health  works  to  fulfill  this  responsibility  through  a
variety of activities. DGMH activities that fulfill this responsibility and that are found in
Titles  8  and  42  of  the  U.S.  Code  and  relevant  supporting  regulations  include:  The
federal  government  derives  its  authority  for  isolation  and  quarantine  from  the
Commerce  Clause  of  the  U.S.  Constitution.  Read  more  on  the  Legal  Authorities  for
Isolation  and  Quarantine  page.  For  regulations  related  to  importation  of  human
remains, animals, and animal products, please see the Laws and Regulations page on
the  Importation  site.  The  United  States  Code  is  a  consolidation  and  codification  by
subject  matter  of  the  general  and  permanent  laws  of  the  United  States.  Sections
264-272  of  the  following  portion  of  the  code  apply:  Title  42  –  The  Public  Health  and
Welfare, Chapter 6A – Public Health Service, Subchapter II – General Powers and Duties,
Part  G  –  Quarantine  and  Inspection.  Links  are  provided  by  the  Government  Printing
Office. The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) is the official and complete text of the
general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register. These regulations are
established  by  the  executive  departments  and  agencies  of  the  Federal  Government.
The  CFR  are  divided  into  various  titles  that  represent  broad  subject  areas  of  Federal
regulation. CDC's regulations fall under Title 42: Public Health, Chapter 1 – Public Health
Service,  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  Links  are  from  the  Office  of  the
Federal  Register,  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration  on  the  United  States
Government  Printing  Office  web  site.  Specifically,  Parts  70  and  71  of  the  following
portion  of  the  CFR  apply:  Interim  Final  Rule  for  Control  of  Communicable  Diseases:
Foreign  Quarantine  On  February  6,  2020,  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services (HHS) and CDC issued an Interim Final Rule to amend its Foreign Quarantine
regulations,  to  enable  CDC  to  require  airlines  to  collect,  and  provide  to  CDC,  certain
data regarding passengers and crew arriving from foreign countries, for the purposes of
health  education,  treatment,  prophylaxis,  or  other  appropriate  public  health
interventions,  including  travel  restrictions.  This  Interim  Final  Rule  was  effective  on
February 7, 2020, and written comments were invited for submission before March 13,
2020. The interim final rule is published on the Office of the Federal Register's website.
Final Rule for Control of Communicable Diseases: Interstate and Foreign On January 19,
2017,  HHS  and  CDC  published  the  Final  Rule  titled  Final  Rule  for  Control  of
Communicable  Diseases:  Interstate  and  Foreign.  This  Final  Rule  enhances  HHS/CDC's
ability to prevent the introduction, transmission, and spread of communicable diseases
into the United States and interstate by clarifying and providing greater transparency
regarding  its  response  capabilities  and  practices.  The  Final  Rule  is  published  on  the
Office of the Federal Register's website. This regulation became effective on March 21,
2017.  Federal  Register  Notice:  Criteria  for  Recommending  Federal  Travel  Restrictions
for Public Health Purposes, Including for Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers On March 27, 2015,
HHS  and  CDC  published  a  notice  in  the  Federal  Register  titled  Criteria  for
Recommending  Federal  Travel  Restrictions  for  Public  Health  Purposes,  Including  for
Viral  Hemorrhagic  Fevers.  This  Notice  was  posted  to  describe  the  tools  the  federal
government  has  to  ensure  that  people  with  serious  contagious  diseases  that  pose  a
public health threat do not board commercial flights into, within, or out of the United
States, or enter into the United States without a public health evaluation. It also lists
the  criteria  that  CDC  uses  in  deciding  whether  to  recommend  using  these  tools.  
Executive Orders specify the list of diseases for which federal quarantine is authorized,
which  is  required  by  the  Public  Health  Service  Act.  On  recommendation  of  the  HHS
Secretary,  the  President  may  amend  this  list  whenever  necessary  to  add  new
communicable diseases, including emerging diseases that are a threat to public health.
The most recent Executive Order, issued September 21, 2021, added measles to the list
of quarantinable communicable diseases. CDC works with partners to protect the health
of  people  exposed  to  a  contagious  disease  during  travel  and  their  communities  from
contagious  diseases  that  are  just  a  flight  away.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/port-health/legal-authorities/index.html
