A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention (CDC), Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and state and local partners are
investigating a link between blood lead levels (BLLs) ≥3.5 µg/dL in children consuming
certain cinnamon-containing apple purée and applesauce products. FDA product testing
has also identified high levels of chromium, in addition to lead, in cinnamon samples
and
 recalled
 applesauce
 pouch
 products.
 (See
https://www.fda.gov/food/outbreaks-foodborne-illness/investigation-elevated-lead-levels
-cinnamon-applesauce-pouches-november-2023  for  a  list  of  affected  products.)
Potential  health  effects  Consumers  should  be  aware  of  these  elevated  levels  of
chromium  and  lead  found  in  the  cinnamon  applesauce  pouches  and  the  potential  for
adverse  health  effects.  Chromium  is  a  naturally  occurring  element  with  trace  levels
normally found in the diet. The most common forms of chromium found in chromium
compounds  are  trivalent  chromium  [chromium  (III)]  and  hexavalent  chromium
[chromium (VI)]. Chromium (III) is considered an essential nutrient and can be found in
a  normal  diet  and  in  some  dietary  supplements.  Chronic,  prolonged  exposure  to
chromium (VI) in occupational settings through inhalation and skin exposure has also
been  associated  with  chronic  lung  disease  and  ulceration  of  skin  and  mucous
membranes. Chromium (VI) is a known carcinogen. The exact form of chromium in the
recalled applesauce products is unclear. However, lead chromate has previously been
reported  as  a  contaminant  in  spices  and  foods.  There  is  limited  information  about
health effects from consuming food contaminated with chromium compounds such as
lead  chromate.  The  main  health  problems  seen  in  laboratory  animals  following
ingestion  of  chromium  (VI)  compounds  are  irritation  and  ulcers  (in  the  stomach  and
small intestine) and anemia. However, the health effects of eating food contaminated
with chromium (VI), in the form of lead chromate, are not well understood. Chromium
(VI) compounds may be converted to chromium (III) in acidic environments. It is difficult
to predict the amount of chromium (VI) and chromium (III) absorbed from ingestion of
contaminated food. While the health effects of chromium are difficult to predict in this
scenario, we know that there is no safe level of lead. CDC recommends discarding all
affected  products  and  not  eating  any  of  them.  Anyone  who  may  have  eaten  the
affected products should talk with their healthcare provider. What can I do? Do not eat
cinnamon-containing  apple  purée  or  applesauce  products  included  in  the  FDA  recall
announcements.  Anyone  who  may  have  eaten  the  affected  products  should  talk  with
their healthcare provider. Medical treatment for chromium exposure focuses on treating
symptoms.  There  is  no  specific  antidote  to  treat  chromium  exposure  and  there  is  no
evidence to support the use of chelation therapy. Additionally, if you suspect that you
or your child may have been exposed to lead, talk with your healthcare provider about
getting a blood lead test. Healthcare providers and most local health departments can
test for lead in the blood. Many private insurance policies cover the cost of testing for
lead  in  the  blood.  The  cost  of  blood  lead  testing  for  children  enrolled  in  Medicaid  is
covered by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. More information Information
about  FDA's  investigation,  with  current  updates,  can  be  found  on  the  FDA  website,
Investigation of Elevated Lead Levels: Cinnamon Applesauce Pouches (November 2023)
|  FDA.  For  more  information  on  chromium,  ToxFAQsTM  for  Chromium  Information  for
Clinicians can be found on the COCA Now webpage, Update on High Blood Lead Levels
in Children Consuming Recalled Cinnamon Applesauce Pouches and Potential Chromium
Exposure  Data  updated  on  March  22,  2024.  CDC  has  received  the  following  reports
from state and local health departments: Cases are reported to the CDC through state
health departments. State health departments receive reports of potential cases from
various sources, and then follow up to determine whether the case definition is met. In
order  to  be  considered  in  CDC's  case  count,  the  person  must  have  had  a  blood  lead
level  of  3.5  ug/dL  or  higher  measured  within  3  months  after  consuming  a  recalled
WanaBana, Schnucks, or Weis brand fruit purée product after November 2022. Based
on  the  amount  of  information  available,  CDC  asks  states  to  further  classify  cases  as
"suspect", "probable", and "confirmed". As the investigation progresses, cases might be
assigned to different case categories. CDC asks states to classify cases as "suspect,"
"probable,"  or  "confirmed"  based  on  several  factors.  CDC  accepts  the  state's
classification. CDC defines a person with a "suspect" case as anyone with a blood lead
level of 3.5 μg/dL or higher detected through capillary or unspecified testing (not yet
confirmed through venous blood testing) within three months of consuming a recalled
product.  Capillary  and  venous  testing  are  both  commonly  used  to  test  blood  for  lead
levels.  However,  capillary  testing  might  give  a  falsely  high  result.  Venous  testing  is
more accurate. CDC defines a person with a "probable" case as anyone with a blood
lead level of 3.5 μg/dL or higher detected through venous testing within three months
of consuming a recalled product. People with a "probable" case: CDC defines a person
with a "confirmed case" as anyone with a blood lead level of 3.5 μg/dL or higher: Please
note  that  as  the  investigation  progresses,  cases  might  move  to  different  case
categories.  For  example,  a  state  may  initially  classify  a  case  as  "suspect,"  but  later
determine  that  the  case  meets  the  criteria  for  being  a  "confirmed"  case.  In  addition,
these simplified definitions might not capture all the nuances of the case definition. We
ask that states use our official case definition when classifying cases submitted to CDC.
For  more  information,  see  CDC's  Lead  and  Chromium  Poisoning  Outbreak  Linked  to
Cinnamon Applesauce Pouches – Case Definition. Please note that CDC and FDA have
different  data  sources,  so  the  counts  reported  by  each  agency  might  not  match.  In
addition,  some  people  who  were  affected  by  the  contaminated  product  might  be
counted  in  numbers  reported  by  both  FDA  and  CDC,  so  the  numbers  should  not  be
added  together.  FDA  relies  on  self-reported  information  submitted  by  healthcare
providers, consumers, and some state partners who submitted an adverse event report
to FDA. The reports were submitted as an initial step in determining if a product is a
potential  shared  source  of  exposure  amongst  complainants.  Children  with  lead
exposure  may  have  no  apparent  acute  symptoms.  However,  even  low  levels  of  lead
have  been  associated  with  learning  and  behavior  problems,  hearing  and  speech
problems,  and  slowed  growth  and  development.  This  can  show  up  as  lower  IQ,
decreased ability to pay attention, and underperformance in school. Children who are
exposed  to  large  amounts  of  lead  may  develop  symptoms  of  acute  lead  poisoning,
including If parents suspect that a child may have been exposed to lead, they should
talk  to  their  child's  healthcare  provider  about  getting  a  blood  lead  test.  Healthcare
providers  and  most  local  health  departments  can  test  for  lead  in  the  blood.  Many
private  insurance  policies  cover  the  cost  of  testing  for  lead  in  the  blood.  The  cost  of
blood  lead  testing  for  children  enrolled  in  Medicaid  is  covered  by  the  Centers  for
Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services.  The  health  effects  of  exposure  are  more  harmful  to
children less than six years of age because their bodies are still developing and growing
rapidly.  Young  children  also  tend  to  put  their  hands  or  other  objects,  which  may  be
contaminated with lead dust, into their mouths, so they are more likely to be exposed
to  lead  than  older  children.  CDC’s  Childhood  Lead  Poisoning  Prevention  Program
(CLPPP) is dedicated to reducing childhood lead poisoning as a public health problem.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/lead-prevention/news/outbreak-applesauce-pouches.html
