Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. In June 1990, the Dallas (Texas)
County Health Department
received a physician's report of an elevated blood lead level (BLL)
(52 ug/dL) for an employee of a company that formulates color
concentrates for the plastics industry. The physician had been
evaluating the employee for severe headaches of uncertain etiology;
however, he requested a BLL analysis when the employee's
occupational history suggested possible lead exposure.  The physician also reported the
exposure to the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and contacted the medical
toxicologist at the North Texas Poison Control Center to obtain
treatment and management recommendations. Because the company
lacked an ongoing medical-monitoring program for employees, as
mandated by OSHA, * the physician consulted with the company
officials, then performed blood-lead analyses for 22 additional
employees. For seven of these employees, BLLs exceeded 40 ug/dL
(range: 43-107 ug/dL; mean: 62 ug/dL). Two employees, with BLLs of
78 ug/dL and 107 ug/dL, were hospitalized for chelation therapy
(the first with calcium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and
penicillamine; the second with EDTA, penicillamine, and
dimercaprol). Two others (with BLLs of 60 ug/dL and 59 ug/dL)
received chelation therapy with penicillamine as outpatients.  During August 1990, to
determine the sources of exposure to
lead and other chemicals, the Environmental Epidemiology Program,
Epidemiology Division, Texas Department of Health (TDH), conducted
an industrial hygiene inspection of the facility. In the plant,
powdered metal-based pigments are mixed in a formulation laboratory
and blended with plastic pellets in 500- to 2000-gallon mixers
located in the production area. The pigment-pellet mixes are then
heated and extruded, forming colored pellets; these completed
pellets are sold and then used to produce colored plastic products.
  The TDH determined that ventilation and other engineering
measures in the plant inadequately controlled dusts generated by
the process. Employees were equipped with half-mask, air-purifying
respirators fitted with organic vapor cartridges and particulate
filters; however, in several environmental samples, airborne lead
exposures exceeded the protective capacity of the respirators.
Based on environmental monitoring, the highest exposures occurred
during the following operations: hand weighing the pigments,
blending, emptying the blenders into open bins, cleaning the
blenders with compressed air, and manually agitating the mixes when
blenders
 and
 extruders
 clogged.
 
 Personal-breathing-zone
 exposure
 samples
documented that
employees had substantial airborne exposure to lead, chromium (as
lead chromate), and cadmium--components of the various pigments
used in the process. Exposure to airborne lead in the extruding
area was 648 ug/m3 (as a 10-hour, time-weighted average) and 226
ug/m3 in the blending area. ** Chromium exposure (as chromates) in
the extruding area was 132 ug/m3, above the OSHA permissible
exposure limit (PEL) of 100 ug/m3 (as a ceiling concentration) ***.
The highest airborne cadmium exposure was 48 ug/m3 (the current PEL
is 200 ug/m3 ****). In addition, contamination with lead and
chromium was detected in wipe samples obtained from a desk next to
the pigment table, the top of the coffee maker in the formulation
laboratory, and different sites in the lunchroom. The highest lead
(0.24 ug/cm2) and chromium (0.04 ug/cm2) levels were detected on
the  handle,  door,  and  controls  of  the  lunchroom  microwave  oven.   The  TDH  made
specific recommendations to correct the observed
violations of OSHA standards, including substantial improvements in
work practices, implementation of a respirator program, and medical
treatment of the affected workers. As of April 1991, the mean BLL
for the eight workers with elevated BLLs had decreased to 36 ug/dL
(range: 23-46 ug/dL). Nonetheless, repeat environmental monitoring
indicated that airborne lead exposures remained high in many areas
of  the  facility  and  required  further  efforts  to  reduce  exposures.   The  TDH  is
investigating to determine whether the exposures in
this plant are characteristic of this industry elsewhere in Texas.  Reported by: C Kelly,
Dallas County Health Dept; J Pichette, MS, L
Schulze, DM Perrotta, PhD, JP Henry, MS, Epidemiology Div, Texas
Dept of Health. Div of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations, and Field
Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,
CDC.  Editorial Note: Although the U.S. Consumer Products Safety
Commission banned lead in residential paints in 1977, *****
pigments containing lead continue to be used in many industrial and
commercial applications and pose a substantial risk to workers and
their families. During 1983, 24 industries used lead chromate
(National Occupational Exposure Survey of CDC's National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), unpublished data,
1991); during May 1991, 30,600 U.S. workers in these industries
potentially were exposed to lead chromate -- 12,500 of whom worked
in the miscellaneous plastics products industry (Table 1).  This investigation documents
the first identified cases of
elevated BLLs among workers in the plastics industry in Texas. In
addition to the risk for lead exposure for workers involved in this
process, the subsequent use of the pigment-infused pellets by
manufacturers of colored plastic products presents a potential for
lead exposure through the heating, remolding, and cutting of
processed plastic parts. During 1988, states that conducted
surveillance of elevated BLLs received 17 reports of elevated BLLs
in the plastics materials and resins industry (Standard Industrial
Code (SIC) 282 (2)) and 11 reports in the miscellaneous plastics
products  industry  (SIC  307)  (NIOSH,  unpublished  data,  1988).   In  Texas,  state  law
requires physicians and laboratories to
report elevated BLLs (i.e., BLLs of greater than or equal to 40
ug/dL for adults); from May 27, 1985, through December 31, 1990,
the TDH received 5952 such reports for 1054 adults. In cooperation
with NIOSH, the TDH participates in the Sentinel Event Notification
System for Occupational Risks (SENSOR) (3) -- a state-based system
for surveillance of occupational illness and injury; surveillance
for elevated BLLs is conducted in conjunction with SENSOR. The
identification and follow-up investigation of cases of elevated
BLLs in the plastics pigmenting industry reported here demonstrates
the utility of lead surveillance systems for identifying new or
unrecognized sources of occupational exposures.  References  
    Office of the Federal Register. Code of federal regulations:
    occupational safety and health standards. Subpart Z: Toxic and
    hazardous substances--lead. Washington, DC: Office of the Federal
    Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 1985. (29
    CFR section 1910.1025).  
    Office of Management and Budget. Standard industrial
    classification manual. New York: Prentice Hall Information
    Services, 1987.  
    Baker EL. Sentinel Event Notification System for Occupational
    Risks (SENSOR): the concept. Am J Pub Health 1989;79(suppl):18-20.  
        The OSHA lead standard requires that employers monitor for
        airborne lead exposures in workplaces where lead is used; when
        airborne lead levels exceed 30 ug/m3 (as an 8-hour, time-weighted
        average (TWA)), employers must provide an industrial hygiene
        program and a medical-monitoring program that includes monitoring
        of BLLs (1).
        ** The OSHA permissible exposure limit (PEL) for lead is 50 ug/m3,
        as an 8-hour TWA. If an employee is exposed to lead for more than
        8 hours in a work day, the PEL is adjusted according to this
        formula: maximum permissible limit=400 ug/m3 divided by hours
        worked in a day. Because employees at this facility worked 10-hour
        shifts, the applicable PEL was  40 ug/m3 (1).
        *** CDC's National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
        (NIOSH) recommended exposure limit for chromates is 1 ug/m3. NIOSH
        considers chromates as potential occupational carcinogens.
        **** NIOSH considers cadmium to be a potential occupational
        carcinogen and recommends that exposure be reduced to the lowest
        feasible level.
        ***** 16 Code of Federal Regulations, part 1303. Ban of
        lead-containing paint and certain consumer products bearing
        lead-containing paint.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00016632.htm
