Volume 11 — August 21, 2014 Suggested citation for this article: Lessard L, Poland M,
Trotter M. Lessons Learned From a Healthful Vending Pilot Program in Delaware State
Agency Buildings, 2011–2012. Prev Chronic Dis 2014;11:140188. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd11.140188. PEER REVIEWED Introduction
Changes in food availability in worksites can result in changes in eating behavior and
weight status. Nemours Health and Prevention Services, in conjunction with partners in
Delaware,  conducted  a  6-month  pilot  program  to  assess  the  feasibility  and  impact  of
requiring that 75% of the items in vending machines in 3 state agency buildings have
healthful items. Methods
We collected process evaluation data from October 2011 through April 2012 by taking
weekly photographs of all machines to record the number of healthful items available.
Outcomes  were  measured  through  sales  reports  designed  to  enumerate  changes  in
number and type of items sold and overall profit from each building. Results
We found challenges in fully implementing the 75% goal. In one of the 3 buildings, all
machines were compliant within 7 weeks; in another, full compliance did not occur until
week  19.  Despite  these  challenges,  the  number  of  items  sold  in  each  machine  was
comparable to numbers from the previous year. Total profits from each building varied
across the 3 sites and during the pilot. One building had a 51% increase in profits in
January  2012  compared  with  profits  averaged  for  January  2011  and  January  2010.  In
contrast, monthly profit at another building fluctuated from an increase of 6% to a loss
of 30%. Conclusion
Overall,  our  results  suggest  that  collaborative  efforts  can  result  in  a  feasible
intervention  with  little  negative  influence  on  profits.  Top  of  Page  In  Delaware  and
throughout  the  United  States,  rates  of  overweight  and  obesity  are  high  and  are
continuing to rise. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 63.4%
of Delaware’s adult population in 2010 was overweight (body mass index [BMI] ≥25.0)
and  28.0%  was  obese  (BMI  ≥30.0)  (1).  Overweight  and  obesity  are  significant  risk
factors
 for
 numerous
 life-threatening
 chronic
 conditions,
 including
 diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, and several types of cancer (2). Poor nutrition (ie, consuming
excessive  amounts  of  foods  and  beverages  high  in  calories,  sugar,  and  fat)  and
insufficient  amounts  of  physical  activity  contribute  to  overweight  and  obesity  (3).
Worksite-based  interventions  designed  to  improve  employee  health  are  a  possible
method  to  address  obesity  (4,5).  People  consume  a  significant  amount  of  their  daily
total calories while at work; one study suggested that adults consume 20% of calories
from  sugar-sweetened  beverages  at  work  (6).  The  nutritional  quality  of  foods  and
beverages sold in vending machines historically has been poor. Items commonly sold in
conventional vending machines are generally high in calories, sugar, and saturated fat,
thus contributing to poor eating habits among many adults (7,8). Recognizing vending
machines  as  an  important  venue  for  promoting  nutritional  choices  that  are  more
healthful than those typically offered, Nemours Health and Prevention Services (NHPS),
the health promotion and disease prevention arm of Nemours pediatric health system,
partnered  with  the  Delaware  Division  of  Public  Health  and  the  state  licensing  agency
responsible  for  the  oversight  and  implementation  of  the  Delaware  Division  of  the
Visually  Impaired  Business  Enterprise  Program.  This  partnership  developed  and
implemented a 6-month healthful food and beverage vending program at 3 pilot sites in
Delaware.   The  goal  of  the  pilot  program  was  to  increase  the  availability  of  healthful
vended items, maximize consumer choice for these items, and educate consumers on
nutrition. The objective of this evaluation was to answer the following questions:  Top of
Page The 3 pilot sites were chosen to represent the diversity of Delaware: one building
in a northern urban location, one building in a central location on the legislative mall in
the  state’s  capitol  city,  and  one  building  in  a  southern  rural  location.  The  northern
building housed one food machine and 4 beverage machines, all of which were included
in the program; the central building had one food and 2 beverage machines, but one of
the beverage machines was not included in the program; and the southern building had
2  food  and  2  beverage  machines,  but  only  the  food  machines  were  included.  The
Division  of  Public  Health  and  the  Business  Enterprise  Program  are  part  of  Delaware’s
Department of Health and Social Services, and the pilot sites are Department of Health
and  Social  Services  office  buildings.  The  pilot  program  began  with  an  assessment  of
employee  interest  and  preferences  for  food  and  beverage  items.  After  surveying
employees at the 3 sites and conducting on-site taste tests of potential new items, the
selection of foods and beverages was adjusted in favor of more healthful alternatives.
The pilot program ran for 28 weeks, from October 26, 2011 through April 24, 2012. The
program  required  that  at  least  75%  of  the  items  in  all  vending  machines  at  the  pilot
sites meet NHPS’ “Go” or “Slow” food guidelines and that no more than 25% would be
“Whoa” items. The 75% goal was set by the director of the Division of Public Health,
and  contracts  were  put  into  place  between  parties  that  reflected  this  goal  and  the
overall  goals  of  the  project.  The  Go,  Slow,  and  Whoa  nutrition  guidelines  (9)  were
developed by NHPS in 2010 on the basis of current science (eg, Dietary Guidelines for
Americans, recommendations by the Institute of Medicine for schools). Go or Slow items
must contain no more than 200 total calories, 35% of calories from fat, 10% of calories
from  saturated  fat,  and  200  mg  of  sodium.  Nuts  and  seeds  are  exempt  from  these
requirements because of their fiber, vitamin E, and superior fat content; however, these
items must meet the criteria for sodium and calories. Additionally, Go and Slow foods
must contain no trans fats, and candy is not allowed. All foods that do not meet these
criteria  are  classified  as  Whoa  foods.  Go  beverages  consist  of  water  without  added
flavoring or additives; Slow beverages consist of 100% fruit juices or contain no more
than  10  total  calories  per  8-oz  serving  (eg,  diet  sodas  and  teas,  flavored  water).
Selection of more healthful items was also based on a subset of the Canteen Vending
Services’ Balanced Choice Options that meet NHPS guidelines (10). New items included
baked chips, 100-calorie packs of popular cookies and crackers, trail mix, energy bars,
diet soda and diet tea, and flavored water. Similar options were offered at each site,
although some adjustments were made in response to preferences expressed via taste
tests or surveys. To encourage employees to purchase the more healthful items, these
items were marked with a special symbol and promoted with signage on or around the
machines. Additional marketing of the pilot program and the new items and nutrition
information was shared in a series of 5 e-mail messages to staff at each site and in a
newsletter for all state employees. Because of concerns over revenue loss, a monetary
safeguard  agreement  was  established  between  the  Business  Enterprise  Program  and
the Division of Public Health. The Division of Public Health agreed to reimburse vendors
for  any  monthly  losses  incurred  during  the  pilot  program;  a  loss  was  defined  as  an
amount  less  than  the  average  gross  revenue  for  the  same  month  in  the  previous  2
years.  One  key  assumption  of  the  evaluation  was  that  2  markets  of  employees  were
potentially affected by this program: those who had been purchasing the less healthful
items from the vending machines and those who had not been purchasing any items
from  the  machines.  The  program  was  designed  to  change  the  buying  behavior  (via
changes  in  access  to  more  healthful  items)  of  the  former  market  and  encourage  the
latter  market  to  use  the  machines.   The  evaluation  used  existing  data  (eg,  monthly
sales reports) wherever possible to reduce burden on participants. Additional data were
collected  via  photographic  documentation  of  the  vending  machines.  These  data  were
supplemented  with  online  surveys  and  interviews  of  stakeholders,  including  but  not
limited to drivers, operators, and employees at the pilot sites; this evaluation does not
include  the  findings  of  the  interviews  or  the  surveys.  To  objectively  document  the
contents  of  the  vending  machines  during  the  study  period,  each  machine  was
photographed weekly by a trained building employee. The photographs were then sent
to NHPS and converted into planograms, diagrams that provide details on placement of
products  in  retail  environments.  The  planograms  were  used  to  determine  whether
machines complied with the 75% goal, assess the number and type of sold-out items,
and confirm pricing. If an item was out of stock or the machine did not meet the 75%
goal,  the  study  team  contacted  the  Business  Enterprise  Program  to  remedy  the
problem. Data were recorded in a spreadsheet and tracked during the 28-week study
period.  Monthly  sales  reports  included  information  about  each  item  sold  in  each
machine and the amount of revenue generated. We also had access to data on items
sold  during  the  same  28-week  period  in  the  previous  year  and  access  to  data  on
monthly profits made by each building during the study period and during the previous
2  years.  We  calculated  the  proportion  of  Go  and  Slow  items  in  each  machine  to
determine compliance on a weekly basis at each site. We also analyzed the number and
proportion of Go, Slow, and Whoa items in each machine according to the following 5 
periods: period 3, November 23 through December 27; period 4, December 28 through
January 24; period 5, January 25 through February 21; period 6, February 22 through
March 27; and Period 7, March 28 through April 24. We compared the total number of
items sold in each period with the number of items sold during the same period in the
previous year. Although the beverage machines in the southern location were exempt
from the contract with the Business Enterprise Program, the vendors were permitted to
stock the machines with the more healthful options, and we included these machines in
our analysis. We calculated the monthly profit at each site for 6 months beginning with
November 2011. We compared these monthly profits with the profits made in the same
months  in  the  2  years  before  the  pilot;  for  example,  November  2011  was  compared
with November 2010 and November 2009. Because of the limited availability of data,
we  could  not  compare  the  profits  of  the  pilot  sites  with  the  profits  of  sites  not
participating  in  the  pilot  program;  these  data  could  have  explained  any  changes  in
sales  that  were  not  caused  by  the  pilot  (eg,  normal  fluctuations  in  sales  of  vending
items, the economy).  Top of Page In several buildings, we faced challenges in bringing
the machines into compliance with the 75% goal and in continuing to achieve this goal
throughout  the  pilot.  At  the  beginning  of  the  pilot  program  at  the  northern  site,  only
28% of the food items and 49% of the beverage items were Go or Slow items. By the
third week, 75% of the items in the food machine were more healthful items, but the
beverage machines were not fully compliant until after week 13 (Figure 1). 
 Figure  1.  Percentage  of  Go  and  Slow  foods  and  beverages  available  in  vending
machines  by  week,  northern  pilot  program  site,  Delaware  state  agency  buildings,
2011–2012.  The  values  for  beverages  are  averages  for  the  4  beverage  machines.
Breaks in data indicate weeks for which data were unavailable. [A 
tabular version of this figure is also available.] At the central location, at the beginning
of the pilot program, only 25% of the food items and 12% of the beverage items were
Go or Slow items. By the third week, 75% of the items in the food machine were more
healthful items, but the beverage machine was not fully compliant until week 19.  At
the  beginning  of  the  pilot  program,  only  11%  of  the  food  items  and  50%  of  the
beverage  items  were  Go  or  Slow  items  (Figure  2)  at  the  southern  site.  By  the  third
week, 75% of items in the food machines were more healthful items, but the beverage
machines were not fully compliant until after week 6. 
 Figure  2.  Percentage  of  Go  and  Slow  foods  and  beverages  available  in  vending
machines  by  week,  southern  pilot  program  site,  Delaware  state  agency  buildings,
2011–2012. The values for beverages are averages for all vending machines. Breaks in
data indicate weeks for which data were unavailable. [A 
tabular  version  of  this  figure  is  also  available.]  In  general,  we  found  increases  in  the
total number of items purchased during the pilot program compared with the previous
year.  For  example,  at  the  northern  site,  the  number  of  items  purchased  in  periods  5
through 7 (n = 434) (Table 1) was higher than the number of items purchased during
the same periods in the previous year (n = 305). We found a 16% increase in purchases
from 2011 to 2012 for period 5, a 68% increase for period 6, and a 43% increase for
period 7. At the northern site, although the number of items purchased varied during
the  pilot  program,  the  proportion  of  purchases  of  Slow  foods  increased  from  56%  in
period 3 to 72% in period 7 (Table 1). At the central and southern sites, purchases were
fairly evenly split between Slow foods and Whoa foods. In one machine in the southern
location, the best-seller (according to number of items purchased) for 3 of the 5 periods
was  a  Slow  food.  At  the  northern  site,  the  proportion  of  purchases  of  Go  and  Slow
beverages  increased  during  the  pilot  period  (Table  1).  At  the  central  site,  we  found
initial  increases  in  the  proportion  of  more  healthful  beverages  purchased,  but  by  the
end of the pilot program, that proportion decreased to 52% (from 63% during the first
month).  Among  the  3  sites,  gains  (compared  with  the  guarantees)  in  monthly  profits
ranged from 4% ($27.68) at the southern site in March 2012 to 51% ($356.58) at the
same  site  in  January  2012.  Losses  ranged  from  −4%  (−$16.74)  at  the  central  site  in
December  2011  to  −36%  (−$170.99)  at  the  same  site  in  January  2012  (Table  2).
Overall, profits at the southern site were greater than the guarantees for 5 of 6 months
of  the  pilot.  Top  of  Page  Our  experience  of  piloting  healthful  vending  in  Delaware
resulted  in  numerous  successes,  lessons  learned,  and  areas  of  opportunity.  The
program was conducted as a collaboration of public health interests (the Department of
Health  and  Social  Services  and  NHPS)  and  entrepreneurial  business  interests  (the
vending machine operators). To effectively execute the pilot program, it was critical to
understand that each stakeholder was uniquely motivated. Likewise, each stakeholder
group needed to have their concerns heard, validated, and woven into the negotiations
on pilot parameters. Addressing these unique motivations and divergent perspectives
was challenging but essential throughout the process — even getting the pilot off the
ground. The Director of Public Health played a key role and provided guidance, vision,
and insight on a weekly basis; was debriefed on process details throughout the pilot;
and was able to maintain relationships with all stakeholders. Additionally, the director
firmly  determined  the  level  of  compliance  to  be  75%.  During  planning  discussions,
revenue concerns were addressed and business cases for success were shared. At the
conclusion  of  negotiations,  vending  operators  held  firm  in  their  request  to  receive  a
subsidy  for  potential  losses.  This  subsidy  requirement  illustrates  the  balance  and
compromise needed for a collaborative initiative to move forward. The processes of the
vending industry, from supply chain to distribution, worked in our favor at the southern
site. These machines easily complied with the 75% goal, and few issues arose during
the pilot program in sustaining the 75% goal. Often, at the other sites, the food supply
company  made  unapproved  product  substitutions,  incorrectly  stocked  the  machines
according to the healthy and pre-approved planogram, or no longer carried a particular
item in the warehouse. Not all parties in distribution channels were aware of, or agreed
to,  pilot  goals.  The  substitution  of  incorrect  products  required  additional  project
management  oversight  and  ultimately  accounted  for  a  majority  of  machine
noncompliance.  We  did  not  find  substantial  reductions  in  the  number  of  units  sold
overall from the previous year; sales reductions were a concern of the vendors during
the planning process. At the southern site, vending machine profits were 51% higher in
January 2012 than profits averaged at that site for January 2011 and January 2010, and
profits  there  were  above  average  levels  for  5  of  6  months  of  the  pilot  program.
However,  under  the  agreement  between  the  Business  Enterprise  Program  and  the
Division  of  Public  Health,  the  vending  operators  were  compensated  a  total  of  $1,383
during  the  pilot  for  overall  revenue  loss  and  product  spoilage  caused  by  the  shorter
shelf life of more healthful items. Additional research is needed to understand customer
preferences. Although general customer preference and taste surveys were conducted
before the pilot program, additional research could determine whether new customers
were enticed to use the vending machines or whether repeat and existing customers
were  purchasing  more  healthful  items  than  before.  Insight  into  customer  preferences
can help in the tailoring of healthful product offerings, thereby theoretically motivating
the customer to use the machine, make healthful food purchases, and increase sales
revenue for the machine’s owner. Our pilot program engaged customers through new,
more healthful product taste testing, online taste preferences surveys, and a series of
e-mails featuring a more healthful product and health facts (eg, “Sugary beverages like
regular soda, sweetened teas, and energy drinks provide little or no nutritional benefit
and lots of empty calories. Replacing one regular soda that contains 10 teaspoons of
sugar a day with water can save you 150 calories or 15 pounds per year!”). To support
and sustain a component of healthy behavior change, contract terms must be in place
to support healthy vending. Although our pilot program successfully operated outside of
the  regular  contract  negotiation  process,  we  recommend  that  healthful  vending
specifications  be  included  in  a  formal  contract  with  a  food  service  provider  so  that
projects can be sustained. Many models exist around the nation, and Nemours Healthy
Vending  and  Concessions  Guidelines  can  also  serve  as  a  tool  in  defining  healthful
specifications for any food service operation (9,11). In 2012, these guidelines were used
to  inform  the  US  General  Services  Administration  for  revision  of  food  and  beverage
standards  for  contracted  cafeteria,  concession,  and  vending  services  on  federal
property (12). Our evaluation has several limitations. We did not have data on vending
machines in buildings that did not participate in the pilot, so it is possible that changes
in  profits  from  the  machines  in  the  pilot  program  could  have  occurred  had  the  pilot
program  not  been  implemented.  Furthermore,  research  suggests  that  comprehensive
workplace  health  promotion  efforts  hold  the  most  promise  for  significant  change  in
healthful eating and physical activity (13); this program included only one component.
If  additional  workplace  efforts  related  to  healthful  eating  had  been  implemented  at
these sites, we may have found different outcomes. In addition, changes were made to
the prices of unhealthful food and beverage items (eg, receiving a larger size candy bar
for  a  reduced  price  and  reducing  the  price  of  sodas)  just  before  the  pilot  program
began;  the  influence  of  those  changes  on  net  profit  is  unknown.  Top  of  Page  The
authors  thank  the  following  collaborators:  Michael  Williams,  Dr  Karyl  Rattay,  Dr  Paul
Silverman, Robert Doyle, Stefanie Van Stan, Paulina Gyan, Tim Gibbs, Donna Sharp, Jill
Fredel,  Jennifer  Wooleyhand,  Jack  Holloway,  Rhonda  Anderson,  Robin  Gorman,  and
Theresa  Strawder.  Financial  support  for  the  vending  machine  operators  was  provided
by  the  Delaware  Division  of  Public  Health.  Top  of  Page  Corresponding  Author:  Mollie
Poland,  MPP,  Policy  Analyst,  Nemours  Health  and  Prevention  Services,  PO  Box  269,
Wilmington, DE 19899. Telephone: 302-298-7648. E-mail: 
mollie.poland@nemours.org.  Author  Affiliations:  Laura  Lessard,  Arcadia  University,
Glenside,  Pennsylvania,  and  Nemours  Health  and  Prevention  Services,  Wilmington,
Delaware;  Mary  Trotter,  Nemours  Health  and  Prevention  Services,  Wilmington,
Delaware.  Top  of  Page  Top  of  Page  a  Percentages  may  not  total  100%  because  of
rounding.b  Categories  of  “Go,”  “Slow,”  and  “Whoa”  items  established  by  Nemours
Health  and  Prevention  Services  (9).  Slow  food  items  contain  no  more  than  200  total
calories, 35% of calories from fat, 10% of calories from saturated fat, and 200 mg of
sodium. Nuts and seeds are exempt because of their fiber, vitamin E, and superior fat
content;  however,  these  items  meet  criteria  for  sodium  and  calories.  Go  beverages
consist of water without added flavoring or additives. Slow beverages consist of 100%
fruit juice or contain no more than 10 total calories per 8-oz serving (eg, diet sodas and
teas, flavored water). All items not classified as Slow or Go are classified as Whoa.   Top
of  Page  The  opinions  expressed  by  authors  contributing  to  this  journal  do  not
necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the  Public  Health  Service,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  or  the
authors' affiliated institutions.
 How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2014/14_0188.htm
