Volume  10  —  November  27,  2013  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Creswell  PD,
Strickland  R,  Stephenson  L,  Pierce-Hudson  K,  Matloub  J,  Waukau  J,  et  al.   Look  Local:
The  Value  of  Cancer  Surveillance  and  Reporting  by  American  Indian  Clinics.  Prev
Chronic Dis 2013;10:130153. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd10.130153. PEER REVIEWED Introduction
Cancer incidence and mortality rates for American Indians in the Northern Plains region
of the United States are among the highest in the nation. Reliable cancer surveillance
data  are  essential  to  help  reduce  this  burden;  however,  racial  data  in  state  cancer
registries are often misclassified, and cases are often underreported. Methods
We  used  a  community-based  participatory  research  approach  to  conduct  a
retrospective  ascertainment  of  cancer  cases  in  clinic  medical  records  over  a  9-year
period (1995–2003) and compared the results with the state cancer registry to evaluate
missing or racially misclassified cases. Six tribal and/or urban Indian clinics participated
in the study. The project team consisted of participating clinics, a state cancer registry,
a comprehensive cancer center, an American Indian/Alaska Native Leadership Initiative
on Cancer, and a set of diverse organizational partners. Clinic personnel were trained
by project staff to accurately identify cancer cases in clinic records. These records were
then  matched  with  the  state  cancer  registry  to  assess  misclassification  and
underreporting. Results
Forty American Indian cases were identified that were either missing or misclassified in
the state registry. Adding these cases to the registry increased the number of American
Indian cases by 21.3% during the study period (P = .05). Conclusions
Our  results  indicate  that  direct  reporting  of  cancer  cases  by  tribal  and  urban  Indian
health clinics to a state cancer registry improved the quality of the data available for
cancer surveillance. Higher-quality data can advance the efforts of cancer prevention
and  control  stakeholders  to  address  disparities  in  Native  communities.  Top  of  Page
American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) often bear a greater cancer burden than
other  population  groups  (1–6).  Cancer  incidence  and  mortality  rates  for  American
Indians in the Northern Plains region of the United States, which includes Wisconsin, are
among the highest in the nation (4,7,8). Evidence also shows that many AI/AN cancer
cases  may  be  misclassified  in  medical  records,  underreported  to  cancer  registries,  or
both (9–15). Studies suggest the discrepancies may happen during the hospital intake
process  when  a  patient’s  race  and  ethnicity  are  being  recorded,  because  cancer
patients  may  not  accurately  report  their  race/ethnicity  or  clinic  staff  erroneously
document a patient’s race/ethnicity on the basis of cues such as age, marital status, or
language  use  (13,16).  Regardless  of  how  these  inaccuracies  in  the  data  arise,  such
discrepancies can greatly affect surveillance efforts and present additional barriers to
addressing  cancer  disparities,  particularly  in  small  populations.  The  objective  of  this
community-based  participatory  research  project  was  to  assess  AI/AN  cancer  case
underreporting  and  misclassification  in  Wisconsin  and  to  quantify  the  extent  of  any
inaccuracies. This article reports on the second phase of the Improving American Indian
Cancer  Surveillance  and  Data  Reporting  in  Wisconsin  study,  which  was  supported
through the Great Lakes Native American Research Center for Health (NARCH) and led
by Spirit of EAGLES: AI/AN Leadership Initiative on Cancer, a national effort to decrease
cancer disparities funded by the National Cancer Institute. The initial phase of this study
compared  state  registry  data  with  national  data  from  the  Indian  Health  Service  and
found a significant number of misclassifications (17). The partners in this project saw
potential for additional improvements in data accuracy by fostering reciprocal reporting
relationships between local tribal health facilities and urban Indian clinics and the state
cancer  registry.  In  the  present  phase  of  the  study,  cancer  case  records  from  clinics
serving  AI/AN  populations  were  compared  with  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting  System
case data. We sought to answer 2 questions: 1) Does the state cancer registry capture
all cancer cases identified in tribal/urban clinic records; and, if so, 2) Is the race of AI/AN
cancer  patients  correctly  identified  in  the  case  records?  Top  of  Page  Recognizing  the
importance  of  community  participation  (18–20),  we  conducted  this  research  project
collaboratively  among  multiple  community  and  partner  organizations.  In  cooperation
with tribal and urban Indian clinic partners, the Great Lakes Inter-Tribal Epidemiology
Center,  the  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting  System,  and  the  University  of  Wisconsin
Carbone  Cancer  Center  jointly  assessed  cancer  case  misclassification  of  AI/AN
populations in Wisconsin. These partnerships were convened and facilitated by Spirit of
EAGLES; the Carbone Cancer Center has had a Spirit of EAGLES subcontract since 2000.
The  overall  objective  was  to  develop  long-term  methods  to  improve  the  quality,
completeness, and use of cancer data by American Indian tribes in Wisconsin. Ten of 13
Wisconsin tribal and urban Indian clinics participated in the full study, and 6 clinics were
involved  in  the  case-matching  endeavor  described  in  this  article.  Clinics  that
participated in the matching phase of the study did not differ in any obvious ways from
those  who  declined.  Both  participating  and  nonparticipating  clinics  were  diverse  in
terms  of  tribal  nation  affiliations,  community  size,  socioeconomic  status,  rurality,  and
geography. The most common reason given for not participating was a perceived lack
of  time  on  the  part  of  the  clinic  staff.  In  the  initial  phase,  project  staff  from  Spirit  of
EAGLES  provided  training  to  tribal  and  urban  Indian  clinic  personnel  at  each  of  the
participating  clinic  sites.  The  personnel  were  taught  cancer  case  abstraction  in
accordance with the state cancer registry data collection standards. Training included
instructing  clinic  personnel  on  how  to  use  medical  records  to  verify  a  diagnostic
confirmation  (eg,  “microscopic  confirmation”),  identify  the  stages  of  the  cancer,  and
identify treatment therapies, if applicable. The clinic staff was given additional training
in  the  use  of  International  Statistical  Classification  of  Diseases  and  Related  Health
Problems  cancer  codes  (ie,  ICD-9  codes  140.0–208.9).  After  completing  training,
personnel searched clinic electronic medical manager systems for relevant ICD-9 codes,
performed  a  manual  chart  audit  of  each  case  identified  in  the  electronic  medical
manager systems, and collected abstracted data on project-specific forms. The forms
were  based  on  the  standard  state  registry  neoplasm  record  form  that  all  Wisconsin
hospitals and clinics were using at that time to report cancer cases. In keeping with the
participatory  nature  of  the  project,  staff  from  each  clinic  reviewed  these  forms  for
usability  and  added  questions  of  local  interest  as  desired.  Following  the  abstraction
process,  clinics  forwarded  the  completed  form  and  case  information  directly  to  the
Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting  System.  The  data  were  then  linked  to  the  registry  case
records using unique patient identifiers. To accomplish this linkage, registry staff keyed
the clinic data into electronic abstracting software that standardized and formatted it to
allow for matching to the registry’s database. Next, registry staff searched for various
combinations of identifiers (ie, name, date of birth, Social Security number, and home
address) to obtain the best possible match between the clinics’ case information and
the state registry. Exact data and “fuzzy” data (eg, year of birth, middle initial) were
used  to  account  for  common  keying  errors  in  both  incoming  and  registry  data  (eg,
reversed  month/day  and  reversed  first/middle  name).  If  there  was  a  discrepancy  in
classification of race/ethnicity between the 2 data sources, the clinic data was typically
given  preference.  Clinic  sites  differed  on  which  year  services  were  first  offered.
Consequently, clinics had different time frames in which cancer cases were queried. For
this study, data on cases diagnosed from 1995 through 2003 were chosen for analysis.
This was the common interval of available cases across most clinic sites and was also
the  common  interval  available  in  the  state  registry  at  the  time.  Because  of  varying
factors  including  data  cleaning  and  cross-checking  processes,  case  data  in  the  state
registry are typically 3 or more years behind at any given time. In late 2008 when this
matching process was conducted, the registry had complete data available until 2003.
The 6 participating clinics submitted 419 cancer cases for linkage with the Wisconsin
Cancer Reporting System. Fifty-six (13.4%) of the 419 cases had an unknown date of
diagnosis, and 97 (23.2%) had a date of diagnosis either before 1995 or after 2003 and
were excluded from analysis. The linkage with the state registry was conducted using
the  remaining  266  cases  (Figure).  Data  from  1  clinic  were  excluded  because  all
observations fell outside the time window or lacked dates of diagnosis.  
 Figure.  Breakdown  of  the  cancer  case  matching  process  between  participating
Wisconsin  tribal  clinics  and  the  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting  System.  Abbreviation:
AI/AN, American Indian/Alaska Native. [A 
text  description  of  this  figure  is  also  available.]  Data  analyses  were  completed  using
SAS  9.2  (SAS  Institute,  Inc,  Cary,  North  Carolina).  We  used  a  Pearson  χ2  statistic,
because  it  is  designed  to  test  whether  the  difference  between  an  established
distribution  (ie,  the  prematched  AI/AN  cancer  cases  in  the  state  registry)  and  a  new
sample  distribution  (ie,  the  postmatched  numbers  of  AI/AN  cancer  cases)  is  due  to
chance alone. This test was used to assess whether the change in the number of AI/AN
cases in the state registry after the match was significant. Significance was set at P ≤
.05. Top of Page Overall, 266 cases with a documented date of diagnosis were found in
the records of the clinics (Figure). Of these, almost all (n = 254, 95.5%) were reportable
by Wisconsin law, although a few were nonreportable (ie, skin cancers, hemangiomas,
and  intracranial  lipomas  [n  =  12,  4.5%])  and  were  excluded  from  further  analyses.
Among the reportable cases, 2 categories of case status were created: 1) clinic cases
matching a registry report (n = 226, 85.0%) and 2) reportable cases not found in the
registry  database  (n  =  28,  10.5%).   Of  the  254  reportable  clinic  cases,  40  American
Indian  cases  (15.7%)  were  either  misclassified  in  the  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting
System (n = 16) or were missing from the registry altogether (n = 24). These 40 cases
are indicated in the Figure by the 2 shaded cells. With these cases added to the state
registry,  the  number  of  AI/AN  cancer  cases  in  the  registry’s  database  increased  from
188 to 228 for the study period, a significant change of 21.3% (P = .05). Top of Page
Our findings show that, before matching, the cancer cases reported to the state cancer
registry  provided  an  incomplete  characterization  of  Wisconsin’s  AI/AN  cancer  burden.
Although the actual number of newly identified cases was not large — 40 cases from 5
clinics  from  1995  through  2003  —  it  was  relevant  to  this  population,  resulting  in  a
significant increase in the number of AI/AN cancer cases in the state registry for this
period.  A  small  number  of  newly  identified  cases  affects  ongoing  surveillance  and
evaluation. As our study illustrates, direct reporting by tribal/urban clinics can improve
the quality of cancer data and may have value for tribes and registries in other states
that wish to improve surveillance of AI/AN cancer or work to reduce cancer disparities.
Nationally,  tribal  and  urban  Indian  centers  have  become  more  engaged  in  cancer
surveillance  activities  through  Spirit  of  EAGLES,  the  Indian  Health  Service  Division  of
Epidemiology  and  Disease  Prevention,  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention
(CDC)–supported  Tribal  Comprehensive  Cancer  Control  programs,  and  through  other
regional efforts, such as those of the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board and
the New Mexico Tumor Registry. Many cancer control–focused educational and research
efforts  are  ongoing  nationally.  For  example,  in  Wisconsin,  Spirit  of  EAGLES  has
convened a coalition of multiple partners including various American Indian tribes and
organizations,  the  Wisconsin  Well  Woman  Program,  the  Wisconsin  Comprehensive
Cancer Control Program, and the American Cancer Society. This coalition sponsors an
annual statewide American Indian cancer conference for tribal members and is now in
its  tenth  year.  Additionally,  the  Menominee  Nation  partnered  with  University  of
Wisconsin  School  of  Medicine  and  Public  Health  in  a  first-of-its-kind,  tribally  driven
clinical  trial  on  smoking  cessation  (21).  Participants  in  these  and  other  efforts  across
the country have repeatedly recognized the need for ongoing access to AI/AN cancer
data, particularly the need for high-quality data at the local level. This study suggests
one potential route — that is, direct reporting by tribal/urban clinics to the state cancer
surveillance system — to achieving the goal of high-quality local cancer data. In states
without  tribal  clinics,  assessing  underreporting  may  be  difficult  but  remains  an
important objective. In these states, the first step to assessing potential disparities in
reporting  is  to  compare  the  proportional  distribution  of  the  states’  AI/AN  populations
with national Indian Health Service estimates of cancer burden for that state or region.
If it seems reasonable to suspect discrepancies (eg, if AI/AN populations appear to have
rates well above or below what would be expected), partnering with state-recognized
tribes  or  local  organizations  that  serve  AI/AN  populations  is  a  potential  next  step.
Organizations  serving  these  communities  can  assist  in  creating  strategies  to  find
discrepancies  in  state  data.  For  example,  surnames  common  to  the  population  of
interest could be matched with state registry data to assess potential inconsistencies.
Research on Asian American populations in California indicates that such surname list
matching  is  a  viable  solution  to  racial/ethnic  misclassification  when  other  options  are
unavailable  (22).  Although  local  cancer  data  are  highly  valued,  development  of  the
necessary infrastructure is challenging. This can be particularly true for smaller tribal
and urban clinics that may lack personnel with the time or training to abstract cancer
cases,  have  few  external  resources,  and  have  competing  priorities.  However,
recognizing  the  reciprocal  benefits  of  improved  AI/AN  cancer  data,  local  clinics  and
state  cancer  registries  might  partner  to  achieve  this  goal.  Training  and  ongoing
technical  support  from  registry  staff,  as  well  as  an  efficient  means  for  tribal/urban
clinics  to  report  their  cases,  could  help  mitigate  local  clinic  limitations.  In  Wisconsin,
electronic  reporting  systems  are  already  in  use  at  the  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting
System, opening the potential for integration with clinics across the state. Additionally,
annual reports returned to the clinics by the registry could provide information to help
the  clinics  monitor  their  population’s  cancer  burden,  focus  interventions,  and  build  a
local cancer registry, while simultaneously demonstrating the value of local reporting.
For example, a new project led by the Medical College of Wisconsin is piloting such a
reciprocal  cancer  surveillance  relationship  between  the  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting
System and the Red Cliff Tribal health facility. Efforts like these are critical to ensure
the local high-quality cancer data needed to conduct effective surveillance and reduce
cancer health disparities. This study has both strengths and potential limitations. First,
the small number of total cases impeded analysis of additional variables that may have
increased  our  understanding  of  factors  associated  with  cases  being  missed  or
misclassified.  For  example,  patient  sociodemographic  characteristics  and  the  type  of
cancer and treatment location may be related to the likelihood that these cases were
properly  documented,  reported,  or  both.  Our  small  sample  size  prohibited  such
exploration.  Moreover,  it  remains  unknown  why  some  cases  were  missing  from  the
registry  given  mandatory  reporting  by  treating  physicians  in  the  state  of  Wisconsin.
However,  because  tribal  and  urban  Indian  clinics  are  less  likely  than  larger  medical
settings to treat cancers that they have diagnosed, it may be that these cases were not
legally required to be reported. Additionally, the closest facility for a cancer patient to
seek  treatment  may  have  been  in  a  bordering  state,  so  these  cases  may  have  been
missed because the treating physician was not governed by Wisconsin law. The study
was also limited by the use of data from 1995 through 2003 rather than more recent
data. Classification of race may have improved since that time; if so, we would not be
able to see the effect of this in our data. Regardless, improving historical data is still
useful  to  strengthen  ongoing  surveillance  and  evaluation  efforts.  An  additional
limitation of this study was that the generalizability of the findings to all of Wisconsin or
to  other  states  may  be  limited,  because  not  all  tribal/urban  clinics  in  the  state
participated  in  the  study.  However,  even  with  limited  participation,  the  matching  of
clinic  data  with  the  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting  System  still  led  to  a  significant
improvement in the state-level data. Our study had strengths as well. The collaborative
and  participatory  process  involving  multiple  organizations  allowed  for  a  unique
assessment.  Moreover,  this  project  demonstrated  the  feasibility  of  working  with
multiple stakeholders to accomplish mutually beneficial ends. By involving local clinics
in the project and linking them to resources and training, this project built additional
capacity  in  these  communities,  which  may  help  them  in  accomplishing  their  future
data-related goals. Finally, this project not only answered a relevant research question
but  also  accomplished  the  practical  task  of  improving  the  state-level  cancer  registry
data,  which  will  benefit  future  cancer  research  and  surveillance  in  Wisconsin.  The
reporting of new cancer cases to the state cancer registry by American Indian clinics
improved  the  quality  of  Wisconsin  AI/AN  cancer  data  above  and  beyond  standard
reporting  practices  and  the  previous  linkage  with  national  Indian  Health  Service
records.  Ongoing  reporting  should  continue  to  improve  data  completeness  and
accuracy.  Both  the  Wisconsin  Cancer  Reporting  System  and  local  tribal  and  urban
Indian  clinics  have  a  stake  in  quality  cancer  data.  Better  cancer  data  will  provide  a
superior  foundation  for  focused  cancer  prevention  and  control  efforts,  informed
advocacy  for  appropriate  funding  from  state  and  federal  sources  to  address  AI/AN
cancer  disparities,  and  more  accurate  data  for  identifying  research  questions  and
conducting epidemiological studies. This study also provides a potential model for other
state cancer registries to work with local tribal/urban clinics to increase the accuracy of
their  cancer  data.  Top  of  Page  This  project  was  supported  through  a  grant  to  Great
Lakes  NARCH  (U26  9400014).  Additional  support  was  provided  through  Spirit  of
EAGLES: AI/AN Leadership Initiative on Cancer, 1 U01 CA86098 and 1 U01 CA114609.
This research was supported in part by grants from the Agency for Healthcare Research
and  Quality  T32  Pre-doctoral  NRSA  Training  Grant  (HS00083,  M.  Smith,  Principal
Investigator). We especially thank the leadership and staff of the participating tribal and
urban clinics in Wisconsin for their significant commitment of time and effort in support
of  this  project.  We  additionally  thank  the  Great  Lakes  NARCH  at  the  Great  Lakes
Inter-Tribal Council for their support and leadership of the NARCH program, as well as
the consultation of Samantha Lucas, MPH, staff epidemiologist. We also recognize David
Espey, MD, CDC Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, assigned to Indian Health
Service Division of Epidemiology and Disease Prevention in Albuquerque, New Mexico,
for his consultation, and Amy Williamson, MPP, Assistant Director, Cancer Control and
Population  Sciences,  UW  Carbone  Cancer  Center,  for  her  editorial  assistance.  Top  of
Page  Corresponding  Author:  Rick  Strickland,  MA,  Spirit  of  EAGLES,  University  of
Wisconsin  Carbone  Cancer  Center,  370  WARF  Bldg,  610  N.  Walnut  St,  Madison,  WI
53726. Telephone: 608-262-0072. E-mail: 
rastrickland@uwcarbone.wisc.edu.  Author  Affiliations:  Paul  D.  Creswell,  University  of
Wisconsin  Department  of  Population  Health  Sciences,  Madison,  Wisconsin;  Laura
Stephenson,  Division  of  Public  Health,  Department  of  Health  Services,  Madison,
Wisconsin; Kimmine Pierce-Hudson, Indian Health Service, Division of Epidemiology and
Disease  Prevention,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Jacqueline  Matloub,  Prevention  Research
Center for Healthy Neighborhoods, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio;
Jerry  Waukau,  Wisconsin  Tribal  Health  Directors  Association,  Keshena,  Wisconsin;
Alexandra  Adams,  Spirit  of  EAGLES,  University  of  Wisconsin  Carbone  Cancer  Center,
Madison, Wisconsin; Judith Kaur, Spirit of EAGLES, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer
Center,  Rochester,  Minnesota;  Patrick  L.  Remington,  University  of  Wisconsin  Carbone
Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin. At time of study, Ms Pierce-Hudson worked at Great
Lakes  Inter-Tribal  Epidemiology  Center,  Great  Lakes  Inter-Tribal  Council,  Inc,  Lac  du
Flambeau,  Wisconsin,  and  Ms  Matloub  worked  for  Spirit  of  EAGLES,  University  of
Wisconsin  Carbone  Cancer  Center,  Madison,  Wisconsin.  Top  of  Page  Top  of  Page  The
opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the
opinions  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  the  Public  Health
Service,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  or  the  authors'  affiliated
institutions.
 How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2013/13_0153.htm
