A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Over 63,000 cases of Lyme disease were reported to CDC by state health departments
and  the  District  of  Columbia  in  2022.  This  number  reflects  cases  reported  through
routine  national  surveillance,  which  is  only  one  way  public  health  officials  track
diseases.  Recent  estimates  using  other  methods  suggest  that  approximately  476,000
people may be diagnosed and treated for Lyme disease each year in the United States.
This number likely includes patients who are treated based on clinical suspicion but do
not actually have Lyme disease. Lyme disease has been a nationally notifiable condition
in the United States since 1991. Reports of Lyme disease are routinely collected and
verified by state and local health departments in accordance with their legal mandate
and surveillance practices. After removal of personal identifiers, selected information on
cases is shared with CDC through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System
(NNDSS). Policies regarding case definitions, reporting, confidentiality, and data release
are determined by states and territories under the auspices of the Council of State and
Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE). Surveillance data have a number of limitations that
need to be considered in the analysis, interpretation, and reporting of results. CDC is
currently working to establish enhanced surveillance and research platforms for Lyme
disease using electronic health records (EHRs) from large healthcare systems in areas
of the U.S. with a high incidence of Lyme disease. The Surveillance Based Lyme Disease
Network  is  comprised  of  partners  in  healthcare  systems  from  Maine,  Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania,  and  Wisconsin.  CDC  will  use  these  EHR  data  in  concert  with  traditional
public  health  surveillance  data  to  better  understand  how  Lyme  disease  affects  the
American public. Lyme disease is caused by Borrelia bacteria spread to people by the
bite  of  an  infected  blacklegged  tick.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/lyme/data-research/facts-stats/index.html
