Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. After an emergency such as a water main break, hurricane, or
flood,  your  tap  water  may  not  be  available  or  safe  to  use.  In  these  situations,  it’s
important  to  know  how  to  prevent  illness  from  unsafe  water.  After  an  emergency  or
disaster: IMPORTANT: Water that has fuel, toxic chemicals, or radioactive materials in it
will not be made safe by boiling or disinfection. Use bottled water or a different source
of  water  if  you  know  or  suspect  that  your  water  might  be  contaminated  with  fuel  or
toxic  chemicals.  If  you  suspect  your  water  is  contaminated  with  fuel  or  chemicals,
contact your local health department for specific advice. If you don’t have safe bottled
water, you should boil your water to make it safe to drink. Boiling is the surest method
to  kill  disease-causing  germs,  including  viruses,  bacteria,  and  parasites.  You  can
improve the flat taste of boiled water by If the water is cloudy, first filter it through a
clean cloth, paper towel, or coffee filter OR allow it to settle. Then, draw off the clear
water and follow the steps below. If you don’t have safe bottled water and if boiling is
not possible, you can make small quantities of water safer to drink by using a chemical
disinfectant, such as unscented household chlorine bleach, iodine, or chlorine dioxide
tablets. Disinfectants can kill most harmful or disease-causing viruses and bacteria, but
most disinfectants* are not as effective as boiling for killing more resistant germs, such
as  the  parasites  Cryptosporidium  and  Giardia.  *Chlorine  dioxide  tablets  can  kill
Cryptosporidium if you follow the manufacturer’s instructions correctly.
If the water has a harmful chemical or radioactive material in it, adding a disinfectant
will not make it drinkable. Bleach comes in different concentrations. Check the label of
the bleach you are using to find its concentration before you start to disinfect water.
Typically,  unscented  household  liquid  chlorine  bleach  in  the  United  States  will  be
between  5%  and  9%  sodium  hypochlorite,  though  concentrations  can  be  different  in
other countries. If the water is cloudy, first filter it through a clean cloth, paper towel, or
coffee filter OR allow it to settle. Then, draw off the clear water and follow the steps
below.  If  you  don’t  have  safe  bottled  water,  water  treatment  tablets  can  be  used  to
disinfect  water.  These  tablets  are  popular  among  campers  and  hikers,  as  well  as  in
other countries. They are available in different sizes and made to treat specific amounts
of  water.  Many  portable  water  filters  can  remove  disease-causing  parasites  such
as  Cryptosporidium  and  Giardia  from  drinking  water.  If  you  are  choosing  a  portable
water  filter:  For  more  information  about  water  filters  that  can  remove  parasites,  see
CDC’s A Guide to Water Filters. Make Water Safe During an Emergency [PDF – 625 KB]
(English)  Haga  que  el  agua  sea  segura  durante  una  emergencia  [PDF  –  627  KB]
(Español) Xử Lý Nước An Toàn Trong Tình Trạng Khẩn Cấp [PDF – 737 KB] (Vietnamese)
      Use Safe Water During an Emergency [PDF – 1 page] (English)
Beba agua que sea segura [PDF – 1 página] (Español) To receive updates highlighting
our recent work to prevent infectious disease, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/emergency/making-water-safe.html
