A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  MDRO  Prevention  and  Control  from  the
Management  of  Multidrug-Resistant  Organisms  in  Healthcare  Settings  (2006).
Preventing  infections  will  reduce  the  burden  of  MDROs  in  healthcare  settings.
Prevention  of  antimicrobial  resistance  depends  on  appropriate  clinical  practices  that
should be incorporated into all routine patient care. These include optimal management
of  vascular  and  urinary  catheters,  prevention  of  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  in
intubated  patients,  accurate  diagnosis  of  infectious  etiologies,  and  judicious
antimicrobial selection and utilization. Guidance for these preventive practices include
the Campaign to Reduce Antimicrobial Resistance in Healthcare Settings ([This link is
no
 longer
 active:
 www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/healthcare.]),
 a
 multifaceted,
evidence-based  approach  with  four  parallel  strategies:  infection  prevention;  accurate
and prompt diagnosis and treatment; prudent use of antimicrobials; and prevention of
transmission.  Campaign  materials  are  available  for  acute  care  hospitals,  surgical
settings,  dialysis  units,  LTCFs  and  pediatric  acute  care  units.  To  reduce  rates  of
central-venous-line
 associated
 bloodstream
 infections
 (CVL-BSIs)
 and
ventilator-associated  pneumonia  (VAP),  a  group  of  bundled  evidence-based  clinical
practices  have  been  implemented  in  many  U.S.  healthcare  facilities  (118,  141-144).
One report demonstrated a sustained effect on the reduction in CVL-BSI rates with this
approach (145). Although the specific effect on MDRO infection and colonization rates
have
 not
 been
 reported,
 it
 is
 logical
 that
 decreasing
 these
 and
 other
healthcare-associated  infections  will  in  turn  reduce  antimicrobial  use  and  decrease
opportunities for emergence and transmission of MDROs. Successful control of MDROs
has  been  documented  in  the  United  States  and  abroad  using  a  variety  of  combined
interventions. These include improvements in hand hygiene, use of Contact Precautions
until patients are culture-negative for a target MDRO, active surveillance cultures (ASC),
education,  enhanced  environmental  cleaning,  and  improvements  in  communication
about  patients  with  MDROs  within  and  between  healthcare  facilities.  Representative
studies include: These success stories testify to the importance of having dedicated and
knowledgeable teams of healthcare professionals who are willing to persist for years, if
necessary,  to  control  MDROs.  Eradication  and  control  of  MDROs,  such  as  those
reported, frequently required periodic reassessment and the addition of new and more
stringent  interventions  over  time  (tiered  strategy).  For  example,  interventions  were
added  in  a  stepwise  fashion  during  a  3-year  effort  that  eventually  eradicated  MRSA
from an NICU (152). A series of interventions was adopted throughout the course of a
year
 to
 eradicate
 VRE
 from
 a
 burn
 unit
 (154).
 Similarly,
 eradication
 of
carbapenem-resistant  strains  of  A.  baumannii  from  a  hospital  required  multiple  and
progressively  more  intense  interventions  over  several  years  (11).  Nearly  all  studies
reporting successful MDRO control employed a median of 7 to 8 different interventions
concurrently  or  sequentially  (Table  1).  These  figures  may  underestimate  the  actual
number  of  control  measures  used,  because  authors  of  these  reports  may  have
considered  their  earliest  efforts  routine  (e.g.,  added  emphasis  on  handwashing),  and
did  not  include  them  as  interventions,  and  some  "single  measures"  are,  in  fact,  a
complex  combination  of  several  interventions.  The  use  of  multiple  concurrent  control
measures  in  these  reports  underscores  the  need  for  a  comprehensive  approach  for
controlling  MDROs.  Several  factors  affect  the  ability  to  generalize  the  results  of  the
various  studies  reviewed,  including  differences  in  definition,  study  design,  endpoints
and  variables  measured,  and  period  of  follow-up.  Two-thirds  of  the  reports  cited  in
Tables 1 and 2 involved perceived outbreaks, and one-third described efforts to reduce
endemic transmission. Few reports described preemptive efforts or prospective studies
to  control  MDROs  before  they  had  reached  high  levels  within  a  unit  or  facility.  With
these  and  other  factors,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  determine  the  effectiveness  of
individual  interventions,  or  a  specific  combination  of  interventions,  that  would  be
appropriate  for  all  healthcare  facilities  to  implement  in  order  to  control  their  target
MDROs. Randomized controlled trials are necessary to acquire this level of evidence. An
NIH-sponsored,  randomized  controlled  trial  on  the  prevention  of  MRSA  and  VRE
transmission  in  adult  ICUs  is  ongoing  and  may  provide  further  insight  into  optimal
control  measures  ([Current  version  of  this  document  may  differ  from  original.]
Strategies to Reduce Transmission of Antimicrobial Resistant Bacteria in Intensive Care
Units (STAR*ICU) Trial). This trial compares the use of education (to improve adherence
to hand hygiene) and Standard Precautions to the use of ASC and Contact Precautions.
The various types of interventions used to control or eradicate MDROs may be grouped
into  seven  categories.  These  include  administrative  support,  judicious  use  of
antimicrobials, surveillance (routine and enhanced), Standard and Contact Precautions,
environmental  measures,  education  and  decolonization.  These  interventions  provide
the  basis  for  the  recommendations  for  control  of  MDROs  in  healthcare  settings  that
follow  this  review  and  as  summarized  in  Table  3.  In  the  studies  reviewed,  these
interventions  were  applied  in  various  combinations  and  degrees  of  intensity,  with
differences  in  outcome.  In  several  reports,  administrative  support  and  involvement
were  important  for  the  successful  control  of  the  target  MDRO  (3,  152,  182-185),  and
authorities in infection control have strongly recommended such support (2, 106, 107,
186).  There  are  several  examples  of  MDRO  control  interventions  that  require
administrative commitment of fiscal and human resources. One is the use of ASC (8, 38,
68, 107, 114, 151, 152, 167, 168, 183, 184, 187-192). Other interventions that require
administrative  support  include:  Other  measures  that  have  been  associated  with  a
positive  impact  on  prevention  efforts,  that  require  administrative  support,  are  direct
observation  with  feedback  to  HCP  on  adherence  to  recommended  precautions  and
keeping HCP informed about changes in transmission rates (3, 152, 182, 203-205). A
"How-to  guide"  for  implementing  change  in  ICUs,  including  analysis  of  structure,
process,  and  outcomes  when  designing  interventions,  can  assist  in  identification  of
needed  administrative  interventions  (195).  Lastly,  participation  in  existing,  or  the
creation  of  new,  city-wide,  state-wide,  regional  or  national  coalitions,  to  combat
emerging  or  growing  MDRO  problems  is  an  effective  strategy  that  requires
administrative support (146, 151, 167, 188, 206, 207). Facility-wide, unit-targeted, and
informal, educational interventions were included in several successful studies (3, 189,
193,  208-211).  The  focus  of  the  interventions  was  to  encourage  a  behavior  change
through  improved  understanding  of  the  problem  MDRO  that  the  facility  was  trying  to
control. Whether the desired change involved hand hygiene, antimicrobial prescribing
patterns,  or  other  outcomes,  enhancing  understanding  and  creating  a  culture  that
supported and promoted the desired behavior, were viewed as essential to the success
of  the  intervention.  Educational  campaigns  to  enhance  adherence  to  hand  hygiene
practices in conjunction with other control measures have been associated temporally
with decreases in MDRO transmission in various healthcare settings (3, 106, 163). While
a  comprehensive  review  of  antimicrobial  stewardship  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this
guideline,  recommendations  for  control  of  MDROs  must  include  attention  to  judicious
antimicrobial  use.  A  temporal  association  between  formulary  changes  and  decreased
occurrence  of  a  target  MDRO  was  found  in  several  studies,  especially  in  those  that
focused  on  MDR-GNBs  (98,  177,  209,  212-218).  Occurrence  of  C.  difficile-associated
disease  has  also  been  associated  with  changes  in  antimicrobial  use  (219).  Although
some  MRSA  and  VRE  control  efforts  have  attempted  to  limit  antimicrobial  use,  the
relative importance of this measure for controlling these MDROs remains unclear (193,
220).  Limiting  antimicrobial  use  alone  may  fail  to  control  resistance  due  to  a
combination of factors; including With the intent of addressing #2 and #3 above in the
study design, one study demonstrated a decrease in the prevalence of VRE associated
with a formulary switch from ticarcillin-clavulanate to piperacillin-tazobactam (221). The
CDC Campaign to Prevent Antimicrobial Resistance that was launched in 2002 provides
evidence-based
 principles
 for
 judicious
 use
 of
 antimicrobials
 and
 tools
 for
implementation
 (222)
 [This
 link
 is
 no
 longer
 active:
www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/healthcare.]. This effort targets all healthcare settings and
focuses  on  effective  antimicrobial  treatment  of  infections,  use  of  narrow  spectrum
agents,  treatment  of  infections  and  not  contaminants,  avoiding  excessive  duration  of
therapy,  and  restricting  use  of  broad-spectrum  or  more  potent  antimicrobials  to
treatment of serious infections when the pathogen is not known or when other effective
agents are unavailable. Achieving these objectives would likely diminish the selective
pressure  that  favors  proliferation  of  MDROs.  Strategies  for  influencing  antimicrobial
prescribing patterns within healthcare facilities include education; formulary restriction;
prior-approval  programs,  including  pre-approved  indications;  automatic  stop  orders;
academic  interventions  to  counteract  pharmaceutical  influences  on  prescribing
patterns;  antimicrobial  cycling  (223-226);  computer-assisted  management  programs
(227-229); and active efforts to remove redundant antimicrobial combinations (230). A
systematic  review  of  controlled  studies  identified  several  successful  practices.  These
include  social  marketing  (i.e.  consumer  education),  practice  guidelines,  authorization
systems, formulary restriction, mandatory consultation, and peer review and feedback.
It  further  suggested  that  online  systems  that  provide  clinical  information,  structured
order  entry,  and  decision  support  are  promising  strategies  (231).  These  changes  are
best
 accomplished
 through
 an
 organizational,
 multidisciplinary,
 antimicrobial
management  program  (232).  Surveillance  is  a  critically  important  component  of  any
MDRO  control  program,  allowing  detection  of  newly  emerging  pathogens,  monitoring
epidemiologic trends, and measuring the effectiveness of interventions. Multiple MDRO
surveillance  strategies  have  been  employed,  ranging  from  surveillance  of  clinical
microbiology laboratory results obtained as part of routine clinical care, to use of ASC to
detect  asymptomatic  colonization.  Antibiograms  The  simplest  form  of  MDRO
surveillance is monitoring of clinical microbiology isolates resulting from tests ordered
as part of routine clinical care. This method is particularly useful to detect emergence of
new  MDROs  not  previously  detected,  either  within  an  individual  healthcare  facility  or
community-wide.  In  addition,  this  information  can  be  used  to  prepare  facility-  or
unit-specific
 summary
 antimicrobial
 susceptibility
 reports
 that
 describe
pathogen-specific prevalence of resistance among clinical isolates. Such reports may be
useful  to  monitor  for  changes  in  known  resistance  patterns  that  might  signal
emergence or transmission of MDROs, and also to provide clinicians with information to
guide  antimicrobial  prescribing  practices  (233  –  235).  Some  investigators  have  used
clinical  microbiology  results  to  calculate  measures  of  incidence  of  MDRO  isolates  in
specific  populations  or  patient  care  locations  (e.g.  new  MDRO  isolates/1,000  patient
days, new MDRO isolates per month) (205, 236, 237). Such measures may be useful for
monitoring  MDRO  trends  and  assessing  the  impact  of  prevention  programs,  although
they have limitations. Because they are based solely on positive culture results without
accompanying clinical information, they do not distinguish colonization from infection,
and may not fully demonstrate the burden of MDRO-associated disease. Furthermore,
these measures do not precisely measure acquisition of MDRO colonization in a given
population or location. Isolating an MDRO from a clinical culture obtained from a patient
several  days  after  admission  to  a  given  unit  or  facility  does  not  establish  that  the
patient  acquired  colonization  in  that  unit.  On  the  other  hand,  patients  who  acquire
MDRO  colonization  may  remain  undetected  by  clinical  cultures  (107).  Despite  these
limitations,  incidence  measures  based  on  clinical  culture  results  may  be  highly
correlated with actual MDRO transmission rates derived from information using ASC, as
demonstrated in a recent multicenter study (237). These results suggest that incidence
measures  based  on  clinical  cultures  alone  might  be  useful  surrogates  for  monitoring
changes  in  MDRO  transmission  rates.  Clinical  cultures  can  also  be  used  to  identify
targeted  MDRO  infections  in  certain  patient  populations  or  units  (238,  239).  This
strategy requires investigation of clinical circumstances surrounding a positive culture
to distinguish colonization from infection, but it can be particularly helpful in defining
the clinical impact of MDROs within a facility. Many investigators have used molecular
typing of selected isolates to confirm clonal transmission to enhance understanding of
MDRO transmission and the effect of interventions within their facility (38, 68, 89, 92,
138, 152, 190, 193, 236, 240). Another form of MDRO surveillance is the use of active
surveillance cultures (ASC) to identify patients who are colonized with a targeted MDRO
(38,  107,  241).  This  approach  is  based  upon  the  observation  that,  for  some  MDROs,
detection  of  colonization  may  be  delayed  or  missed  completely  if  culture  results
obtained  in  the  course  of  routine  clinical  care  are  the  primary  means  of  identifying
colonized patients (8, 38, 107, 114, 151, 153, 167, 168, 183, 184, 187, 189, 191-193,
242-244).  Several  authors  report  having  used  ASC  when  new  pathogens  emerge  in
order to define the epidemiology of the particular agent (22, 23, 107, 190). In addition,
the  authors  of  several  reports  have  concluded  that  ASC,  in  combination  with  use  of
Contact  Precautions  for  colonized  patients,  contributed  directly  to  the  decline  or
eradication of the target MDRO (38, 68, 107, 151, 153, 184, 217, 242). However, not all
studies have reached the same conclusion. Poor control of MRSA despite use of ASC has
been described (245). A recent study failed to identify cross-transmission of MRSA or
MSSA in a MICU during a 10 week period when ASC were obtained, despite the fact that
culture results were not reported to the staff (246). The investigators suggest that the
degree  of  cohorting  and  adherence  to  Standard  Precautions  might  have  been  the
important  determinants  of  transmission  prevention,  rather  than  the  use  of  ASC  and
Contact Precautions for MRSA-colonized patients. The authors of a systematic review of
the literature on the use of isolation measures to control healthcare-associated MRSA
concluded that there is evidence that concerted efforts that include ASC and isolation
can  reduce  MRSA  even  in  endemic  settings.  However,  the  authors  also  noted  that
methodological  weaknesses  and  inadequate  reporting  in  published  research  make  it
difficult to rule out plausible alternative explanations for reductions in MRSA acquisition
associated  with  these  interventions,  and  therefore  concluded  that  the  precise
contribution  of  active  surveillance  and  isolation  alone  is  difficult  to  assess  (247).
Mathematical modeling studies have been used to estimate the impact of ASC use in
control  of  MDROs.  One  such  study  evaluating  interventions  to  decrease  VRE
transmission indicated that use of ASC (versus no cultures) could potentially decrease
transmission 39% and that with pre-emptive isolation plus ASC, transmission could be
decreased  65%  (248).  Another  mathematical  model  examining  the  use  of  ASC  and
isolation for control of MRSA predicted that isolating colonized or infected patients on
the  basis  of  clinical  culture  results  is  unlikely  to  be  successful  at  controlling  MRSA,
whereas use of active surveillance and isolation can lead to successful control, even in
settings where MRSA is highly endemic. (249) There is less literature on the use of ASC
in controlling MDR-GNBs. Active surveillance cultures have been used as part of efforts
to  successful  control  of  MDR-GNBs  in  outbreak  settings.  The  experience  with  ASC  as
part  of  successful  control  efforts  in  endemic  settings  is  mixed.  One  study  reported
successful
 reduction
 of
 extended-
 spectrum
 beta-lactamase
 –producing
Enterobacteriaceae  over  a  six  year  period  using  a  multifaceted  control  program  that
included use of ASC (245). Other reports suggest that use of ASC is not necessary to
control  endemic  MDR-GNBs.  (250,  251).  More  research  is  needed  to  determine  the
circumstances  under  which  ASC  are  most  beneficial  (252),  but  their  use  should  be
considered in some settings, especially if other control measures have been ineffective.
When use of ASC is incorporated into MDRO prevention programs, the following should
be  considered:  Since  1996  CDC  has  recommended  the  use  of  Standard  and  Contact
Precautions for MDROs "judged by an infection control program...to be of special clinical
and epidemiologic significance." This recommendation was based on general consensus
and  was  not  necessarily  evidence-based.  No  studies  have  directly  compared  the
efficacy  of  Standard  Precautions  alone  versus  Standard  Precautions  and  Contact
Precautions, with or without ASC, for control of MDROs. Some reports mention the use
of one or both sets of precautions as part of successful MDRO control efforts; however,
the precautions were not the primary focus of the study intervention (164, 190, 205,
269- 271). The NIH-sponsored study mentioned earlier (Section: Overview of the MDRO
control  literature)  may  provide  some  answers  (Strategies  to  Reduce  Transmission  of
Antimicrobial  Resistant  Bacteria  in  Intensive  Care  Units  (STAR*ICU)  Trial)  [Current
version  of  this  document  may  differ  from  original.].  Standard  precautions  have  an
essential  role  in  preventing  MDRO  transmission,  even  in  facilities  that  use  Contact
Precautions for patients with an identified MDRO. Colonization with MDROs is frequently
undetected;  even  surveillance  cultures  may  fail  to  identify  colonized  persons  due  to
lack  of  sensitivity,  laboratory  deficiencies,  or  intermittent  colonization  due  to
antimicrobial therapy (262). Therefore, Standard Precautions must be used in order to
prevent transmission from potentially colonized patients. Hand hygiene is an important
component of Standard Precautions. The authors of the Guideline for Hand Hygiene in
Healthcare Settings (106) cited nine studies that demonstrated a temporal relationship
between improved adherence to recommended hand hygiene practices and control of
MDROs.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  one  report  the  frequency  of  hand  hygiene  did  not
improve with use of Contact Precautions but did improve when gloves were used (per
Standard  Precautions)  for  contact  with  MDRO  patients  (272).  MDRO  control  efforts
frequently  involved  changes  in  isolation  practices,  especially  during  outbreaks.  In  the
majority of reports, Contact Precautions were implemented for all patients found to be
colonized  or  infected  with  the  target  MDRO  (See  Table  2).  Some  facilities  also
preemptively used Contact Precautions, in conjunction with ASC, for all new admissions
or for all patients admitted to a specific unit, until a negative screening culture for the
target MDRO was reported (30, 184, 273). Contact precautions are intended to prevent
transmission
 of
 infectious
 agents,
 including
 epidemiologically
 important
microorganisms, which are transmitted by direct or indirect contact with the patient or
the patient's environment. A single-patient room is preferred for patients who require
Contact  Precautions.  When  a  single-patient  room  is  not  available,  consultation  with
infection control is necessary to assess the various risks associated with other patient
placement  options  (e.g.,  cohorting,  keeping  the  patient  with  an  existing  roommate).
HCP caring for patients on Contact Precautions should wear a gown and gloves for all
interactions that may involve contact with the patient or potentially contaminated areas
in the patient's environment. Donning gown and gloves upon room entry and discarding
before  exiting  the  patient  room  is  done  to  contain  pathogens,  especially  those  that
have been implicated in transmission through environmental contamination (e.g., VRE,
C. difficile, noroviruses and other intestinal tract agents; RSV) (109, 111, 274-277). In
several  reports,  cohorting  of  patients  (152,  153,  167,  183,  184,  188,  189,  217,  242),
cohorting of staff (184, 217, 242, 278), use of designated beds or units (183, 184), and
even unit closure (38, 146, 159, 161, 279, 280) were necessary to control transmission.
Some  authors  indicated  that  implementation  of  the  latter  two  strategies  were  the
turning points in their control efforts; however, these measures usually followed many
other actions to prevent transmission. In one, two-center study, moving MRSA-positive
patients  into  single  rooms  or  cohorting  these  patients  in  designated  bays  failed  to
reduce transmission in ICUs. However, in this study adherence to recommendations for
hand hygiene between patient contacts was only 21% (281). Other published studies,
including  one  commissioned  by  the  American  Institute  of  Architects  and  the  Facility
Guidelines  Institute  ([This  link  is  no  longer  active:  www.aia.org/aah_gd_hospcons.]),
have documented a beneficial relationship between private rooms and reduction in risk
of  acquiring  MDROs  (282).  Additional  studies  are  needed  to  define  the  specific
contribution of using single-patient rooms and/or cohorting on preventing transmission
of  MDROs.  The  necessary  duration  of  Contact  Precautions  for  patients  treated  for
infection  with  an  MDRO,  but  who  may  continue  to  be  colonized  with  the  organism  at
one or more body sites, remains an unresolved issue. Patients may remain colonized
with MDROs for prolonged periods; shedding of these organisms may be intermittent,
and  surveillance  cultures  may  fail  to  detect  their  presence  (84,  250,  283).  The  1995
HICPAC  guideline  for  preventing  the  transmission  of  VRE  suggested  three  negative
stool/perianal cultures obtained at weekly intervals as a criterion for discontinuation of
Contact  Precautions  (274).  One  study  found  these  criteria  generally  reliable  (284).
However,  this  and  other  studies  have  noted  a  recurrence  of  VRE  positive  cultures  in
persons who subsequently receive antimicrobial therapy and persistent or intermittent
carriage  of  VRE  for  more  than  1  year  has  been  reported  (284-286).  Similarly,
colonization  with  MRSA  can  be  prolonged  (287,  288).  Studies  demonstrating  initial
clearance of MRSA following decolonization therapy have reported a high frequency of
subsequent carriage (289, 290). There is a paucity of information in the literature on
when  to  discontinue  Contact  Precautions  for  patients  colonized  with  a  MDR-GNB,
possibly because infection and colonization with these MDROs are often associated with
outbreaks. Despite the uncertainty about when to discontinue Contact Precautions, the
studies offer some guidance. In the context of an outbreak, prudence would dictate that
Contact Precautions be used indefinitely for all previously infected and known colonized
patients. Likewise, if ASC are used to detect and isolate patients colonized with MRSA or
VRE,  and  there  is  no  decolonization  of  these  patients,  it  is  logical  to  assume  that
Contact Precautions would be used for the duration of stay in the setting where they
were  first  implemented.  In  general,  it  seems  reasonable  to  discontinue  Contact
Precautions  when  three  or  more  surveillance  cultures  for  the  target  MDRO  are
repeatedly negative over the course of a week or two in a patient who has not received
antimicrobial therapy for several weeks, especially in the absence of a draining wound,
profuse respiratory secretions, or evidence implicating the specific patient in ongoing
transmission of the MDRO within the facility. Three studies evaluated the use of gloves
with or without gowns for all patient contacts to prevent VRE acquisition in ICU settings
(30, 105, 273). Two of the studies showed that use of both gloves and gowns reduced
VRE transmission (30, 105) while the third showed no difference in transmission based
on the barriers used (273). One study in a LTCF compared the use of gloves only, with
gloves  plus  contact  isolation,  for  patients  with  four  MDROs,  including  VRE  and  MRSA,
and found no difference (86). However, patients on contact isolation were more likely to
acquire MDR-K. pneumoniae strains that were prevalent in the facility; reasons for this
were  not  specifically  known.  In  addition  to  differences  in  outcome,  differing
methodologies  make  comparisons  difficult.  Specifically,  HCP  adherence  to  the
recommended  protocol,  the  influence  of  added  precautions  on  the  number  of
HCP-patient  interactions,  and  colonization  pressure  were  not  consistently  assessed.
There  are  limited  data  regarding  the  impact  of  Contact  Precautions  on  patients.  Two
studies found that HCP, including attending physicians, were half as likely to enter the
rooms of (291), or examine (292), patients on Contact Precautions. Other investigators
have reported similar observations on surgical wards (293). Two studies reported that
patients in private rooms and on barrier precautions for an MDRO had increased anxiety
and depression scores (294, 295). Another study found that patients placed on Contact
Precautions  for  MRSA  had  significantly  more  preventable  adverse  events,  expressed
greater dissatisfaction with their treatment, and had less documented care than control
patients  who  were  not  in  isolation  (296).  Therefore,  when  patients  are  placed  on
Contact Precautions, efforts must be made by the healthcare team to counteract these
potential  adverse  effects.  The  potential  role  of  environmental  reservoirs,  such  as
surfaces and medical equipment, in the transmission of VRE and other MDROs has been
the subject of several reports (109-111, 297, 298). While environmental cultures are not
routinely recommended (299), environmental cultures were used in several studies to
document  contamination,  and  led  to  interventions  that  included  the  use  of  dedicated
noncritical medical equipment (217, 300), assignment of dedicated cleaning personnel
to  the  affected  patient  care  unit  (154),  and  increased  cleaning  and  disinfection  of
frequently-touched  surfaces  (e.g.,  bedrails,  charts,  bedside  commodes,  doorknobs).  A
common reason given for finding environmental contamination with an MDRO was the
lack of adherence to facility procedures for cleaning and disinfection. In an educational
and  observational  intervention,  which  targeted  a  defined  group  of  housekeeping
personnel, there was a persistent decrease in the acquisition of VRE in a medical ICU
(301).  Therefore,  monitoring  for  adherence  to  recommended  environmental  cleaning
practices is an important determinant for success in controlling transmission of MDROs
and  other  pathogens  in  the  environment  (274,  302).  In  the  MDRO  reports  reviewed,
enhanced environmental cleaning was frequently undertaken when there was evidence
of environmental contamination and ongoing transmission. Rarely, control of the target
MDRO required vacating a patient care unit for complete environmental cleaning and
assessment  (175,  279).  Decolonization  entails  treatment  of  persons  colonized  with  a
specific  MDRO,  usually  MRSA,  to  eradicate  carriage  of  that  organism.  Although  some
investigators  have  attempted  to  decolonize  patients  harboring  VRE  (220),  few  have
achieved success. However, decolonization of persons carrying MRSA in their nares has
proved  possible  with  several  regimens  that  include  topical  mupirocin  alone  or  in
combination  with  orally  administered  antibiotics  (e.g.,  rifampin  in  combination  with
trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole or ciprofloxacin) plus the use of an antimicrobial soap
for  bathing  (303).  In  one  report,  a  3-day  regimen  of  baths  with  povidone-iodine  and
nasal therapy with mupirocin resulted in eradication of nasal MRSA colonization (304).
These  and  other  methods  of  MRSA  decolonization  have  been  thoroughly  reviewed.
(303, 305-307). Decolonization regimens are not sufficiently effective to warrant routine
use.  Therefore,  most  healthcare  facilities  have  limited  the  use  of  decolonization  to
MRSA  outbreaks,  or  other  high  prevalence  situations,  especially  those  affecting
special-care  units.  Several  factors  limit  the  utility  of  this  control  measure  on  a
widespread  basis:  HCP  implicated  in  transmission  of  MRSA  are  candidates  for
decolonization  and  should  be  treated  and  culture  negative  before  returning  to  direct
patient care. In contrast, HCP who are colonized with MRSA, but are asymptomatic, and
have not been linked epidemiologically to transmission, do not require decolonization.
CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk
of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/mdro-management/prevention-control.html
