  Please note: An
erratum has been published for this article. To view the erratum, please click here.
 On February 13, 2015, this report was posted as an MMWR Early Release on the MMWR
website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). Jennifer Zipprich, PhD1, Kathleen Winter, MPH1, Jill
Hacker, PhD1, Dongxiang Xia, MD, PhD1, James Watt, MD1, Kathleen Harriman, PhD1
(Author  affiliations  at  end  of  text)  On  January  5,  2015,  the  California  Department  of
Public Health (CDPH) was notified about a suspected measles case. The patient was a
hospitalized, unvaccinated child, aged 11 years with rash onset on December 28. The
only notable travel history during the exposure period was a visit to one of two adjacent
Disney  theme  parks  located  in  Orange  County,  California.  On  the  same  day,  CDPH
received reports of four additional suspected measles cases in California residents and
two  in  Utah  residents,  all  of  whom  reported  visiting  one  or  both  Disney  theme  parks
during  December  17–20.  By  January  7,  seven  California  measles  cases  had  been
confirmed,  and  CDPH  issued  a  press  release  and  an  Epidemic  Information  Exchange
(Epi-X)  notification  to  other  states  regarding  this  outbreak.  Measles  transmission  is
ongoing (Figure). As of February 11, a total of 125 measles cases with rash occurring
during  December  28,  2014–February  8,  2015,  had  been  confirmed  in  U.S.  residents
connected  with  this  outbreak.  Of  these,  110  patients  were  California  residents.
Thirty-nine (35%) of the California patients visited one or both of the two Disney theme
parks  during  December  17–20,  where  they  are  thought  to  have  been  exposed  to
measles,  37  have  an  unknown  exposure  source  (34%),  and  34  (31%)  are  secondary
cases. Among the 34 secondary cases, 26 were household or close contacts, and eight
were  exposed  in  a  community  setting.  Five  (5%)  of  the  California  patients  reported
being  in  one  or  both  of  the  two  Disney  theme  parks  during  their  exposure  period
outside  of  December  17–20,  but  their  source  of  infection  is  unknown.  In  addition,  15
cases linked to the two Disney theme parks have been reported in seven other states:
Arizona  (seven),  Colorado  (one),  Nebraska  (one),  Oregon  (one),  Utah  (three),  and
Washington (two), as well as linked cases reported in two neighboring countries, Mexico
(one)  and  Canada  (10).   Among  the  110  California  patients,  49  (45%)  were
unvaccinated; five (5%) had 1 dose of measles-containing vaccine, seven (6%) had 2
doses,  one  (1%)  had  3  doses,  47  (43%)  had  unknown  or  undocumented  vaccination
status, and one (1%) had immunoglobulin G seropositivity documented, which indicates
prior  vaccination  or  measles  infection  at  an  undetermined  time.  Twelve  of  the
unvaccinated  patients  were  infants  too  young  to  be  vaccinated.  Among  the  37
remaining vaccine-eligible patients, 28 (67%) were intentionally unvaccinated because
of personal beliefs, and one was on an alternative plan for vaccination. Among the 28
intentionally  unvaccinated  patients,  18  were  children  (aged  <18  years),  and  10  were
adults. Patients range in age from 6 weeks to 70 years; the median age is 22 years.
Among the 84 patients with known hospitalization status, 17 (20%) were hospitalized.
The  source  of  the  initial  Disney  theme  park  exposure  has  not  been  identified.
Specimens from 30 California patients were genotyped; all were measles genotype B3,
which  has  caused  a  large  outbreak  recently  in  the  Philippines,  but  has  also  been
detected in at least 14 countries and at least six U.S. states in the last 6 months (1). 
Annual attendance at Disney theme parks in California is estimated at 24 million (2),
including  many  international  visitors  from  countries  where  measles  is  endemic.  The
December holiday season coincides with the exposure period of interest. Since 2011,
six  confirmed  measles  cases  have  been  reported  to  CDPH  in  persons  whose  notable
exposure  was  to  large  theme  parks  that  attract  international  tourists.  International
travel to countries where measles is endemic is a well-known risk factor for measles,
and  measles  importations  continue  to  occur  in  the  United  States;  the  number  of
measles
 cases
 reported
 to
 CDC
 is
 updated
 weekly
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/measles/cases-outbreaks.html. However, U.S. residents also can be
exposed to measles in the United States at venues with large numbers of international
visitors,  such  as  other  tourist  attractions  and  airports.  This  outbreak  illustrates  the
continued  importance  of  ensuring  high  measles  vaccination  coverage  in  the  United
States.   California  local  health  jurisdictions.  Regina  Chase,  Giorgio  Cosentino,  Alex
Espinosa, Natasha Espinosa, Ashraf Fadol, Carlos Gonzalez, Kristina Hsieh, Ruth Lopez,
Chris Preas, Maria Salas, Diana Singh, Abiy Tadesse, Patricia Stoll, Kim Hansard, Viral
and  Rickettsial  Disease  Laboratory,  California  Department  of  Public  Health.  Patrick
Ayscue, Brooke Bregman, Cynthia Yen, Anthony Moore, Anna Clayton, Shrimati Datta,
Rosie  Glenn-Finer,  Immunization  Branch,  California  Department  of  Public  Health.  
1California  Department  of  Public  Health  (Corresponding  author:  Jennifer  Zipprich,
jennifer.zipprich@cdph.ca.gov,  510-620-3848)  FIGURE.  Number  of  confirmed  measles
cases (N = 110),* by date of rash onset — California, December 2014–February 2015  
*Reported  to  the  California  Department  of  Public  Health  as  of  February  11,  2015.  
Alternate  Text:  The  figure  above  is  a  histogram  showing  the  number  of  confirmed
measles  cases  (N  =  110),  by  date  of  rash  onset  in  California  during  December
2014-February 2015. Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification
only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6406a5.htm
