Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  CDC  recommends  that  people  get  MMR  vaccine  to  protect
against measles, mumps, and rubella. Children should get two doses of MMR vaccine,
starting with the first dose at 12 to 15 months of age, and the second dose at 4 through
6 years of age. Teens and adults should also be up to date on their MMR vaccination.
Two MMR vaccines are available for use in the United States, M-M-R II and PRIORIX. 
M-M-R  II  and  PRIORIX  are  fully  interchangeable  for  all  indications  for  which  MMR
vaccination  is  recommended.  Children  may  also  get  MMRV  vaccine,  which  protects
against  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella  (chickenpox).  This  vaccine  is  only
licensed  for  use  in  children  who  are  12  months  through  12  years  of  age.  CDC
recommends  all  children  get  two  doses  of  MMR  (measles-mumps-rubella)  vaccine,
starting with the first dose at 12 through 15 months of age, and the second dose at 4
through 6 years of age. Children can receive the second dose earlier as long as it is at
least 28 days after the first dose. Learn about MMRV vaccine, which protects against
measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella (chickenpox). This vaccine is only licensed for
use  in  children  who  are  12  months  through  12  years  of  age.  Students  at  post-high
school  educational  institutions  who  do  not  have  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity
need  two  doses  of  MMR  vaccine,  separated  by  at  least  28  days.  Adults  who  do  not
have presumptive evidence of immunity should get at least one dose of MMR vaccine.
Certain adults may need 2 doses. Adults who are going to be in a setting that poses a
high  risk  for  measles  or  mumps  transmission  should  make  sure  they  have  had  two
doses separated by at least 28 days. These adults include People 6 months of age and
older who will be traveling internationally should be protected against measles. Before
any  international  travel—  See  also,  Travel  Information  (Measles  |  Mumps  |  Rubella)
Healthcare  personnel  should  have  documented  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity,
according  to  the  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices  [48  pages].  Healthcare  personnel  without  evidence  of  immunity  should  get
two doses of MMR vaccine, separated by at least 28 days. Find out if you need measles
vaccine Women of childbearing age should check with their doctor to make sure they
are  vaccinated  before  they  get  pregnant.  Women  of  childbearing  age  who  are  not
pregnant and do not have presumptive evidence of immunity should get at least one
dose of MMR vaccine. It is safe for breastfeeding women to receive MMR vaccination.
Breastfeeding does not interfere with the response to MMR vaccine, and the baby will
not be affected by the vaccine through breast milk. During a mumps outbreak, public
health authorities might recommend an additional dose of MMR vaccine for people who
belong to groups at increased risk for getting mumps. These groups are usually those
who are likely to have close contact, such as sharing sport equipment or drinks, kissing,
or  living  in  close  quarters,  with  a  person  who  has  mumps.  Your  local  public  health
authorities  or  institution  will  communicate  to  the  groups  at  increased  risk  that  they
should receive this dose. If you already have two doses of MMR, it is not necessary to
seek out vaccination unless you are part of this group.  Top of Page Some people should
not get MMR vaccine or should wait. Tell your vaccine provider if the person getting the
vaccine:    This  information  was  taken  directly  from  the  MMR  (Measles,  Mumps  &
Rubella)  Vaccine  information  Statement  (VIS)  dated  2/12/2018.  Learn  who  should  not
get  MMRV  vaccine,  which  protects  against  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella
(chickenpox).  This  vaccine  is  only  licensed  for  use  in  children  who  are  12  months
through 12 years of age. You do not need measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine
if you meet any of these criteria for presumptive evidence of immunity*: If you do not
have presumptive evidence of immunity against measles, mumps, and rubella, talk with
your doctor about getting vaccinated. If you’re unsure whether you’ve been vaccinated,
you  should  first  try  to  find  your  vaccination  records.  If  you  do  not  have  written
documentation of MMR vaccine, you should get vaccinated. The MMR vaccine is safe,
and there is no harm in getting another dose if you may already be immune to measles,
mumps, or rubella. If you received a measles vaccine in the 1960s, you may not need
to be revaccinated. People who have documentation of receiving LIVE measles vaccine
in the 1960s do not need to be revaccinated. People who were vaccinated prior to 1968
with  either  inactivated  (killed)  measles  vaccine  or  measles  vaccine  of  unknown  type
should be revaccinated with at least one dose of live attenuated measles vaccine. This
recommendation  is  intended  to  protect  those  who  may  have  received  killed  measles
vaccine,  which  was  available  in  1963-1967  and  was  not  effective.  *Except  during  a
mumps  outbreak.  During  a  mumps  outbreak  public  health  authorities  might
recommend  an  additional  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  for  people  who  belong  to  groups  at
increased  risk  for  getting  mumps,  regardless  if  they  meet  the  criteria  listed  above.
**Birth  before  1957  provides  only  presumptive  evidence  for  measles,  mumps,  and
rubella.  Before  vaccines  were  available,  nearly  everyone  was  infected  with  measles,
mumps, and rubella viruses during childhood. The majority of people born before 1957
are likely to have been infected naturally and therefore are presumed to be protected
against measles, mumps, and rubella. Healthcare personnel born before 1957 without
laboratory evidence of immunity or disease should consider getting two doses of MMR
vaccine.   Top  of  Page  MMR  vaccine  is  very  effective  at  protecting  people  against
measles,  mumps,  and  rubella,  and  preventing  the  complications  caused  by  these
diseases.  People  who  receive  MMR  vaccination  according  to  the  U.S.  vaccination
schedule  are  usually  considered  protected  for  life  against  measles  and  rubella.  While
MMR  provides  effective  protection  against  mumps  for  most  people,  immunity  against
mumps may decrease over time and some people may no longer be protected against
mumps later in life. An additional dose may be needed if you are at risk because of a
mumps  outbreak.  One  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  is  93%  effective  against  measles,  78%
effective against mumps, and 97% effective against rubella. Two doses of MMR vaccine
are  97%  effective  against  measles  and  88%  effective  against  mumps.  MMR  is  an
attenuated (weakened) live virus vaccine. This means that after injection, the viruses
cause a harmless infection in the vaccinated person with very few, if any, symptoms
before  they  are  eliminated  from  the  body.  The  person’s  immune  system  fights  the
infection caused by these weakened viruses, and immunity (the body’s protection from
the  virus)  develops.  Some  people  who  get  two  doses  of  MMR  vaccine  may  still  get
measles,  mumps,  or  rubella  if  they  are  exposed  to  the  viruses  that  cause  these
diseases. Experts aren’t sure why; it could be that their immune systems didn’t respond
as well as they should have to the vaccine or their immune system’s ability to fight the
infection  decreased  over  time.  However,  disease  symptoms  are  generally  milder  in
vaccinated people.  Top of Page MMRV vaccine protects against four diseases: measles,
mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella  (chickenpox).  This  vaccine  is  only  licensed  for  use  in
children 12 months through 12 years of age. CDC recommends that children get one
dose  of  MMRV  vaccine  at  12  through  15  months  of  age,  and  the  second  dose  at  4
through 6 years of age. Children can receive the second dose of MMRV vaccine earlier
than 4 through 6 years. This second dose of MMRV vaccine can be given 3 months after
the  first  dose.  A  doctor  can  help  parents  decide  whether  to  use  this  vaccine  or  MMR
vaccine. MMRV is given by shot and may be given at the same time as other vaccines.
Please see the MMRV Vaccine Information Statement (VIS) for more information about
who should not get MMRV vaccine or should wait. For more information, see If you do
not have immunity against measles, mumps, and rubella and are exposed to someone
with one of these diseases, talk with your doctor about getting MMR vaccine. It is not
harmful to get MMR vaccine after being exposed to measles, mumps, or rubella, and
doing so may possibly prevent later disease. If you get MMR vaccine within 72 hours of
initially being exposed to measles, you may get some protection against the disease, or
have  milder  illness.  In  other  cases,  you  may  be   given  a  medicine  called
immunoglobulin  (IG)  within  six  days  of  being  exposed  to  measles,  to  provide  some
protection against the disease, or have milder illness. Unlike with measles, MMR has not
been shown to be effective at preventing mumps or rubella in people already infected
with the virus (i.e., post-exposure vaccination is not recommended). During outbreaks
of measles or mumps, everyone without presumptive evidence of immunity should be
brought up to date on their MMR vaccination. And some people who are already up to
date on their MMR vaccination may be recommended to get an additional dose of MMR
for  added  protection  against  disease.   Top  of  Page  All  50  states  and  the  District  of
Columbia (DC) have state laws that require children entering childcare or public schools
to  have  certain  vaccinations.  There  is  no  federal  law  that  requires  this.  The  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  recommends  that  all  states  require  children
entering  childcare,  and  students  starting  school,  college,  and  other  postsecondary
educational institutions to be up to date on MMR vaccination: For more information, see
State  Vaccination  Requirements.  Most  health  insurance  plans  cover  the  cost  of
vaccines. But you may want to check with your health insurance provider before going
to  the  doctor.  Learn  how  to  pay  for  vaccines.  If  you  don’t  have  insurance  or  if  your
insurance  does  not  cover  vaccines  for  your  child,  the  Vaccines  for  Children  (VFC)
Program may be able to help. This program helps families of eligible children who might
not otherwise have access to vaccines. To find out if your child is eligible, visit the VFC
website  or  ask  your  child’s  doctor.  You  can  also  contact  your  state  VFC  coordinator.
 Top of Page
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/mmr/public/index.html
