 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. A Guidebook for Surveillance and
Case Management
 Prepared by
 Kurt B. Nolte, M.D.,1,2* Randy L. Hanzlick, 
M.D.,2,3* Daniel C. Payne, 
Ph.D.,4 Andrew T. Kroger, M.D.,5 William R. Oliver, M.D.,6* Andrew M. Baker, 
M.D.,7* Dennis E. McGowan,3* Joyce L. DeJong, D.O.,8* Michael R. Bell, 
M.D.,7 Jeannette Guarner, M.D.,9 Wun-Ju Shieh, M.D., Ph.D.,9 and Sherif R. Zaki, M.D.,
Ph.D.9
 1University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, New Mexico; 2Division of
Public Health Surveillance and Informatics, Epidemiology 
Program  Office,  CDC;  3Fulton  County  Medical  Examiner's  Office,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
4Epidemiology and Surveillance Division, National Immunization Program, 
CDC; 5Immunization Services Division, National Immunization Program, CDC; 6Georgia
Bureau of Investigation, Trion, Georgia; 
7Hennepin  County  Medical  Examiner's  Office,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota;  8Sparrow
Hospital, Lansing, Michigan; and 
9Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center 
for Infectious Diseases, CDC
 The material in this report originated in the Epidemiology Program Office, Stephen B.
Thacker,  M.D.,  M.Sc.,  Director;  the  Division  of  Public  Health  Surveillance  and
Informatics,  Richard  Hopkins,  M.D.,  M.S.P.H.,  Acting  Director;  the  National  Center  for
Infectious  Diseases,  James  M.  Hughes,  M.D.,  Director;  and  the  Division  of  Viral  and
Rickettsial Diseases, James LeDuc, Ph.D., Sc.D., Director.
      
 
Summary
 Medical  examiners  and  coroners  (ME/Cs)  are  essential  public  health  partners  for
terrorism preparedness and response. 
These medicolegal investigators support both public health and public safety functions
and investigate deaths that are 
sudden,  suspicious,  violent,  unattended,  and  unexplained.  Medicolegal  autopsies  are
essential  for  making  organism-specific  diagnoses  in  deaths  caused  by  biologic
terrorism. This report has been created to 1) help public health officials understand the
role of 
ME/Cs in biologic terrorism surveillance and response efforts and 2) provide ME/Cs with
the detailed information required to 
build capacity for biologic terrorism preparedness in a public health context. This report
provides background information regarding biologic terrorism, possible biologic agents,
and  the  consequent  clinicopathologic  diseases,  autopsy  procedures,  and  diagnostic
tests as well as a description of biosafety risks and standards for autopsy precautions.
ME/Cs'  vital  role  in  terrorism  surveillance  requires  consistent  standards  for  collecting,
analyzing, and disseminating data. Familiarity with the 
operational, jurisdictional, and evidentiary concerns involving biologic terrorism-related
death  investigation  is  critical  to  both  ME/Cs  and  public  health  authorities.  Managing
terrorism-associated  fatalities  can  be  expensive  and  can  overwhelm  the  existing
capacity 
of  ME/Cs.  This  report  describes  federal  resources  for  funding  and  reimbursement  for
ME/C preparedness and response 
activities and the limited support capacity of the federal Disaster Mortuary Operational
Response  Team.  Standards  for  communication  are  critical  in  responding  to  any
emergency situation. This report, which is a joint collaboration between CDC and the
National Association of Medical Examiners (NAME), describes the relationship between
ME/Cs and public 
health departments, emergency management agencies, emergency operations centers,
and the Incident Command System.
Introduction
 Terrorist events in recent years have heightened awareness of the risk of terrorist acts
involving unconventional 
agents, including biologic and chemical weapons. The need for terrorism preparedness
and planning for response at multiple levels 
is  now  recognized,  including  planning  and  response  by  medical  examiners,  coroners
(ME/Cs), and the medicolegal 
death-investigation system.
 Federal,  state,  and  local  agencies  have  developed  plans  to  detect  and  respond  to
terrorism by using a 
multidisciplinary approach that requires active participation of health-care 
providers, law enforcement, and public health and safety 
staff. Because ME/Cs have expertise in disease surveillance, diagnosis, deceased body
handling, and evidence collection, they serve a vital role in terrorism preparedness and
response. 
ME/Cs should ensure that their role in surveillance for 
unusual  deaths  ---  and  response  to  known  terrorist  events  ---  is  a  critical  part  of  the
multidisciplinary  response  team.  Terrorism-related  drills  and  practical  exercises
conducted by public health, law enforcement, and public safety agencies should include
training 
on postmortem operations and services.
 This  report,  prepared  as  a  joint  effort  between  the  National  Association  of  Medical
Examiners (NAME) and CDC, is a 
first step in providing specific guidance to ME/C death investigators and public health
officials. This report can help bridge 
gaps 
that  exist  in  local  terrorism  preparedness  and  response  planning.  By  discussing  the
substantial contributions of 
ME/Cs,  this  report  can  also  serve  as  a  foundation  for  identifying  the  needs  of
medicolegal death-investigation systems and for 
addressing those needs through adequate training and 
funding.
 This report provides guidance, identifies support services and resources, and discusses
the roles and responsibilities of 
ME/Cs  and  affiliated  personnel  in  recognizing  and  responding  to  potential  biologic
terrorism  events.  Certain  questions  being  asked  by  ME/Cs  and  their  public  health
partners are answered in this report, including the following:
 CDC has identified medicolegal death investigators (i.e., ME/Cs) as essential partners in
terrorism preparedness 
and  response  (1).  This  report  is  designed  to  assist  ME/Cs  and  their  public  health
partners in developing appropriate capacity for recognizing and responding to deaths
that are potentially a consequence of biologic terrorism.
 The organization of medicolegal death investigative systems within the United States
varies by state 
(2). As ME/Cs and public health and public safety departments prepare to 
respond to terrorism-associated events, each state should consider 
how  its  medicolegal  death  investigation  system  is  organized.  These  systems  can  be
medical examiner-based (21 states and 
the  District  of  Columbia),  coroner-based  (10  states),  or  both  (19  states)  (Figure  1).
Typically, coroners are elected lay persons 
who use medical personnel to assist in death investigation and autopsy performance.
Medical examiners are 
usually appointed physicians and pathologists who have 
received special training in death investigation and forensic pathology.
 Medicolegal death investigation systems can be either centralized (i.e., investigations
emanate from one state-level 
office) or decentralized (i.e., investigations are conducted in more than one regional-,
county-,  or  city-based  office).  A  total  of  23  states  plus  the  District  of  Columbia  have
centralized systems; 27 states are decentralized. States with medical examiner systems
might  have  a  state-based  medical  examiner  office,  and  also  have  county-level
autonomous medical examiner 
offices that perform their own autopsies and manage their own data and administrative
systems.
 ME/C offices can also vary in their organizational position within the government. ME/C
offices might be a component 
of the public health department or the public safety department, or be independent of
other government agencies. All types 
of medicolegal death investigation systems should be considered when determining the
roles, responsibilities, and participation 
of ME/Cs in a jurisdiction's terrorism preparedness and response plans.
Biologic Terrorism
 Biologic terrorism is defined as "the use or threatened use of biologic agents against a
person,  group,  or  larger  population  to  create  fear  or  illnesses  for  purposes  of
intimidation, gaining an advantage, interruption of normal activities, or 
ideologic activities. The resultant reaction is dependent upon the actual event and the
population  involved  and  can  vary  from  a  minimal  effect  to  disruption  of  ongoing
activities and emotional reaction, illness, or death" 
(3). In the United States in 1984, an outbreak of terrorism-related 
Salmonella dysentery caused 715 persons to become ill, but no fatalities resulted 
(4).  In  2001,  the  intentional  distribution  of  anthrax  spores  through  the  U.S.  Postal
Service  resulted  in  five  deaths  from  inhalational  anthrax  (5--8).  MEs  were  critical
members of the 
response team during the anthrax outbreak, performing 
autopsies on each fatality to confirm the cause of death as anthrax and to identify the
manner  of  death  as  homicide.   ME/Cs  have  state  statutory  authority  to  investigate
deaths that are sudden, suspicious, violent, unattended, or 
unexplained (9); therefore, these investigators have a role in recognizing and reporting
fatal outbreaks, including those that are 
possibly terrorism-related, and a role in responding to a known terrorist event 
(10--12). Deaths of persons at home or away 
from  health-care  facilities  fall  under  the  jurisdiction  and  surveillance  of  medicolegal
death investigators 
(13), who often identify infectious diseases that are not terrorism-related. For example,
in 1993, MEs recognized an outbreak of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, a disease with
symptoms that can mimic terrorism-related illnesses 
(14). Deaths of patients in hospitals can also 
fall  under  medicolegal  jurisdiction  if  the  patient  dies  precipitously  before  an  accurate
diagnosis is made or if a public 
health  concern  exists  (10).  Fatalities  caused  by  known  terrorist  events  are  homicides
and therefore fall under the statutory 
jurisdiction of ME/Cs.
 Risk assessment for potential biologic terrorism is an 
uncertain process. Hypothetical terrorism scenarios can 
involve a limited number of cases or millions of cases, with proportionate numbers of
fatalities. For example, in 2002, the Dark 
Winter smallpox exercise included in the scenario 3 
million fourth-generation cases of smallpox and approximately 1 million 
deaths  (15).  In  2000,  the  TOPOFF  (Top  Officials)  plague  exercise  included  in  the
scenario 2,000 
fatalities  in  a  1-week  period  (16).  Given  such  possibilities  if  a  biologic  terrorist  event
occurred,  ME/Cs  should  proactively  identify  appropriate  resources  and  links  to  the
public  health,  emergency  response,  health-care,  and  law  enforcement  communities.
With appropriate 
resources  and  links,  ME/Cs  can  assist  with  surveillance  for  infectious  disease  deaths
possibly caused by terrorism and 
provide  confirmatory  diagnoses  and  evidence  in  deaths  clearly  linked  to  terrorism.
Conversely, public health agencies should recognize ME/Cs as a vital part of the public
health system and keep them informed of infectious disease outbreaks occurring in 
their  jurisdictions  so  that  they  are  better  able  to  recognize  related  fatalities.
Additionally, public health agencies should provide 
ME/Cs with appropriate resources to enhance their surveillance and 
response capacities for terrorism.
 An ME/C's principal diagnostic tool is the autopsy. This procedure enables pathologists
to identify the dead, observe 
the condition of the body, and reach conclusions regarding the cause and manner of
death. Autopsies are valuable 
in diagnosing unrecognized infections, evaluating therapy, 
understanding the pathogenesis and route of infection 
for  uncommon  or  emerging  infections,  and  developing  evidence  for  subsequent  legal
proceedings 
(10,17).  In  1979,  an  anthrax  outbreak  occurred  that  was  associated  with  an
unintentional  release  of  spores  from  a  bioweapons  factory  in  the  Soviet  city  of
Sverdlovsk; pathologists used autopsies to identify the cause of death as anthrax and
the route of infection as inhalation 
(18). In a 1945 smallpox outbreak, autopsy pathologists, rather than clinicians, were the
physicians who recognized the 
sentinel case (19).
Probable Biologic Terrorism Agents, Diseases, and Diagnostic Tests
Agent Categories
 In this report, the list of potential biologic terrorism agents has been prioritized on the
basis of the risk to 
national security (Box 1) (1). Biologic agents are classified as high-risk, or Category A,
because they can 1) be easily disseminated or transmitted person to person; 2) cause
high mortality, with potential for major public health impact; 3) might cause 
public  panic  and  social  disruption;  or  4)  require  special  action  for  public  health
preparedness. The second highest priority, or Category B, agents include those that 1)
are moderately easy to disseminate; 2) cause moderate morbidity and low 
mortality;  or  3)  require  enhanced  disease  surveillance.  The  third  highest  priority,  or
Category C, agents include emerging pathogens that 
can be engineered for future mass dissemination because of 1) availability; 2) ease of
production and dissemination; or 
3) potential for high morbidity and mortality and major health impact.
 Recognizing  pathologic  features  of  different  biologic  agents  is  important,  as
demonstrated by the inhalational and 
cutaneous anthrax cases that occurred in the United States during 2001 
(5,8,20--23). The autopsy of the index patient was 
performed  to  determine  how  the  person  had  acquired  anthrax  (cutaneous,
gastrointestinal,  or  inhalational).  After  inhalational  anthrax  was  diagnosed,  public
health officials were able to better define potential sources of the airborne 
Bacillus anthracis spores.
Diagnostic Tests
 If  possible,  given  the  constraints  of  case  volume  and  biosafety  concerns,  complete
autopsies with histologic sampling 
of multiple organs should be performed in deaths potentially caused by infections with
biologic terrorism agents. 
Autopsy diagnostic procedures for the Category A agents include 
microscopic examination, combined with the collection of 
specimens for additional tests that will aid in determining a definitive organism-specific
diagnosis. Blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and tissue samples or swabs should be placed in
transport media that will allow bacterial and viral isolation. Serum should be 
collected  for  serologic  and  biologic  assays.  Tissue  samples  should  be  frozen  for
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Tissue samples 
should  also  be  placed  in  electron  microscopy  fixative  (glutaraldehyde).  Microscopic
examination of formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded  tissues  stained  with  hematoxylin  and  eosin  (H&E)  is  essential  to
characterizing the patterns of tissue damage defining 
a  syndrome  and  establishes  a  list  of  possible  microorganisms  in  the  differential
diagnosis. To 
enhance  surveillance  for  these  conditions,  a  matrix  of  potential  pathology-based
syndromes (Table 1) has been developed to guide autopsy pathologists in recognizing
potential  cases  (24).  Special  stains  (e.g.,  tissue  Gram  and  silver  impregnation  stains
[Steiner's or 
Warthin-Starry]),  can  be  helpful  in  identifying  bacterial  agents.  Additionally,  specific
immunohistochemical  (IHC)  and  direct  fluorescent  assays  (DFA)  for  the  Category  A
terrorism agents have been developed and are available at 
CDC.† These tests can be performed 
on  formalin-fixed  tissues.  Clinical  and  pathologic  characteristics  of  the  Category  A
agents and corresponding diagnostic 
methods are summarized in this report (Tables 2 and 3).
Anthrax
 
Agent: Bacillus anthracis
 Pathologic  Findings.  Anthrax  has  three  pathologic  forms.  Cutaneous  anthrax  is
characterized by an eschar that forms 
where  the  bacteria  entered  the  skin  (Figure  2).  Microscopically,  the  epidermis  has
necrosis and crusts, whereas 
the dermis demonstrates necrosis, edema, hemorrhage, perivascular 
inflammation, and vasculitis. The lymph nodes that drain 
the skin site eventually become enlarged, necrotic, and hemorrhagic. Gastrointestinal
anthrax  is  distinguishable  by  hemorrhagic  ulcers  in  the  terminal  ileum  and  caecum
accompanied by mesenteric hemorrhagic lymphadenitis and 
peritonitis.
 Inhalational
 anthrax
 is
 characterized
 by
 hemorrhagic
 mediastinal
lymphadenitis (Figure 3) accompanied by pleural effusions. Histologically, lymph nodes
have  abundant  edema,  hemorrhage,  and  necrosis  with  limited  inflammatory  infiltrate
(Figure 4) (18,25--29). As any of the three anthrax forms progresses, the bacteria can
spread to abdominal organs, 
producing  petechial  hemorrhages,  and  to  the  central  nervous  system,  producing
hemorrhagic meningitis (i.e., cardinal's cap) (Figure 5).
 Diagnostic  Specimens.  Performing  a  complete  autopsy  with  histologic  sampling  of
multiple organs will help determine 
the distribution of bacilli and the portal of entry. The specimens that harbor the highest
number of 
B. anthracis organisms vary by the pathologic form of anthrax. For example, diagnosis
of  cutaneous  anthrax  requires  skin  samples  from  the  center  and  periphery  of  the
eschar,  whereas  for  inhalational  anthrax,  pleural  fluid  cell  blocks,  pleura  tissue,  and
mediastinal lymph 
nodes have the highest amounts of bacilli and 
antigens.
 Diagnostic Tests. If the patient has not received antibiotics, bacilli can be observed in
tissues with H&E, Gram, and 
silver impregnation stains and IHC assays (Figures 6 and 7). However, after antibiotic
treatment has been instituted, only silver stains and IHC assays will highlight the bacilli.
IHC assays for 
B. anthracis can demonstrate bacilli, bacillary fragments, 
and granular bacterial fragments in formalin-fixed 
tissues, even after 10 days of antibiotic treatment. Although a DFA test is available for
B. anthracis, it is not used on 
formalin-fixed tissues.
Plague
 
Agent: Yersinia pestis
 Pathologic Findings. Similar to anthrax, the clinicopathologic manifestations of plague
are classified on the basis of 
the portal of entry of Y. pestis. Bubonic plague refers to an acute lymphadenitis that
occurs after the bacteria have penetrated the skin (Figure 8). Usually, skin lesions are
inconspicuous or have a small vesicle or pustule that might not be evident at the 
time the infected lymph node (bubo) appears. Histologically, the bubo exhibits edema,
hemorrhage, necrosis, and a 
ground-glass  amphophilic  material  that  represents  masses  of  bacilli.  Primary
pneumonic  plague  refers  to  the  infection  caused  by  inhalation  of  airborne  bacteria,
producing
 intra-alveolar
 edema
 accompanied
 by
 varying
 amounts
 of
 acute
inflammatory 
infiltrate and abundant bacteria. Primary septicemic plague occurs when 
Y. pestis enters through the oropharyngeal route. In 
septicemic  plague,  the  cervical  lymph  nodes  draining  the  infected  region  will  display
the  previously  described  pathologic  features.  As  the  disease  progresses,  bacteria  are
distributed widely throughout the body, and findings consistent with shock and 
disseminated intravascular coagulation are observed. Septicemic plague with bacterial
seeding of the lungs results in secondary pneumonic plague (Figure 9, left [A]) 
(30--35).
 Diagnostic  Specimens.  Performing  a  complete  autopsy  with  histologic  sampling  of
multiple organs will help determine 
the distribution of bacteria and the portal of entry. Enlarged, soft, hemorrhagic lymph
nodes  should  be  sampled  and  tested  for  Y.  pestis.  The  lungs  should  be  sampled  to
determine whether a primary or secondary infection existed 
(30).
 Diagnostic  Tests.  Y.  pestis  can  be  visualized  in  formalin-fixed  tissues  by  using  H&E,
Gram,  silver  impregnation,  and  Giemsa  stains;  however,  specific  identification  of  the
bacilli in tissues can only be performed by using IHC or DFA 
(Figure 9, right [B]).
Tularemia
 
Agent: Francisella tularensis
 Pathologic  Findings.  Tularemia  can  also  have  multiple  clinicopathologic  forms,
depending on the portal of entry, 
including  ulceroglandular,  oculoglandular,  glandular,  pharyngeal,  typhoidal,  and
pneumonic.  In  all  forms,  the  primary  draining  lymph  nodes  demonstrate  necrotizing
lymphadenitis surrounded by a neutrophilic and granulomatous inflammatory infiltrate.
In 
the  ulceroglandular  form,  a  skin  ulcer  or  eschar  with  corresponding  lymph  node
involvement is present, but skin lesions are 
absent in the glandular form. In the oculoglandular form, the eye exhibits conjunctivitis
with 
ulcers  and  soft-tissue  edema.  The  pharyngeal  form  is  characterized  by  pharyngitis  or
tonsillitis with ulceration. The lungs in pneumonic tularemia exhibit abundant fibrinous
necrosis accompanied by varying amounts of mixed inflammatory 
infiltrate (Figure 10, left [A]). Typhoidal tularemia refers to systemic involvement with
focal areas of necrosis in the major organs and disseminated intravascular coagulation,
but lacks a group of primary draining lymph nodes 
(36--40). In cases of tularemia sepsis, 
organisms can be seen with blood smears (Figure 11).
 Diagnostic  Specimens.  Performing  a  complete  autopsy  with  histologic  sampling  of
multiple organs will help determine the distribution of bacteria and the portal of entry.
Enlarged, necrotic lymph nodes should be sampled and tested for 
F. tularensis. Culture swabs from the potential portals of entry (e.g., skin, conjunctiva,
or  throat)  can  be  useful.   Diagnostic  Tests.  The  microorganisms  are  difficult  to
demonstrate with special stains; however, IHC and DFA have 
been successfully used in formalin-fixed tissues to demonstrate the bacteria (Figure 10,
right [B]).
Botulism
 
Agent: Absorption of Clostridium 
botulinum Toxin
 Pathologic Findings. C. botulinum elaborates a potent, preformed neurotoxin. The most
important diagnostic feature 
of botulism is the clinical history because the histopathologic changes are nonspecific
(e.g., central nervous system hyperemia 
and microthrombosis of small vessels) (41).
 Diagnostic Specimens. When botulism is suspected 
because of a symmetrical, descending pattern of weakness and 
paralysis  of  cranial  nerves,  limbs,  and  trunk,  the  pathologist  should  obtain  tissue  for
anaerobic  cultures  from  the  suspect  entry  sites  (i.e.,  wound,  gastrointestinal  tract,  or
respiratory tract) and serum for botulinum toxin mouse bioassay.
 Diagnostic Tests. Microbiologic culture and botulinum toxin mouse bioassay with serum
are necessary. 
Smallpox
 
Agent: Variola virus (Orthopoxvirus)
 Pathologic  Findings.  Smallpox  is  an  acute,  highly  contagious  illness  caused  by  a
member of the 
Poxviridae  family.  Variola  major  refers  to  the  form  with  a  higher  mortality  rate,  and
variola  minor  or  alastrim  is  a  milder  form.  The  lesions  develop  at  approximately  the
same time and rate, starting in the palms and soles and spreading centrally; they first
appear as macules 
and  papules,  and  then  progress  to  vesicles  and  umbilicated  pustules  (Figure  12),
followed by scabs and crusts, and end as 
pitted scars. Occasionally, a hemorrhagic and uniformly fatal form occurs. This form has
extensive bleeding into the skin 
and  gastrointestinal  tract  and  can  be  grossly  taken  for  meningococcemia,  acute
leukemia, or a drug reaction 
(42).  Microscopically,  the  skin  exhibits  multiloculated,  intraepidermal  vesicles;
ballooning  degeneration  of  epithelial  cells;  intracytoplasmic,  paranuclear,  and
eosinophilic  viral  inclusions  (i.e.,  Guarnieri  bodies)  (Figure  13);  and  occasionally
intranuclear  viral  changes.  Secondary  infections  (e.g.,  bronchitis,  pneumonia,  and
encephalitis) can complicate the clinical appearance 
(43--48).
 Diagnostic Specimens. Cutaneous lesions are the most 
important sample for smallpox. Samples should include fluid 
from vesicles to be studied by electron microscopy, and skin samples fixed in formalin
for histopathology 
and immunohistochemistry. Performing a complete autopsy with histologic sampling of
multiple organs will help determine 
the  extent  and  distribution  of  the  virus,  as  well  as  the  occurrence  of  secondary
infections.
 Diagnostic  Tests.  Electron  microscopic  studies  of  vesicle  fluid  or  skin  samples  can
identify  characteristic  viral  particles  (Figure  14).  IHC  studies  have  demonstrated  the
virus in the epithelial cells and in the subjacent fibroconnective tissue. 
Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers
 
Agents: Multiple
 Viruses that can cause hemorrhagic fevers belong to different families, including 
Filoviridae (Ebola, Marburg viruses), 
Flaviviridae (yellow fever, dengue viruses), 
Bunyaviridae  (Rift  Valley  fever,  Crimean  Congo,  Hantaan,  Sin  Nombre  viruses),  and
Arenaviridae (Junin, Machupo, Guanarito, Lassa viruses). 
 Pathologic Findings. The term viral hemorrhagic fever is reserved for febrile illnesses
associated  with  abnormal  vascular  regulation  and  vascular  damage.  Common
pathologic findings at autopsy include petechial hemorrhages and ecchymoses of skin
(Figure 15), mucous membranes, and internal organs. Although systemic hemorrhages
occur in the majority of 
viral  hemorrhagic  fevers,  certain  agents  infect  specific  cells  and  thus  histopathologic
features  can  differ  among  agents.  Necrosis  of  liver  and  lymphoid  tissues,  as  well  as
diffuse alveolar damage, occur in the majority of viral hemorrhagic fevers, but can 
be  more  prominent  for  certain  infections  (e.g.,  midzonal  hepatocellular  necrosis  is
prominent in yellow fever, but not in 
dengue).  Viral  inclusions  can  be  visualized  in  hepatocytes  with  Ebola  or  Marburg
infections by using light and 
electron microscopy (Figure 16) (49--54).
 Diagnostic  Specimens.  Performing  a  complete  autopsy  with  histologic  sampling  of
multiple organs can determine 
the extent of the disease and help identify the specific virus. After a specific etiologic
agent  has  been  isolated  or  identified  from  an  index  case,  targeted  sampling  of
additional  cases  with  similar  symptoms  can  decrease  the  exposure  of  autopsy
personnel 
to  these  hazardous  agents  and  still  yield  diagnostic  material.  For  example,  during
outbreaks of Ebola hemorrhagic fever in Africa, using IHC on skin punch biopsy samples
was 
sufficient to provide a diagnosis in a substantial number of fatalities 
and minimized the risk to the medical personnel who obtained the specimens 
(49).
 Diagnostic  Tests.  Serum  and  skin  samples  can  be  tested  by  using  PCR,
immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy (Figure 17). Additionally, serum can be
inoculated into 
experimental animals or culture cells for viral isolation.
Laboratory Response Network
 CDC, in collaboration with the Association of Public Health Laboratories (APHL), the FBI,
and other federal agencies, has developed the Laboratory Response Network (LRN) as a
multilevel system of linked local, state, and federal public health laboratories as well as
veterinary, food, and environmental laboratory partners 
(55--57).  The  primary  components  of  LRN  are  the  state  public  health  laboratories
representing  each  of  the  50  states.  Within  certain  states,  laboratories  are  located  in
different counties and more populated cities. In addition, federal laboratories within LRN
include CDC, the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Army
Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), and other Department of 
Defense laboratories.
 Each  laboratory  has  been  assigned  a  designation  (Table  4),  predicated  on  their
diagnostic capability, ranging from 
sentinel  status  (i.e.,  Level  A  for  presumptive-level  screening)  through  national
laboratory status (i.e., Level D for genetic subtyping 
and  confirmatory  testing)  (55--57).  Hospital  clinical  laboratories  are  designated  as
sentinel laboratories 
(Level A); they have a rapid rule out and forward mission when handling presumptive
clinical  cases.  County,  city,  and  state  public  health  laboratories  are  designated  as
confirmatory  reference  facilities  (Level  B,  core,  or  Level  C,  advanced),  depending  on
their degree of 
containment
 capacity
 and
 technical
 proficiency
 in
 performing
 agent-specific
confirmatory  analyses  and  rapid  presumptive  testing  by  PCR  for  nucleic  acid
amplification  and  time-resolved  fluorescence  for  antigen  detection.  The  Level  D
designation is reserved 
for  CDC  and  USAMRIID  laboratories.  No  regional  laboratories  exist;  the  network
functions by channeling the 
specimens through the designated levels to a pathogen-specific conclusion.
 ME/Cs should submit specimens from suspected biologic terrorism-related cases to the
state public health 
laboratory through the local or county laboratory that serves their jurisdiction, unless
their  standard  reporting  protocol  makes  them  a  direct  client  of  the  state  laboratory.
These primary laboratories conduct the tests that fall within the scope of their ability 
and  refer  specimens  to  the  state  laboratory  for  more  advanced  tests.  The  state
laboratory  processes  and  refers  specimens  in  a  similar  manner  to  other  state
laboratories or CDC 
(Figure 18). Contact information for all state diagnostic laboratories is included 
in this report (Appendix A). The point of contact for ME/Cs should remain the laboratory
where the specimens were 
first submitted, unless they are directed to contact a reference laboratory (e.g., a state
laboratory) to track the progress of the testing. Before the need for LRN services arises,
ME/Cs should establish contact with the public health laboratory 
serving their jurisdiction and determine how the laboratory 
services can be best accessed when needed. Such a relationship 
might require a memorandum-of-understanding, which should be prepared and agreed
to in advance.
 All  specimens  that  are  to  be  tested  for  potential  biologic  terrorism  pathogens  are
handled through the same reporting 
and  submission  process  except  specimens  potentially  containing  smallpox  virus.
Because smallpox virus should only be handled 
in a Biosafety Level 4 facility, the specimen should be transported to CDC 
(57). If ME/Cs suspect this agent, they should 
notify their state public health department, which can test for other agents that cause a
vesiculopustular rash (i.e., varicella zoster, vaccinia, and monkeypox viruses) and either
further test or refer the specimen for rapid presumptive screening for smallpox virus by
PCR.  The same laboratories will  be able to  coordinate submission  of the specimen  to
CDC as needed for 
pathogen  confirmation.  In  advance,  ME/Cs  should  establish  contact  with  the  state
health
 department
 representative
 who
 would
 coordinate
 smallpox
 specimen
submission.  In  their  surveillance  capacity  and  concurrent  with  specimen  submission,
ME/Cs  should  notify  the  epidemiologic  investigation  unit  in  their  local  or  state  health
department of the suspected smallpox-infected decedent.
Biosafety Concerns
Autopsy Risks
 Biosafety  is  critical  for  autopsy  personnel  who  might  handle  human  remains
contaminated  with  biologic  terrorism  agents.  Tularemia,  viral  hemorrhagic  fevers,
smallpox, glanders, and Q fever have been transmitted to persons performing autopsies
(i.e., prosectors); certain infections have been fatal 
(49,58--70). Infections can be transmitted at autopsies by 
percutaneous inoculation (i.e., injury), splashes to unprotected mucosa, and inhalation
of infectious aerosols 
(71).  All  of  the  Category  A  pathogens  are  potentially  transmissible  to  autopsy
personnel, although the degree of risk varies considerably among these organisms.
 Additionally, autopsies of persons who die as the result of terrorism-related infections
might expose autopsy personnel 
to residual surface contamination with infectious material. For example, botulinum toxin
has the potential to be inhaled 
by autopsy personnel if it is present on the body surface at the time of examination 
(72).  Heavy  surface  contamination  of  the  body  is  unlikely  because  of  the  incubation
period  for  the  majority  of  infectious  agents  and  the  likelihood  that  a  victim  will  have
bathed and changed clothes after exposure and 
before becoming symptomatic and dying (73). However, if such 
residual material (e.g., powder) is present, examination and specimen collection should
be undertaken by using 
appropriate biosafety procedures to protect autopsy and 
analytic laboratory personnel from possible exposure to more concentrated 
infectious material.
 Because human remains infected with unidentified biologic terrorism pathogens might
arrive at autopsy without 
warning, basic protective measures described in this report should be maintained for all
contact with potentially infectious 
materials (74,75). In addition to these measures, certain high-risk activities (e.g., use of
oscillating saw) are known to increase 
the  potential  for  worker  exposure  and  should  be  performed  with  added  safety
precautions.
Autopsy Precautions
 Existing guidelines for biosafety and infection control for patient care are designed to
prevent transmission of 
infections  from  living  patients  to  care  providers,  or  from  laboratory  specimens  to
laboratory technicians 
(76,77). Although certain biosafety and infection-control guidelines are applicable to the
handling of human remains, inherent differences exist 
in transmission mechanisms and intensity of potential exposures during autopsies that
require specific consideration (71).
 As with any contact involving broken skin or body fluids when caring for live patients,
certain precautions must be 
applied to all contact with human remains, regardless of known or suspected infectivity.
Even if a pathogen of concern has been 
ruled out, other unsuspected agents might be present. Thus, all human autopsies must
be performed in an 
appropriate  autopsy  room  with  adequate  air  exchange  by  personnel  wearing
appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) 
(71).  All  autopsy  facilities  should  have  written  biosafety  policies  and  procedures;
autopsy  personnel  should  receive  training  in  these  policies  and  procedures,  and  the
annual occurrence of training should be documented.
 Standard  Precautions  are  the  combination  of  PPE  and  procedures  used  to  reduce
transmission of all pathogens from 
moist body substances to personnel or patients 
(77). These precautions are driven by the nature of an interaction (e.g., possibility 
of splashing or potential of soiling garments) rather than the nature of a pathogen. In
addition, transmission-based 
precautions  are  applied  for  known  or  suspected  pathogens.  Precautions  include  the
following:
 All autopsies involve exposure to blood, a risk of being splashed or splattered, and a
risk of percutaneous injury 
(71). The propensity of postmortem procedures to cause gross soiling of the immediate
environment  also  requires  use  of  effective  containment  strategies.  All  autopsies
generate aerosols; furthermore, postmortem procedures that require using 
devices (e.g., oscillating saws) that generate fine aerosols can create airborne particles
that contain infectious pathogens not normally transmitted by the airborne route 
(71,78--81).
 
PPE
 For autopsies, Standard Precautions can be summarized as using a surgical scrub suit,
surgical cap, impervious gown 
or  apron  with  full  sleeve  coverage,  a  form  of  eye  protection  (e.g.,  goggles  or  face
shield), shoe covers, and double surgical gloves with an interposed layer of cut-proof
synthetic mesh 
(71). Surgical masks protect the nose and mouth from splashes of 
body  fluids  (i.e.,  droplets  >5  µm);  they  do  not  provide  protection  from  airborne
pathogens 
(82,83).  Because  of  the  fine  aerosols  generated  at  autopsy,  prosectors  should  at  a
minimum  wear  N-95  respirators  for  all  autopsies,  regardless  of  suspected  or  known
pathogens  (84).  However,  because  of  the  efficient  generation  of  high  concentration
aerosols by mechanical devices 
in the autopsy setting, powered air-purifying respirators (PAPRs) equipped with N-95 or
high-efficiency particulate air 
(HEPA) 
filters  should  be  considered  (85--87).  Autopsy  personnel  who  cannot  wear  N-95
respirators because of facial hair or other 
fit limitations should wear PAPRs.
 
Autopsy Procedures
 Standard safety practices to prevent injury from sharp items should be followed at all
times 
(77). These include never recapping, bending, or cutting needles, and ensuring that 
appropriate puncture-resistant sharps disposal containers 
are available. These containers should be placed as close as possible to where sharp
items are used to minimize the distance a sharp item is carried. Filled sharps disposal
containers should be discarded and replaced regularly and never overfilled (77).
 Protective  outer  garments  should  be  removed  when  leaving  the  immediate  autopsy
area and discarded in 
appropriate laundry or waste receptacles, either in an antechamber to the 
autopsy suite or immediately inside the entrance if 
an antechamber is unavailable. Handwashing is requisite upon glove removal 
(77).
 
Engineering Strategies and Facility Design Concerns
 Air-handling  systems  for  autopsy  suites  should  ensure  both  adequate  air  exchanges
per hour and correct directionality 
and exhaust of airflow. Autopsy suites should have a minimum of 12 air exchanges/hour
and  should  be  at  a  negative  pressure  relative  to  adjacent  passageways  and  office
spaces 
(84). Air should never be returned to the building interior, but should 
be exhausted outdoors, away from areas of human traffic or gathering spaces (e.g., air
should be directed off the roof) and 
away  from  other  air  intake  systems  (88,89).  For  autopsies,  local  airflow  control  (i.e.,
laminar flow systems) can be used to direct aerosols away from personnel; however,
this safety feature does not eliminate the need for appropriate PPE.
 Clean  sinks  and  safety  equipment  should  be  positioned  so  that  they  do  not  require
unnecessary travel to reach during routine work and are readily available in the event
of an emergency. Work surfaces should have integral waste-containment and drainage
features that minimize spills of body fluids and wastewater.
 Biosafety cabinets should be available for handling and 
examination of smaller infectious specimens; however, 
the majority of available cabinets are not designed to contain a whole body 
(76,90). Oscillating saws are available with 
vacuum shrouds to reduce the amount of particulate and droplet aerosols generated 
(80).  These  devices  should  be  used  whenever  possible  to  decrease  the  risk  of
dispersing aerosols that might lead to occupationally acquired infection.  
Vaccination and Postexposure Prophylaxis
 Vaccines are available that convey protection against certain diseases considered to
be potentially 
terrorism-associated, including anthrax, plague, and tularemia 
(76). However, these vaccines are not recommended for unexposed autopsy 
workers at low risk. Consistent application of standard safety practices should obviate
the need for vaccination for 
B. anthracis and Y. pestis. In 2003, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) initiated a program to administer 
vaccinia (smallpox) vaccine to first responders and medical personnel. In this context,
persons who might be called on to assess 
remains or specimens from patients with smallpox should be included among this group
(91) (Box 2).
 The  administration  of  prophylactic  antibiotics  to  autopsy  workers  exposed  to
potentially lethal bacterial pathogens 
is sometimes appropriate. For example, autopsy personnel exposed to 
Y. pestis aerosols should consider receiving such 
treatment regardless of vaccination status 
(92). Similarly, because tularemia can result from infection with a limited number 
of  organisms,  an  exposure  to  F.  tularensis  should  also  prompt  consideration  of
antimicrobial prophylaxis. However, decisions 
to  use  antimicrobial  postexposure  prophylaxis  should  be  made  in  consultation  with
infectious disease and occupational 
health specialists, with consideration made of vaccination status, nature of exposure,
and safety and efficacy of prophylaxis.
 
Decontamination of Body-Surface Contaminants
 If  human  remains  with  heavy,  residual  surface  contamination  (i.e.,  visible)  must  be
assessed, they should be cleansed 
before being brought to the autopsy facility and after appropriate samples have been
collected in the field. Surface cleaning should 
be performed with an appropriate cleaning solution (e.g., 0.5% hypochlorite solution or
phenolic disinfectant) used according 
to  manufacturer's  instructions.  If  the  number  of  remains  requiring  autopsy  is  limited
(i.e., one or two), cleaning of 
heavily  contaminated  remains  can  be  undertaken  in  an  autopsy  facility  that  has  the
infrastructure,  capacity,  and  hazardous  materials  (HAZMAT)-trained  personnel  to
perform the cleaning safely. Heavily contaminated remains should not be brought 
to  facilities  where  patient  care  is  performed.  Both  personnel  carrying  contaminated
remains and personnel 
occupying  areas  through  which  remains  are  being  carried  should  wear  PPE.  HAZMAT
personnel should perform large-scale decontamination 
outdoors  in  a  controlled  setting.  To  ensure  mutual  understanding  of  the  roles  and
responsibilities  of  HAZMAT  and  death-investigation  personnel  in  situations  with
contaminated  remains,  ME/Cs  should  develop  response  protocols  with  HAZMAT
personnel before such an event occurs.
 
Waste Handling
 Liquid waste (e.g., body fluids) can be flushed or washed down ordinary sanitary drains
without special 
procedures.  Pretreatment  of  liquid  waste  is  not  required  and  might  damage  sewage
treatment  systems.  If  substantial  volumes  are  expected,  the  local  wastewater
treatment  personnel  should  be  consulted  in  advance.  Solid  waste  should  be
appropriately contained in biohazard or sharps containers and incinerated in a medical
waste incinerator 
(73,75).
 
Storage and Disposition of Corpses
 The majority of potential biologic terrorism agents 
(B. anthracis, Y. pestis, or botulinum toxin) are unlikely to be 
transmitted  to  personnel  engaged  in  the  nonautopsy  handling  of  a  contaminated
cadaver.  However,  such  agents  as  the  hemorrhagic  fever  viruses  and  smallpox  virus
can be transmitted in this manner. Therefore, Standard Precautions 
(77) should be followed while handling all cadavers before and after 
autopsy.
 When  bodies  are  bagged  at  the  scene  of  death,  surface  decontamination  of  the
corpse-containing body bags is 
required  before  transport.  Bodies  can  be  transported  and  stored  (refrigerated)  in
impermeable bags (double-bagging is preferable), after wiping visible soiling on outer
bag  surfaces  with  0.5%  hypochlorite  solution.  Storage  areas  should  be  negatively
pressured with 9--12 air exchanges/hour.
 The  risks  of  occupational  exposure  to  biologic  terrorism  agents  while  embalming
outweigh its advantages; therefore, 
bodies infected with these agents should not be embalmed. Bodies infected with such
agents as 
Y. pestis or F. tularensis can be 
directly buried without embalming. However, such agents as 
B. anthracis produce spores that can be long-lasting and, in such 
cases,  cremation  is  the  preferred  disposition  method.  Similarly,  bodies  contaminated
with highly infectious agents (e.g., 
smallpox  and  hemorrhagic  fever  viruses)  should  be  cremated  without  embalming.  If
cremation is not an option, the body should 
be  properly  secured  in  a  sealed  container  (e.g.,  a  Zigler  case  or  other  hermetically
sealed casket) to reduce the potential risk of pathogen transmission. However, sealed
containers still have the potential to leak or lose integrity, especially if they 
are dropped or are transported to a different altitude 
(93).
 ME/Cs should work with local emergency management agencies, funeral directors, and
the state and local 
health  departments  to  determine,  in  advance,  the  local  capacity  (bodies  per  day)  of
existing  crematoriums,  and  soil  and  water  table  characteristics  that  might  affect
interment. For planning purposes, a thorough cremation produces approximately 3--6
pounds  of  ash  and  fragments.  ME/Cs  should  also  work  with  local  emergency
management agencies to identify sources and costs 
of  special  equipment  (e.g.,  air  curtain  incinerators,  which  are  capable  of  high-volume
cremation) and the newer 
plasma  incinerators,  which  are  faster  and  more  efficient  than  previous  incineration
methods. The costs of such equipment and the time required to obtain them on request
should be 
included in state and local terrorism preparedness plans.
ME/C's Role in Biologic Terrorism Surveillance
 ME/Cs  should  be  a  key  component  of  population-based  surveillance  for  biologic
terrorism. They see fatalities 
among persons who have not been examined initially by other physicians, emergency
departments,  or  hospitals.  In  addition,  persons  who  have  been  seen  first  by  other
health-care providers might die precipitously, without a confirmed diagnosis, and 
therefore  fall  under  medicolegal  jurisdiction.  Autopsies  are  a  critical  component  of
surveillance  for  fatal  infectious  diseases,  because  they  provide  organism-specific
diagnoses and clarify the route of exposure 
(94). With biologic terrorism-related fatalities, 
organisms identified in autopsy tissues can be characterized by strain to assist in the
process of criminal attribution. 
 Models for ME surveillance for biologic terrorism mortality include sharing of daily case
dockets  with  public  health  authorities  (e.g.,  King  County,  Washington,  and  an  active
symptom-driven  case  acquisition  and  pathology  syndrome-based  public  health
reporting system developed in New Mexico 
[24]). Different areas of responsibility exist for ME/Cs 
regarding their role in effective surveillance for possible terrorism events. The following
steps  should  be  taken  in  local  jurisdictions  to  enable  ME/Cs  to  implement  biologic
terrorism 
surveillance:
 For  public  health  surveillance,  criminal  justice,  and  administrative  purposes,  ME/Cs
should promptly, accurately, and thoroughly collect, document, electronically store, and
have available for analysis and reporting, case-specific death-investigation information.
Initially, depending upon local 
resources and legal restrictions, all aspects of data management 
and  use  might  not  need  to  occur  in-house.  Recognizing  that  numerous  entities  use
medicolegal death-investigation data, ME/Cs should establish collaborations with public
health and law enforcement professionals to achieve the goal of complete, 
accurate,  and  timely  case-specific  death-investigation  data.  Advance  planning  and
policy development should also clarify to whom such data may be released and under
which circumstances. To facilitate this process, the following steps should be taken:
 On February 28, 2003, Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5 (HSPD-5) modified
federal response policy 
(97).  Under  the  new  directive,  the  Secretary  of  Homeland  Security  is  the  principal
federal official for domestic incident management. Pursuant to the Homeland Security
Act of 2002 
(Public Law 107-296), the Secretary of the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) is responsible for coordinating federal operations within the
United States to prepare for, 
respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other emergencies.
The Secretary will coordinate the federal government's resources used in response to or
recovery from terrorist attacks, major disasters, or other emergencies if and when any
one of the following four conditions applies: 1) a federal department or agency acting
under its own 
authority has requested the assistance of the Secretary; 2) the resources of state and
local  authorities  are  overwhelmed  and  federal  assistance  has  been  requested  by  the
appropriate state and local authorities; 3) more than one federal department or agency
has 
become  substantially  involved  in  responding  to  the  incident;  or  4)  the  Secretary  has
been directed to assume responsibility 
for managing the domestic incident by the 
President.
 HSPD-5  further  stipulates  that  the  U.S.  Attorney  General,  through  the  FBI,  has  lead
federal responsibility for 
criminal investigations of terrorist acts or terrorist threats by persons or groups inside
the United States, or directed at U.S. citizens 
or institutions abroad, where such acts are within the federal criminal jurisdiction of the
United States. The FBI, 
in  cooperation  with  other  federal  departments  and  agencies  engaged  in  activities  to
protect national security, will also coordinate the activities of the other members of the
law enforcement community to detect, prevent, preempt, and disrupt 
terrorist  attacks  against  the  United  States.  In  the  event  of  a  weapons  of  mass
destruction (WMD) threat or incident, the local FBI field office special agent in charge
(SAC) will be responsible for leading the federal criminal investigation and law 
enforcement actions, acting in concert with the principal federal 
officer (PFO) appointed by the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security and state and local officials.
 The FBI has a WMD coordinator in each of the agency's 56 field offices (Appendix B).
These  persons  are  responsible  for  pre-event  planning  and  preparedness,  as  well  as
responding to WMD threats or incidents. ME/Cs are encouraged to 
contact  their  local  FBI  WMD  coordinator  before  an  incident  to  clarify  roles  and
responsibilities, and ME/Cs should contact the coordinator in any case where concerns
or suspicions exist of a potential WMD-related death.
 The FBI assertion of jurisdiction at the scene of a terrorist event would not necessarily
usurp  (or  relieve)  ME/Cs  from  their  statutory  authority  and  responsibility  to  identify
decedents and determine cause and manner of death. Such an 
arrangement  is  consistent  with  the  performance  of  medicolegal  death  investigation
where other federal crimes are involved. ME/Cs who conduct terrorism-associated death
investigations  should  be  prepared  to  present  their  medicolegal  death  investigation
findings in federal court.
Public Health Agency Authority
 State public health laws might establish the health department's specific authority to
control certain aspects of 
operations,  personnel,  or  corpses  in  a  public  health  emergency.  For  example,  the
Center for Law and the Public's Health at Georgetown and Johns Hopkins Universities, at
the request of CDC, has created a model state emergency health powers act for 
adoption by states (98). Different states have either enacted versions of this act or are
in the process of introducing similar legislative bills (99). ME/Cs should know specifically
how  existing  state  laws  might  provide  for  the  health  department  to  take  control  and
dictate  the  disposition  of  human  remains  (burial  or  cremation).  A  state's  emergency
health powers act might also 
provide for
 ME/Cs  and  health  departments  should  work  together  as  part  of  the  emergency
planning process to determine 
which  emergency  health  powers  might  be  established  by  the  health  department  and
under what circumstances these might be invoked for each potential biologic terrorism
agent. Determining how health departments and ME/C operations can 
best
 interact,
 including
 documenting
 concerns
 regarding
 the
 availability
 of
death-investigation personnel and the control and disposition of human remains, should
be emphasized. ME/Cs should take part in community exercises to clarify and practice
their role in the emergency response process.
General Operations
 In the majority of terrorism-associated scenarios, ME/Cs are responsible for identifying
remains  and  determining  the  cause  and  manner  of  death.  To  that  end,  ME/Cs  might
need  to  enlist  additional  local,  state,  or  federal  assistance  while  maintaining  primary
responsibility  for  death  investigation.  ME/Cs  should  request  this  assistance  from  the
local or state emergency operations center (EOC), as appropriate. The probable source
of federal assistance is the Disaster 
Mortuary  Operational  Response  Team  (DMORT).  However,  DMORT  has  not  yet
developed capacity to respond to events 
precipitated  by  the  release  of  biologic  agents  (further  details  regarding  DMORT  and
other federal agencies are discussed in 
following sections).
 Where  possible,  postmortem  examinations  for  identifying  remains  and  determining
cause and manner of death should 
occur  within  the  local  or  state  jurisdiction  where  victims  have  died.  Local  resources
dictate whether the statutory ME/C system 
can  accomplish  this  with  existing  personnel  and  within  existing  facilities,  or  whether
additional local, state, or federal assistance is necessary. Moving substantial numbers
of human remains, particularly those contaminated by a biologic agent (known 
or  unknown)  to  locations  considerably  distant  from  the  scenes  of  death  is  neither
feasible nor safe. Two potential strategies can 
be used to augment the biosafety capacity of local agencies having limited resources.
One strategy would be to develop a 
mobile  Biosafety  Level  3  autopsy  laboratory.  Another  strategy  would  be  to  develop
regional Biosafety Level 3 autopsy centers that 
can  handle  cases  from  surrounding  jurisdictions  or  states.  A  combination  of  the  two
approaches will probably achieve the 
best coverage of national needs.
Postmortem Examinations and Evidence Collection
 A  large-scale  biologic  event  might  create  more  fatalities  than  combined  local,  state,
and federal agencies can store 
and  examine  (15).  Small  or  rural  jurisdictions  might  be  overwhelmed  by  a  relatively
limited number of fatalities, whereas larger state or city ME/C offices could conceivably
process  greater  numbers  of  human  remains.  No  formulas  exist  that  can  be  used  to
determine  in  advance  the  autopsy  rate  and  the  extent  of  autopsy  that  might  be
needed. In the event of a biologic event, 
ME/Cs should perform complete autopsies on as many cases as feasible on the basis of
case volume and biosafety risks. 
These autopsies should meet the standards that forensic pathologists usually meet for
homicide cases. Conferring with the FBI 
and  appropriate  prosecutorial  authorities  early  in  the  process  will  ensure  that
appropriate documentary and diagnostic 
maneuvers  are  employed  that  will  support  the  criminal  justice  process.  Similarly,
interacting with public health 
authorities early in the death-investigation process should 
ensure that appropriate diagnostic evaluations are conducted to support the public 
health investigation and response.
 After the etiologic agent has been determined, certain (or all) other potentially related
fatalities can be selectively sampled 
to  confirm  the  presence  of  the  organism  in  question.  ME/Cs  should  coordinate  the
decision to transition from 
complete  autopsies  to  more  limited  examinations  with  law  enforcement  and  public
health professionals. Selective sampling 
could include skin swabs and needle aspiration of blood or other body fluids, tissues for
culture, or biopsies of a particular tissue or organ for histologic diagnostic tests (e.g.,
immunohistochemical procedures and electron microscopy). The required 
specimens  from  a  limited  autopsy  and  the  diagnostic  procedures  employed  will  be
dictated by the nature of the biologic agent. Guidelines for targeted organs or tissues
for
 culture
 or
 analysis
 were
 discussed
 previously.
 As
 with
 all
 homicides,
chain-of-custody for specimens should be maintained at all times.
 Whenever  a  complete  autopsy  is  performed,  the  goals  should  be  to  1)  establish  the
disease  process  and  the  etiologic  agent;  2)  determine  that  the  agent  or  disease  is
indeed  the  cause  of  death;  and  3)  reasonably  rule  out  competing  causes  of  death.
When limited autopsies or external examinations are 
performed, ME/C personnel should
 Forming a reasonably sound medical opinion regarding cause and manner of death can
be accomplished with knowledge 
of  the  presenting  syndrome  and  circumstantial  events,  external  examination  of  the
body, and testing of appropriate specimens 
to  document  the  etiologic  agent.  For  example,  in  a  confirmed  smallpox  outbreak,
identifying the deceased, externally 
examining the body and photographing the lesions, and 
obtaining samples from the lesions for culture or electron 
microscopy might be adequate.
 Biologic evidence obtained at autopsy can be sent to local or state health department
laboratories, and other 
physical  evidence  can  be  sent  to  the  usual  crime  laboratory,  unless  otherwise
instructed by the FBI. Laboratories within LRN, 
as  described  previously,  are  responsible  for  coordinating  the  transfer  of  evidence  or
results  to  the  FBI,  U.S.  Attorney  General,  or  local  and  state  legal  authorities,  as
appropriate. Consistent with routine practice, ME/Cs should document all 
evidence transfers adequately.
Cause and Manner of Death Statements
 Death  certificates  are  not  withheld  from  the  public  record,  even  when  the  cause  of
death is terrorism-related. The cause 
of  death  section  should  be  used  to  fully  explain  the  sequence  of  the  cause  of  death
(e.g., "hemorrhagic mediastinitis due to inhalational anthrax"). If death resulted from a
terrorism event, the manner of death should be classified as homicide. 
The "how injury occurred" section on the death certificate should be completed, and it
should  reflect  how  the  infectious  agent  was  delivered  to  the  victim  (e.g.,  "victim  of
terrorism; inhaled anthrax spores delivered in mail envelope"). The place 
of injury should be the statement of where (i.e., geographic 
location) the agent was received.
Reimbursement for Expenses and Potential Funding Sources
 Additional funding for ME/Cs might be needed for either preparedness or use during an
actual biologic terrorism 
event. ME/Cs should prepare financially for potential future terrorist events that might
be  similar  to  the  anthrax  attacks  of  October--November  2001.  In  crisis  situations,
funding is 
retroactive but no less a concern.
 Preparedness funding can support multiple activities, 
including training of ME/Cs for large-scale terrorism events. 
Certain activities involving training of ME/Cs have occurred through DMORT, a program
authorized by the DHHS Office of Emergency Preparedness to rapidly mobilize 
ME/Cs to respond to incidents of mass fatality. Preparedness funding can 
also  support  surveillance  activities  in  ME/C  offices.  As  part  of  the  Bioterrorism
Preparedness  and  Response  cooperative  agreements  with  state  health  departments,
CDC  has  provided  funding  to  New  Mexico  and  other  states  that  are  pursuing  ME/C
surveillance systems as an enhancement to their traditional surveillance systems. The
New Mexico 
Office of the Medical Investigator has been a recipient of this funding through the New
Mexico  Department  of  Health  since  the  inception  of  the  cooperative  agreement
program.  This  funding  has  supported  development  of  specialized  surveillance
techniques for 
deaths caused by potential agents of biologic terrorism 
(24) and recognition of ME/Cs as a key resource for all phases --- 
early  detection,  case  characterization,  incident  response  and  recovery  ---  of  a  public
health emergency 
response.  CDC  encourages  pursuit  of  this  enhanced  (ME/C)  surveillance  capacity
through cooperative agreements with states, if the state has made adequate progress
with other critical capacity goals.
 ME/Cs might obtain preparedness funding by integrating their response activities into
the existing EOCs that have 
been  established  at  selected  state  and  county  levels  (integration  of  ME/C  offices  into
this  framework  is  discussed  in  Communications  and  the  Incident  Command  System).
When ME/C offices are integrated into the emergency 
response 
system, ME/Cs have an opportunity to make emergency management officials aware of
ME/C emergency responsibilities and resource needs.
 The sources of funding for consequence management, 
including medicolegal death investigation, will depend on the 
scope  of  the  terrorism  event.  In  events  with  a  limited  number  of  deaths,  funding  for
activities  related  to  the  detection  and  diagnosis  might  remain  at  the  office  level.
Because  terrorism  deaths  are  homicides,  these  deaths  will  contribute  to  an  office's
jurisdictional  workload,  and  future  planning  for  preparedness  funding  should  be
considered. Certain ME/C offices are already a part of the local or state public health
department or are already affiliated with an EOC. ME/C offices, 
health  departments,  and  EOCs  are  strongly  encouraged  to  forge  links  for  effective
preparedness  and  response  and  to  participate  in  joint  training  exercises  to  maximize
preparedness funding.
 In  events  with  multiple  deaths,  a  federal  emergency  might  be  declared.  As  long  as
ME/Cs' offices are officially 
working through the state or local EOC, certain expenses associated with the response
(e.g.,  cost  of  diagnostic  testing)  can  be  submitted  to  the  Federal  Emergency
Management  Agency  (FEMA)  for  reimbursement.  In  the  majority  of  localities,  these
requests  for  resources  required  for  appropriate  response  during  an  event  should  be
submitted through local emergency 
management  agencies  that  are  part  of  state  and  local  EOCs.  Costs  will  probably  be
covered by the agency that has 
jurisdiction  over  the  disaster  (e.g.,  FEMA).  In  cases  where  a  presidential  disaster
declaration  is  made,  testing  costs,  victim  identification,  mortuary  services,  and  those
services  that  are  covered  by  the  National  Disaster  Medical  System  (a  mutual  aid
network that 
includes DHHS, the Department of Defense, and FEMA) 
(100) are reimbursable under Emergency Support Function 8 (Health 
and Medical) of the Federal Response Plan (FRP).
 Under FRP, FEMA covers 75% of reimbursement costs; the remaining 25% are covered
by the state through 
emergency funds or in-kind reimbursement. FEMA also supports state emergency funds
through the DHHS electronic 
payments management system. In an emergency, all requests for reimbursement flow
from their point of origin, in this case from an ME/C, through the state EOC/emergency
management agency, to 
FEMA.§ Before an event, ME/Cs should clarify 
the procedures to follow to ensure that they will be reimbursed for expenses incurred
as part of their emergency response.
DMORT
 DMORT is a national program that includes volunteers, divided into 10 regional teams
responsible for supporting 
death investigation and mortuary services in federal emergency 
response situations involving natural disasters and mass 
fatalities  associated  with  transportation  accidents  or  terrorism.  Team  members  are
specialists from multiple forensic disciplines, funeral directors, law enforcement agents,
and administrative support personnel. Each team represents a FEMA region. 
DMORT members are activated through DHS after mass 
fatalities or events involving multiple displaced human remains (e.g., 
a cemetery washout after a flood).
 The primary functions of DMORT include the identification of human remains, evidence
recovery from the 
bodies, recovery of human remains from the scene, and assisting with operation of a
family assistance center. Whenever 
possible, identification of the bodies is made by using commonly 
accepted scientific methods (e.g., fingerprint, dental, radiograph, 
or DNA comparisons).
 Upon activation, DMORT members are federal government employees. When DMORT is
activated, representatives 
from DHS are also sent to manage the logistics of deployment. The FBI most commonly
staffs the fingerprint section of 
the  morgue.  The  Armed  Forces  DNA  Identification  Laboratory  in  Rockville,  Maryland,
has traditionally performed 
DNA  analyses;  the  arrangements  for  this  testing  are  negotiated  separately  with  the
local ME/C.
 After  a  request  for  DMORT  assistance  has  been  made,  one  of  two  Disaster  Portable
Morgue Units (DPMUs) and 
DMORT  staff  are  sent  to  the  disaster  site.  DPMUs  contain  specialized  equipment  and
supplies, prestaged for deployment within hours to a disaster site. DPMUs include all of
the equipment required for a functional basic morgue with designated 
workstations  and  prepackaged  equipment  and  supplies.  DPMUs  can  operate  at
Biosafety  Level  2,  but  do  not  have  the  ventilatory  capacity  necessary  to  protect
prosectors  and  other  nearby  persons  from  airborne  pathogens.  DPMUs  also  contain
equipment  for  site  search  and  recovery,  pathology,  anthropology,  radiology,
photography, and information 
resources,  as  well  as  office  equipment,  wheeled  examination  tables,  water  heaters,
plumbing  equipment,  electrical  distribution  equipment,  personal  protective  gear,  and
temporary  partitions  and  supports.  DPMUs  do  not  have  the  materials  required  to
support microbiologic sampling. 
When a DPMU is deployed, members of the DPMU team (i.e., a subset of DMORT) are
sent to the destination to unload 
the 
DPMU  equipment  and  establish  and  maintain  the  temporary  morgue.  Additional
equipment is required locally 
after  DMORT  activation.  At  a  minimum,  this  equipment  includes  a  facility  in  which  to
house the morgue equipment, a forklift 
to  move  the  DPMU  equipment  into  the  temporary  morgue  facility,  and  refrigerated
trucks to hold human remains.
 ME/Cs can request DMORT response after a mass fatality or after an incident resulting
in  the  displacement  of  a  substantial  number  of  human  remains.  ME/Cs  should  follow
state  protocols  for  DMORT  requests.  Typically,  ME/Cs  contact  the  state  governor's
office, which then requests DMORT from 
DHS.¶ The request should include an estimate of how many 
deaths occurred (if known), the condition of the bodies (if known), and the location of
the  incident.  When  deployed,  DMORT  supports  ME/Cs  in  the  jurisdiction  where  the
incident  occurred.  All  medicolegal  death  investigation  records  created  by  DMORT  are
given to ME/Cs at the end of the deployment, and ME/Cs are ultimately responsible for
all of 
the identifications made and the documents created 
pertaining to the incident.
DMORT-WMD Team
 The DMORT-WMD team is composed of national rather than regional volunteers. The
primary focus of 
DMORT-WMD  is  decontamination  of  bodies  when  death  results  from  exposure  to
chemicals or radiation. DMORT-WMD is 
developing  resources  to  respond  to  a  mass  disaster  resulting  from  biologic  agents.
However, this team might have difficulty in responding to such an event if the deaths
occur in multiple locations.
 The  major  forensic  disciplines  (i.e.,  forensic  dentistry,  forensic  anthropology,  and
forensic pathology) as well 
as funeral directors, law enforcement, criminalists, and administrative support persons
are represented on the 
DMORT-WMD team. Members of DMORT-WMD undergo specialized training that focuses
on chemical and radiologic decontamination of human remains. The DMORT-WMD unit
has separate equipment, stored separately from the DPMU, including PPE (up 
to  and  including  level  A  suits),  decontamination  tents,  and  equipment  to  gather
contaminated water. DMORT-WMD teams 
are requested and deployed in the same manner as general DMORTs.
Communications and the Incident Command System
 ME/Cs are key members of the biologic terrorism detection and management response
team in any community and 
should  be  integrated  into  the  comprehensive  communication  plan  during  any
terrorism-associated  event.  Routine  and  consistent  communication  among  ME/Cs  and
local and state laboratories, public health departments, EOCs, communication centers,
DMORT, and other agencies, is critical to the success of efficient and effective biologic
terrorism surveillance, 
fatality  management,  and  public  health  and  criminal  investigations.  Planning  for
different  emergency  scenarios  and  participation  in  disaster  response  exercises  are
necessary to ensure effective response to a terrorism event.
 Each state and certain counties have some type of emergency operation center that
has been organized to provide 
a coordinated response during a terrorism event. ME/Cs should verify their jurisdiction's
EOC contact point and work 
with them periodically regarding concerns related to preparedness and response.
 All EOCs follow the Incident Command System (ICS) 
(100), an internationally recognized emergency management 
system that provides a coordinated response across organizations and jurisdictions. The
ICS structure allows for individual 
EOC  decision  making  and  different  information  flow  in  each  state.  ME/Cs  should
determine how the EOC functions in 
their jurisdiction.
 Each  ICS  is  composed  of  a  managing  authority  that  directs  the  response  of  health
department, law enforcement, 
and emergency management officials during a planning exercise, emergency, or major
disaster. In addition to assessing the 
incident and serving as the interagency contact, ICS also coordinates the response to
information inquiries and the safety monitoring of assigned response personnel. The ICS
organizational
 framework,
 includes
 planning,
 operations,
 logistics,
 and
finance/administration  sections  (101).  ME/Cs  are  most  likely  to  participate  in  the
operations team,  which  makes tactical  decisions regarding  the incident response and
implements those activities defined in action plans. This team might also include public
health, emergency communications, fire, law enforcement, EMS, and state emergency
management agency staff.
 During a suspected terrorism event, ME/Cs should be 
responsible for the following actions to facilitate communication:
 ME/Cs  are  essential  public  health  partners  for  terrorism  preparedness  and  response.
Despite  state  and  local  differences  in  medicolegal  death-investigation  systems,  these
investigators have the statutory authority to investigate deaths that are 
sudden,  suspicious,  violent,  and  unattended,  and  consequently  play  a  vital  role  in
terrorism surveillance and response. Public health officials should work with ME/Cs to
ensure  that  these  investigators  can  assist  with  surveillance  for  infectious  disease
deaths possibly caused by terrorism and provide confirmatory diagnoses and evidence
in deaths linked to terrorism. This process should involve an assessment of local ME/C
standards  for  accepting  jurisdiction  of  potential  infectious  disease  deaths  and
performing autopsies, laboratory capacity for making 
organism-specific diagnoses, and autopsy biosafety capacity. Ideally, 
ME/Cs should
 If biologic terrorism-related fatalities occur, ME/Cs are 
responsible for identifying remains and determining the cause 
and manner of death. Routine and consistent communication among ME/Cs and local
and state laboratories, public 
health  departments,  EOCs,  law  enforcement,  and  other  agencies  is  critical  to  the
success of efficient and effective biologic terrorism surveillance, fatality management,
and  public  health  and  criminal  investigations.  To  prepare  for  this  possibility,  ME/Cs
should
 The  majority  of  ME/C  facilities  do  not  have  the  capacity  to  perform  autopsies  at
Biosafety Level 3 as a consequence 
of facility design features that are expensive to fix. In addition, DMORT does not have
the capacity to respond to 
events  precipitated  by  the  release  of  biologic  agents.  These  limitations  might  affect
local,  state,  and  national  surveillance  for  infectious  disease  deaths  of  public  health
importance,  including  those  deaths  potentially  caused  by  terrorism.  Two  potential
strategies  might  be  used  in  the  future  to  augment  the  biosafety  capacity  of  local
agencies having limited resources. One strategy would be to develop a mobile Biosafety
Level  3  autopsy  laboratory.  Another  strategy  might  be  to  develop  regional  Biosafety
Level 3 autopsy centers that can handle cases from surrounding jurisdictions or states.
A combination of the two approaches 
will probably achieve the best coverage of national needs.
 Acknowledgments
 This report was prepared with the assistance and support of the members of NAME,
Michael A. Graham, M.D., President. 
The concept for this report originated with Lynda Biedrzycki, M.D. (member of NAME),
of the Waukesha County, Wisconsin, 
Medical  Examiner's  Office.  The  preparers  of  this  report  appreciate  the  early
organizational  efforts  of  John  Teggatz,  M.D.,  of  the  Milwaukee  County,  Wisconsin,
Medical  Examiner's  Office,  and  the  editorial  comments  of  Victor  Weedn,  M.D.,  J.D.,
Carnegie  Mellon  University;  Mary  Ann  Sens,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  University  of  North  Dakota
School of Medicine and Health Sciences; Samuel L. Groseclose, 
D.V.M., CDC. The preparers also thank Aldo Fusaro, M.D., of the Cook County, Illinois,
Medical Examiner's Office for compiling Appendix B. 
References
 * Member of the National Association of Medical Examiners (NAME).
 † Additional information is available by contacting CDC by telephone (404-639-3133) or
by fax (404-639-3043).
 §  Robert  T.  Stafford  Disaster  Relief  and  Emergency  Assistance  Act,  as  amended  by
Public Law 106-390, October 30, 2000, United States Code, Title 42, The Public Health
and Welfare, Chapter 68, Disaster Relief.
 ¶ State requests should be directed to the Department of Homeland Security, National
Disaster Medical System Section, by telephone at 301-443-1167 (or 800-USA-NDMS) or
by fax at 301-443-5146 (or 800-USA-KWIK).
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 6/9/2004 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 6/9/2004
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5308a1.htm
