Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Recommendations  and  Reports  /  September  25,  2020  /
69(9);1–41  Sarah  A.  Mbaeyi,  MD1;  Catherine  H.  Bozio,  PhD1;  Jonathan  Duffy,  MD2;
Lorry G. Rubin, MD3; Susan Hariri, PhD1; David S. Stephens, MD4; Jessica R. MacNeil,
MPH5 (View author affiliations) Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Box 1 Box
2 Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 Table 5 Table 6 Table 7 Table 8 Table 9 Table 10
Table  11    This  report  compiles  and  summarizes  all  recommendations  from  CDC’s
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  for  use  of  meningococcal
vaccines in the United States. As a comprehensive summary and update of previously
published  recommendations,  it  replaces  all  previously  published  reports  and  policy
notes.  This  report  also  contains  new  recommendations  for  administration  of  booster
doses of serogroup B meningococcal (MenB) vaccine for persons at increased risk for
serogroup B meningococcal disease. These guidelines will be updated as needed on the
basis  of  availability  of  new  data  or  licensure  of  new  meningococcal  vaccines.  ACIP
recommends routine vaccination with a quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine
(MenACWY) for adolescents aged 11 or 12 years, with a booster dose at age 16 years.
ACIP also recommends routine vaccination with MenACWY for persons aged ≥2 months
at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  caused  by  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  or  Y,
including  persons  who  have  persistent  complement  component  deficiencies;  persons
receiving a complement inhibitor (e.g., eculizumab [Soliris] or ravulizumab [Ultomiris]);
persons
 who
 have
 anatomic
 or
 functional
 asplenia;
 persons
 with
 human
immunodeficiency  virus  infection;  microbiologists  routinely  exposed  to  isolates  of
Neisseria  meningitidis;  persons  identified  to  be  at  increased  risk  because  of  a
meningococcal  disease  outbreak  caused  by  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  or  Y;  persons  who
travel to or live in areas in which meningococcal disease is hyperendemic or epidemic;
unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated first-year college students living in residence
halls;  and  military  recruits.  ACIP  recommends  MenACWY  booster  doses  for  previously
vaccinated  persons  who  become  or  remain  at  increased  risk.  In  addition,  ACIP
recommends routine use of MenB vaccine series among persons aged ≥10 years who
are  at  increased  risk  for  serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease,  including  persons  who
have persistent complement component deficiencies; persons receiving a complement
inhibitor;  persons  who  have  anatomic  or  functional  asplenia;  microbiologists  who  are
routinely  exposed  to  isolates  of  N.  meningitidis;  and  persons  identified  to  be  at
increased  risk  because  of  a  meningococcal  disease  outbreak  caused  by  serogroup  B.
ACIP recommends MenB booster doses for previously vaccinated persons who become
or  remain  at  increased  risk.  In  addition,  ACIP  recommends  a  MenB  series  for
adolescents  and  young  adults  aged  16–23  years  on  the  basis  of  shared  clinical
decision-making  to  provide  short-term  protection  against  disease  caused  by  most
strains  of  serogroup  B  N.  meningitidis.    Top  Meningococcal  disease  is  a  serious
bacterial  infection  that  primarily  presents  as  meningitis,  bacteremia,  or  both.  Three
quadrivalent  (serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y)  meningococcal  conjugate  (MenACWY)
vaccines  and  two  serogroup  B  meningococcal  (MenB)  vaccines  are  licensed  and
available in the United States and are recommended by CDC’s Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) for the prevention of meningococcal disease caused by
these  serogroups  (Table  1)  (Box  1)  (1–13).  Details  about  groups  recommended  to
receive  meningococcal  vaccination,  number  of  vaccine  doses,  dosing  regimens,
contraindications,  precautions,  and  special  circumstances  are  described  elsewhere  in
this  report.  This  report  compiles  and  summarizes  all  previously  published  ACIP
recommendations  for  use  of  meningococcal  vaccines  in  the  United  States  (Box  2)
(1–15).  It  also  clarifies  certain  existing  recommendations  and  contains  new
recommendations for administration of booster doses of MenB vaccine among persons
aged ≥10 years at increased risk for serogroup B meningococcal disease. This report is
intended  for  use  by  clinicians  and  public  health  providers  for  guidance  regarding  the
use of meningococcal vaccines. Top ACIP provides recommendations for the prevention
and  control  of  meningococcal  disease  in  the  United  States.  The  ACIP  Meningococcal
Vaccines Work Group met by teleconference once per month during 2005–2020, except
during  brief  periods  of  hiatus.  Work  group  membership  included  voting  members  of
ACIP,  representatives  of  ACIP  ex-officio  and  liaison  organizations,  and  scientific
consultants  with  expertise  in  public  health,  vaccinology,  medical  specialties,  vaccine
research,  and  assessments  of  vaccine  efficacy  and  safety.  Work  group  discussions
included  topics  such  as  meningococcal  disease  surveillance  and  epidemiology  and
meningococcal  vaccine  safety,  immunogenicity,  effectiveness,  coverage,  program
feasibility, and cost-effectiveness. Presentations were requested from invited experts,
and published and unpublished data were discussed. These data were summarized by
the  work  group  and  presented  to  ACIP  to  help  establish  recommendations.  When
evidence  was  lacking,  the  recommendations  incorporated  expert  opinion  from  ACIP.
Meeting  minutes  and  information  on  ACIP  membership  and  conflicts  of  interest  are
available on the ACIP website (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip). This report updates
and replaces previously published ACIP recommendations for meningococcal vaccines
(9–13,16).  Grading  of  Recommendations,  Assessment,  Development  and  Evaluation
(GRADE)  was  adopted  by  ACIP  in  2010  (17).  Recommendations  using  the  GRADE
approach  include  the  use  of  MenACWY  oligosaccharide  diphtheria  CRM197  conjugate
vaccine  (MenACWY-CRM)  among  children  aged  2–23  months  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal  disease,  use  of  a  MenACWY  vaccine  among  persons  infected  with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), all MenB vaccine recommendations, and use of a
MenACWY  tetanus  toxoid  vaccine  (MenACWY-TT)  among  persons  aged  ≥2  years
(9–11,13).  GRADE  evidence  tables  for  these  recommendations  are  available
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/table-refs.html).  In  2018,  ACIP  adopted
the  Evidence  to  Recommendations  (EtR)  framework  to  facilitate  the  assessment  and
ensure
 transparency
 of
 additional
 factors
 considered
 in
 developing
 vaccine
recommendations,  including  target  population  values,  stakeholder  acceptability,  and
feasibility  of  implementation  (18).  Recommendations  for  MenB  booster  doses  among
persons  aged  ≥10  years  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  and  use  of
MenACWY-TT  among  persons  aged  ≥2  years  were  further  evaluated  using  the  EtR
framework  (19).  The  EtR  frameworks  for  these  recommendations  are  available
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/etr.html). ACIP did not use GRADE or EtR
for  updates  of  evidence  related  to  recommendations  made  before  implementation  of
these  approaches.  ACIP  votes  were  held  when  a  new  routine  or  risk-based
recommendation was under consideration, with new age indications or dosing regimens
for  a  vaccine,  or  when  additional  groups  were  identified  as  being  at  risk  for
meningococcal  disease.  An  ACIP  vote  was  not  required  for  use  of  newly  licensed
products  (e.g.,  MenACWY-TT  in  persons  aged  ≥2  years)  when  no  changes  in
recommendations for vaccine use in terms of dosing and schedules were made. For this
report, a systematic literature search was completed to review all available evidence on
the  immunogenicity,  effectiveness,  and  safety  of  U.S.-licensed  MenACWY  and  MenB
vaccines among age groups for which the vaccines were approved, including separate
reviews to assess evidence related to MenB booster doses and MenACWY-TT. PubMed,
Medline,  Embase,  CINAHL,  Scopus,  Cochrane  Library,  and  ClinicalTrials.gov  were
searched for clinical trials or observational studies published during 2000–2018 without
language  or  geographic  restrictions.  The  following  search  terms  were  used:
“(quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  or  tetravalent  meningococcal  conjugate  or
meningococcal ACWY or MCV4 or MCV-4 or MenACWY or MenACWY-D or MenACWY-CRM
or Menactra or Menveo or serogroup B meningococcal or meningococcal serogroup B or
meningococcal  B  or  meningococcal  group  B  or  group  B  meningococcal  or  MenB  or
Bexsero  or  MenB-4C  or  rMenB+OMV  NZ  or  4CMenB  or  Trumenba  or  rLP2086  or
MenB-FHbp or FHbp or Factor H binding protein)” and “vaccin*” and “(immunogenicity
or  efficacy  or  effectiveness  or  impact  or  safety  or  adverse  event*).”  For  the  review
specific  to  MenB  booster  vaccination,  the  same  MenB  vaccine  search  terms  plus  the
term  “booster”  were  used  to  capture  all  studies  related  to  booster  doses.  To  identify
evidence  related  to  MenACWY-TT,  licensed  after  the  original  systematic  literature
search  was  conducted,  as  well  as  newly  available  evidence  related  to  other
meningococcal  vaccines,  search  results  were  supplemented  by  data  (using  updated
search terms to include “MenACWY-TT,” “MenACYW-TT,” and “MenQuadfi”) published in
2019–2020  or  identified  by  work  group  subject  matter  experts,  or  unpublished  data
provided  by  the  vaccine  manufacturers.  To  further  assess  vaccine  safety,  data  were
evaluated from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) and the Vaccine
Safety  Datalink  (VSD),  two  postlicensure  surveillance  systems  for  adverse  events.
VAERS is a national passive public health surveillance system operated by CDC and the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and accepts reports from anyone, including health
care  professionals,  vaccine  manufacturers,  patients,  and  caregivers  (20).  Health  care
providers  and  patients  are  encouraged  to  report  clinically  important  or  unexpected
adverse  events,  even  if  unsure  whether  the  event  is  vaccine  related,  and  to  provide
medical
 documentation
 for
 reports
 of
 serious
 adverse
 events
 (e.g.,
 death,
life-threatening health event, hospitalization, or lasting disability after vaccination) (20).
VAERS  can  identify  rare  adverse  events  and  detect  possible  safety  problems  quickly,
generating  vaccine  safety  hypotheses  to  be  evaluated  by  other  sources;  however,
VAERS data cannot be used to determine whether a vaccine caused an adverse event.
VSD is a collaboration between CDC and eight health care organizations that conducts
active public health surveillance and epidemiologic research about vaccine safety. VSD
collects individual-level data, including medical and vaccine records, on approximately
10 million persons annually (approximately 3% of the U.S. population) (21). This allows
for population-based observational studies with longitudinal follow-up that can be used
to calculate rates and relative risks of vaccine adverse events. Therefore, VSD data can
be used for surveillance to identify vaccine safety signals or for hypothesis testing to
evaluate  signals  originating  from  other  sources  such  as  VAERS.  Top  Meningococcal
disease includes the spectrum of invasive infections caused by Neisseria meningitidis, a
gram-negative  diplococcus.  Meningococcal  disease  usually  presents  clinically  as
meningitis, bacteremia, or both (22). Meningococcal disease also can present as other
invasive  syndromes  such  as  bacteremic  pneumonia,  arthritis,  and  pericarditis.
Noninvasive  infections  such  as  pneumonia  without  bacteremia,  conjunctivitis,  or
urethritis  also  might  occur.  Meningococcal  disease  develops  rapidly,  often  among
previously  healthy  persons,  and  results  in  high  morbidity  and  mortality.  Even  with
appropriate antimicrobial therapy, the overall case-fatality ratio in the United States is
15%, and 10%–20% of survivors have long-term sequelae such as neurologic disability,
limb or digit loss, or hearing loss (22,23). N. meningitidis is classified into 12 serogroups
according to the composition of its polysaccharide capsule; serogroups A, B, C, W, X,
and  Y  cause  most  of  the  disease  globally  (24).  N.  meningitidis  colonizes  mucosal
surfaces  of  the  nasopharynx  and  is  transmitted  through  direct  contact  with
large-droplet  respiratory  tract  secretions  from  patients  or  asymptomatic  carriers.
Nasopharyngeal carriage rates are highest in adolescents and young adults, who serve
as reservoirs for transmission of N. meningitidis (25). Invasive disease is an infrequent
consequence  of  nasopharyngeal  colonization.  Since  the  late  1990s,  the  incidence  of
meningococcal disease has steadily decreased in the United States, from 1.2 cases per
100,000 population in 1996 to an historic low of 0.1 cases per 100,000 population in
2018.  During  2015–2018,  approximately  360  cases  occurred  annually  in  the  United
States, representing an average annual incidence of 0.11 cases per 100,000 population
(26). Incidence is highest among infants aged <1 year, followed by children aged 1 year
and  adolescents  and  young  adults  aged  16–20  years  (23).  During  2015–2018,  the
primary serogroups that caused disease were B and C, causing 42% and 26% of cases
in  which  serogroup  was  known,  respectively;  serogroups  W  and  Y  and  nongroupable
strains  each  caused  9%–14%  of  cases  (26).  Decreases  in  meningococcal  disease
incidence  began  before  the  introduction  of  MenACWY  and  MenB  vaccines  and  have
been  observed  across  all  age  groups  and  for  the  predominant  disease-causing
serogroups  in  the  United  States  (23).  Outbreaks  account  for  approximately  5%  of
meningococcal  disease  cases  across  age  groups  in  the  United  States  (27).  In  recent
years,  several  outbreaks  of  serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease  among  university
students and serogroup C meningococcal disease among men who have sex with men
(MSM)  have  been  reported  (28,29).  Risk  factors  for  meningococcal  disease  include
antecedent  viral  infection,  household  crowding,  and  smoking  (30–34).  In  addition,
certain groups are at increased risk for meningococcal disease, including the following:
Persons  with  persistent  complement  component  deficiencies:  Persons  who  have
persistent  (e.g.,  genetic)  deficiencies  in  the  complement  pathway  (e.g.,  C3,  C5–C9,
properdin,  factor  D,  or  factor  H)  have  up  to  a  10,000-fold  increased  risk  for
meningococcal  disease  (35).  Persons  with  complement  deficiencies  might  experience
recurrent  disease  and  inherited  disorders  might  affect  additional  family  members;
therefore,  testing  for  complement  deficiency  should  be  considered  for  patients  with
meningococcal  disease  (36–38).  Persons  who  use  complement  inhibitors:  Use  of
complement  inhibitors  (e.g.,  the  currently  licensed  eculizumab  [Soliris]  and  its
long-acting derivative ravulizumab [Ultomiris] monoclonal antibody therapies that block
C5) is associated with a substantially increased risk for meningococcal disease (39,40).
Eculizumab use is associated with an approximately 2,000-fold increased incidence of
meningococcal  disease  (41).  Complement  inhibitor  recipients  remain  at  risk  for
meningococcal disease even after meningococcal vaccination; therefore, CDC guidance
indicates that providers could consider treating patients with antimicrobial prophylaxis
for  the  duration  of  complement  inhibitor  treatment  (42).  Persons  with  anatomic  or
functional asplenia: Persons with anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell
disease) appear to be at increased risk for meningococcal disease and, compared with
healthy  persons,  have  a  higher  mortality  rate  (40%–70%)  from  the  disease  (43–45).
Persons  living  with  HIV  infection:  In  studies  from  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,
and  South  Africa,  persons  living  with  HIV  infection  or  acquired  immunodeficiency
syndrome  have  an  elevenfold  to  twenty-four-fold  increased  risk  for  meningococcal
disease (46–50). Among persons living with HIV infection, low CD4 count or high viral
load are associated with greater risk (48). Most meningococcal cases reported among
persons living with HIV infection in the United States are caused by serogroups C, W, or
Y (47). Microbiologists routinely exposed to N. meningitidis isolates: The annual attack
rate  of  laboratory-acquired  meningococcal  infection  among  microbiologists  who
routinely work with N. meningitidis isolates has historically been estimated to be 13 per
100,000 persons, which is manyfold higher than the rate for adults among the general
population  (51).  This  increased  risk  is  likely  related  to  mechanical  manipulation  of
isolates  that  generates  droplets  or  aerosols;  increased  risk  was  not  observed  among
laboratory  workers  who  handle  clinical  specimens  but  not  isolates  (51).  Persons  at
increased risk during an outbreak of meningococcal disease: Approximately 5% of U.S.
cases are outbreak related (27). Outbreaks can occur in community or organizational
settings (52). During outbreaks, the median attack rate is up to 1,400-fold higher than
in the nonoutbreak setting (27). Travelers to countries where meningococcal disease is
hyperendemic  or  epidemic:  Travelers  to  countries  where  meningococcal  disease  is
hyperendemic  or  epidemic,  such  as  the  meningitis  belt  of  sub-Saharan  Africa,  are  at
increased  risk  for  exposure,  and  thus,  disease.  Historically,  serogroup  A  was  the
predominant  meningococcal  pathogen  in  the  meningitis  belt.  However,  after  the
implementation  of  a  meningococcal  serogroup  A  conjugate  vaccine  (MenAfriVac),
serogroup  A  disease  has  been  nearly  eliminated  in  the  meningitis  belt  (53).  Endemic
meningococcal disease and outbreaks are now most commonly caused by serogroups
C,  W,  and  X  (54).  College  students:  Historically,  college  freshman  living  in  residence
halls  were  identified  as  being  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  (55).  With
improved control of serogroups C, W, and Y disease after widespread use of MenACWY
vaccine among adolescents, the risk for meningococcal disease among college students
is  greatest  for  serogroup  B,  with  a  relative  risk  of  3.5  compared  with  persons  not
attending college, although serogroup B disease incidence among this population is low
(0.17 cases per 100,000 population) (56). Risk factors for serogroup B meningococcal
disease among undergraduate college students include age 18–20 years, attendance at
a 4-year college, freshman class year, and on-campus residence (56,57). Although not
assessed  outside  of  outbreak  settings,  participation  in  a  fraternity  or  sorority  is  an
additional risk factor during serogroup B meningococcal disease outbreaks (57). Military
recruits: Historically, new military recruits were identified as being at increased risk for
meningococcal  disease  and  outbreaks,  most  likely  related  to  the  crowded  living
conditions among persons originating from different geographic areas carrying diverse
N.  meningitidis  strains  (58,59).  Men  who  have  sex  with  men:  Several  outbreaks  of
serogroup  C  meningococcal  disease  have  been  reported  among  MSM  in  the  United
States  (28).  MSM  have  also  been  shown  to  be  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal
disease  outside  of  outbreaks,  although  the  incidence  of  disease  remains  low.  HIV
infection  might  be  an  important  factor  for  this  increased  risk  in  the  United  States,
particularly in nonoutbreak settings (60). Early recognition of meningococcal disease is
important  for  prompt  diagnosis  and  initiation  of  antimicrobial  therapy.  Symptoms  of
meningitis include sudden onset of high fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, altered mental
status, photophobia, nausea, and vomiting. Meningococcemia might present as fever;
malaise;  cold  hands  and  feet;  leg  or  other  body  pain;  vomiting;  diarrhea;  and
maculopapular,  petechial,  or  purpuric  rash  (61).  The  diagnosis  of  confirmed
meningococcal disease is made either through isolation of N. meningitidis or detection
of N. meningitidis–specific nucleic acid in a specimen obtained from a normally sterile
body site (e.g., blood or cerebrospinal fluid) (62). Culture is the preferred confirmatory
test  because  it  allows  for  further  characterization  of  the  strain;  however,
serogroup-specific  polymerase  chain  reaction  testing  using  a  validated  assay  is  a
sensitive  method  for  identifying  N.  meningitidis,  particularly  in  situations  in  which
antimicrobial  therapy  was  initiated  before  specimen  collection  (63).  Because  N.
meningitidis  infections  typically  are  severe,  antibiotics  should  be  started  immediately
for  a  patient  with  suspected  meningococcal  disease  without  waiting  for  laboratory
confirmation.  Several  antibiotics  are  available  for  the  treatment  of  meningococcal
disease,  including  ceftriaxone,  cefotaxime,  and,  when  the  diagnosis  is  confirmed,
penicillin  (64).  Antimicrobial  chemoprophylaxis  of  close  contacts  of  a  patient  with
meningococcal disease is important to prevent secondary cases. Several antibiotics are
recommended for chemoprophylaxis, including ciprofloxacin, rifampin, and ceftriaxone;
azithromycin  can  be  used  in  areas  with  sustained  ciprofloxacin  resistance  (currently
rare in the United States). Additional information on identification of close contacts and
administration of chemoprophylaxis is available in CDC’s Manual for the Surveillance of
Vaccine-Preventable Diseases (65). The investigation of and response to meningococcal
disease outbreaks rely on comprehensive epidemiologic and laboratory investigation of
cases, identification of persons at increased risk for meningococcal disease as a result
of the outbreak and, in certain situations, implementation of vaccination campaigns and
use of expanded antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis. Additional information is available in
CDC’s  Guidance  for  the  Evaluation  and  Public  Health  Management  of  Suspected
Outbreaks  of  Meningococcal  Disease  (52).  Top  Three  quadrivalent  meningococcal
conjugate  (MenACWY)  vaccines  are  currently  licensed  and  available  in  the  United
States:  1)  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid
conjugate vaccine (MenACWY-D) (Menactra); 2) meningococcal groups A, C, W, and Y
oligosaccharide diphtheria CRM197 conjugate vaccine (MenACWY-CRM) (Menveo); and
3)  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid  conjugate
vaccine (MenACWY-TT) (MenQuadfi) (Table 1). Additional information is available in the
package inserts (66–68). In addition, two serogroup B meningococcal (MenB) vaccines
are  licensed  and  available  in  the  United  States:  1)  MenB-FHbp  (Trumenba)  and  2)
MenB-4C (Bexsero) (Table 1). MenB-FHbp consists of two purified recombinant lipidated
FHbp  antigens,  one  from  each  FHbp  subfamily  (A  and  B).  MenB-4C  consists  of  three
recombinant  proteins  (neisserial  adhesin  A  [NadA],  factor  H  binding  protein  [FHbp]
fusion protein from subfamily B, and neisserial heparin binding antigen [NhbA] fusion
protein) and outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) containing outer membrane protein porin
A (PorA) serosubtype P1.4. Additional information on MenB vaccines is available in the
package inserts (69,70). Two additional licensed meningococcal vaccines are no longer
available  in  the  United  States:  1)  a  quadrivalent  (serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y)
meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  (MPSV4)  (Menomune  –  A/C/Y/W-135)  and  2)  a
combined  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  and  meningococcal  serogroups  C  and  Y
conjugate  vaccine  (Hib-MenCY-TT)  (MenHibrix)  (71,72).  Top  Because  of  the  low
incidence  of  meningococcal  disease  in  the  United  States,  vaccine  efficacy  estimates
supporting  U.S.  licensure  of  the  current  meningococcal  vaccines  are  based  on
demonstration  of  specific  immune  responses  (e.g.,  immune  correlate  of  protection
through  serum  bactericidal  activity  [SBA])  and  not  direct  evidence  of  clinical
effectiveness).  Protection  against  invasive  meningococcal  disease  is  mediated  by
bactericidal antibodies to meningococcal capsular polysaccharides or protein antigens
in  the  presence  of  complement.  This  complement-dependent  bactericidal  activity  is
measured  by  use  of  an  SBA  assay  with  a  human  (hSBA)  or  baby  rabbit  (rSBA)
complement  source  (73).  SBA  activity  has  been  demonstrated  to  correlate  with
immunity  against  meningococcal  disease  and  thus  is  accepted  as  the  correlate  of
protection  (74).  Because  meningococci  have  greater  susceptibility  to  lysis  by  rabbit
complement, antibody titers measured by an rSBA assay are elevated compared with
those from an hSBA assay; thus, antibody titers measured by these two assays are not
directly  comparable  (74).  An  hSBA  titer  ≥1:4  (although  a  threshold  of  ≥1:8  also  has
been used to account for assay variability) or an rSBA titer ≥1:8 and/or a fourfold rise in
rSBA or hSBA titers have been used to infer vaccine-mediated immunologic protection
against meningococcal disease (73). For the purposes of U.S. licensure, immunogenicity
was  assessed  as  the  proportion  of  persons  who  achieved  an  SBA  titer  above  a
predefined  threshold  or  fourfold  rise  in  SBA  titers  for  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  and
serogroup B strains tested. For MenACWY vaccines, efficacy was inferred using either
rSBA or hSBA. For MenB vaccines, efficacy was inferred using hSBA. MenB vaccines are
not expected to protect against all strains of serogroup B N. meningitidis because their
mechanism  of  action  is  against  subcapsular  proteins  and  not  the  polysaccharide
capsule (75,76). Because laboratory evaluation of vaccine efficacy against all serogroup
B  meningococcal  strains  would  be  impossible  because  of  their  antigenic  and  genetic
diversity,  efficacy  of  MenB  vaccines  was  inferred  using  hSBA  titers  against  selected
strains (77). Because MenB vaccines do not protect against all strains of serogroup B N.
meningitidis, assays have been developed to provide additional insight into breadth of
strain  coverage.  For  MenB-FHbp,  a  flow  cytometric  meningococcal  antigen  surface
expression (MEASURE) assay was developed to quantify the level of FHbp expressed in
serogroup  B  strains  through  mean  fluorescence  intensity.  On  the  basis  of  this  assay,
91%  of  U.S.  and  European  serogroup  B  strains  expressed  sufficient  FHbp  to  be
susceptible  to  MenB-FHbp–mediated  bactericidal  killing  (75).  The  meningococcal
antigen typing system (MATS) was developed to predict MenB-4C strain coverage using
genotyping  for  PorA  and  enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assays  for  FHbp,  NhbA,  and
NadA.  Using  MATS,  91%  of  U.S.  serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease  strains  are
predicted to be covered by MenB-4C, with FHbp and NhbA the greatest contributors to
U.S.  strain  coverage  (76).  A  complementary  strain  coverage  prediction  method  using
genotyping  (gMATS)  also  has  been  developed  (78),  as  has  the  Bexsero  antigen
sequence  type  (BAST)  scheme  to  facilitate  genomic  surveillance  of  MenB-4C  antigen
variants  in  invasive  meningococcal  disease  isolates  (79).  Top  MenACWY-D  was  first
licensed in the United States in 2005. Clinical trials have demonstrated immunogenicity
of MenACWY-D among persons aged 9 months–55 years, although antibody waning is
observed  during  the  3–5  years  after  primary  vaccination  (67,80–104).  Booster
vaccination  elicits  a  robust  immune  response,  and  data  in  adolescents  demonstrate
persistence  for  at  least  4  years  after  a  booster  dose  (105,106).  Clinical  trials  have
demonstrated an acceptable safety profile, with injection site pain and erythema as the
most  common  local  reactions;  irritability  and  drowsiness  are  the  most  common
systemic  adverse  events  among  infants  and  children,  and  myalgia,  headache,  and
fatigue are the most common systemic adverse events among adolescents and adults
(67,80,81,85,87–90,92–96,98–103).  Most  adverse  events  are  mild  to  moderate  and
resolve within 3 days. Early postlicensure surveillance raised the concern of a potential
risk for Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), but subsequent evaluations have not identified
an  increased  risk  for  GBS  after  MenACWY-D  vaccination  (107–110).  No  other  vaccine
safety concerns have been identified in postlicensure surveillance (111–114). In clinical
trials  among  infants  who  received  MenACWY-D  as  a  2-dose  series  at  ages  9  and  12
months,  89%–96%  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  against  serogroup  A,  ≥98%  against
serogroup  C,  81%–92%  against  serogroup  W,  and  95%–97%  against  serogroup  Y  1
month  after  completion  of  the  series  (80,98).  Administration  of  MenACWY-D
simultaneously  with  routine  vaccines  did  not  result  in  reduced  immune  responses  to
meningococcal  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  or  Y  or  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  or  varicella
antigens;
 however,
 when
 MenACWY-D
 was
 administered
 simultaneously
 with
seven-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) (Prevnar), noninferiority criteria
were not met for three of seven pneumococcal serotypes (98). By 3 years after primary
series  completion,  substantial  MenACWY-D  waning  occurred,  with  13%–46%  of
recipients  having  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  across  serogroups,  although  this  proportion
increased to ≥98% 1 month after a single booster dose (80). Among toddlers receiving
a 2-dose primary series at ages 12 and 15 months, 85% achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:8
against serogroup A and ≥96% against serogroups C, W, and Y at 1 month after the
primary series (80). In another study in which MenACWY-D was administered at ages 12
and 18 months, ≥96% achieved rSBA titers ≥1:8 for all serogroups (95). In this study,
administration  of  MenACWY-D  simultaneously  with  routine  vaccines  did  not  result  in
reduced  immune  responses  to  meningococcal  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  or  Y  or  tetanus,
diphtheria, pertussis, poliovirus, or H. influenzae type b antigens. Among children aged
2–10 years, the rate of seroresponse (defined as a greater than fourfold rise in hSBA or
a titer ≥1:8 among persons with baseline titers <4) was highest for serogroup A (80%)
and lower for serogroups C, W, and Y (42%–57%) at 1 month after a single dose (88).
Studies  using  rSBA  demonstrated  a  higher  proportion  of  seroresponse  across
serogroups  (≥86%)  using  different  thresholds  (either  a  greater  than  fourfold  rise  in
titers among persons with baseline titers <1:8 or a titer ≥1:8) (91,93,96,104). Among
children  aged  4–6  years,  administration  of  MenACWY-D  simultaneously  with  routine
vaccines did not result in reduced immune response to meningococcal serogroups A, C,
or W or diphtheria, tetanus, or poliovirus antigens; however, the noninferiority criteria
were not met for serogroup Y and one pertussis antigen (anti-fimbriae) (67). Because
no  clinical  correlates  of  protection  are  available  for  pertussis  antigens,  the  clinical
significance  of  this  finding  is  unknown.  When  MenACWY-D  was  administered  30  days
after diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccine (DAPTACEL),
significantly lower geometric mean titers (GMTs) were observed for all meningococcal
serogroups  (67).  Among  children  aged  4–6  years  vaccinated  previously  at  age  2–3
years, the proportions maintaining an rSBA titer ≥1:128 were 75%, 52%, 61%, and 90%
for serogroups A, C, W, and Y, respectively (97). Among adolescents and adults aged
10–55  years,  64%–71%  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  against  serogroup  A,  72%–99%
against serogroup C, 64%–90% against serogroup W, and 39%–82% against serogroup
Y  at  1  month  after  vaccination  with  a  single  dose  (81,87,89,99).  In  studies  assessing
immunogenicity  using  rSBA,  ≥80%  and  ≥88%  achieved  seroprotection  across
serogroups  when  the  thresholds  of  ≥1:128  and  ≥1:8  were  used,  respectively
(85,90,92,102,104). Administration of MenACWY-D simultaneously with routine vaccines
did not result in reduced immune responses to meningococcal serogroups A, C, W, or Y
or tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, human papillomavirus (HPV), MenB-FHbp, or typhoid
antigens  (67,94,100–103).  Persistence  studies  conducted  among  adolescents  and
adults
 demonstrated
 antibody
 waning
 after
 primary
 vaccination;
 however,
serogroup-specific degree of waning varied between the studies. In one study, antibody
waning  was  observed  for  all  serogroups,  particularly  serogroup  A,  by  22  months
postvaccination and titers remained stable thereafter at 3 and 5 years postvaccination;
21%–34%  of  recipients  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  for  serogroup  A,  58%–62%  for
serogroup  C,  71%–74%  for  serogroup  W,  and  53%–54%  for  serogroup  Y  between  22
months and 5 years postvaccination (83,84,86). In another study, antibody waning was
observed by 4–6 years postvaccination but was more marked for serogroups C and Y
(44% and 39% achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:8, respectively) compared with serogroups A
and W (65% and 69%, respectively) (105). In a separate study, serogroup A waning was
most pronounced, although for the other serogroups the proportion of recipients with
hSBA  titers  ≥1:8  was  higher  than  that  observed  in  previously  mentioned  studies  and
was stable at 1, 3, and 5 years postvaccination with 32%–44% seroprotected against
serogroup  A,  73%–81%  against  serogroup  C,  76%–85%  against  serogroup  W,  and
87%–91%  against  serogroup  Y  (82).  Thus,  although  antibody  waning  after  primary
vaccination  of  adolescents  and  adults  was  observed  across  studies,  time  points
assessed  and  patterns  of  waning  by  serogroup  were  not  consistent.  In  a  study  of
adolescents who received a booster dose of MenACWY-D, ≥99% achieved hSBA titers
≥1:8  against  all  serogroups  at  1  month  postvaccination;  this  proportion  remained
≥90% 4 years later (105,106). Among infants vaccinated at ages 9 and 12 months and
toddlers  vaccinated  at  ages  12  months  and  15  or  18  months,  the  most  commonly
reported  local  reactions  after  either  of  the  doses  were  injection  site  pain  (35%–59%)
and erythema (23%–43%) (80,95,98). The most commonly reported systemic adverse
events  were  irritability  (49%–72%)  and  drowsiness  (27%–44%);  fever  was  reported  in
11%–50% of recipients. Adverse events among infants were similar when MenACWY-D
was administered alone or simultaneously with other vaccines (98). After receipt of a
booster dose 3 years after vaccination as an infant, rates of local and systemic adverse
events  were  similar  to  those  observed  for  the  primary  series  (115).  Similar  adverse
events  were  observed  among  children  aged  2–10  years  after  a  single  dose,  although
typically at a slightly lower rate; injection site pain (32%–48%), induration (11%–22%),
and  erythema  (10%–30%)  were  the  most  commonly  reported  local  reactions,  and
drowsiness  (9%–26%),  irritability  (7%–35%),  and  fever  (2%–11%)  were  the  most
common systemic adverse events (67,88,93,96). Among adolescents and adults aged
11–55 years who received a single dose, injection site pain (31%–69%) was the most
common  local  reaction,  followed  by  induration  (9%–20%),  erythema  (3%–20%),  and
swelling
 (1%–14%)
 (81,85,87,89,90,92,99,102).
 Myalgia
 (15%–26%),
 headache
(11%–45%),  fatigue  or  malaise  (10%–28%),  and  diarrhea  or  other  gastrointestinal
symptoms  (11%–17%)  were  the  most  commonly  reported  systemic  adverse  events;
fever was observed in <8%. Similar types and rates of adverse events were observed
after  a  booster  dose  administered  4  years  later  (105).  In  general,  MenACWY-D
administered simultaneously with HPV vaccine, tetanus and reduced diphtheria toxoids
and  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  (Tdap),  MenB-FHbp,  or  typhoid  vaccines  was  well
tolerated,  although  rates  of  some  adverse  events  (e.g.,  headache  and  fatigue)  were
slightly
 higher
 with
 simultaneous
 administration
 compared
 with
 MenACWY-D
administered  alone  (67,94,100–103).  Across  age  groups,  whether  MenACWY-D  was
administered alone or simultaneously with other vaccines, adverse events were mild to
moderate and typically resolved within 3 days. After licensure of the vaccine in 2005,
several cases of GBS after MenACWY-D vaccination were reported to VAERS (116). ACIP
reviewed  the  available  data  and  determined  that  the  benefits  of  meningococcal
vaccination outweighed the small potential increased risk for GBS (107). By 2010, two
retrospective evaluations had been conducted in which no GBS cases were observed in
the 6 weeks after 2.3 million doses of MenACWY-D were administered (108,110). The
excess risk for GBS after vaccination, if it exists, is estimated to be <0.66 cases per 1
million adolescents vaccinated (110). In 2010, ACIP voted to remove the precaution for
persons with a history of GBS from the ACIP recommendations, although it continues to
be listed as a precaution in the package insert (16,67). Evaluations of VSD data through
2014  and  VAERS  data  through  2016  have  since  been  conducted,  identifying  no  new
GBS-related concerns (CDC, unpublished data, 2020). In addition to assessing risk for
GBS,  data  from  VAERS  and  VSD  have  been  evaluated  to  assess  for  other  potential
postvaccination adverse events. In a comprehensive review of VAERS reports received
from  2005  through  June  2016,  during  which  approximately  70  million  MenACWY-D
doses were distributed, no new safety concerns were identified (CDC, unpublished data,
2020). A total of 13,075 adverse events related to MenACWY-D were reported, of which
846  (6.5%)  were  serious.  Reports  predominantly  related  to  adolescents  aged  11–18
years  simultaneously  vaccinated  with  MenACWY-D  and  other  vaccines.  The  most
commonly  reported  events  were  injection  site  erythema,  fever,  and  headache,
consistent with findings from clinical trials. An analysis of VSD during 2005–2014, when
1.4 million doses, including 245,000 booster doses, were administered, was conducted
to  evaluate  prespecified  outcomes  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2020).  Although  rates  of
syncope and medically attended fever increased after MenACWY-D vaccination, no new
safety concerns were identified. Furthermore, tree-temporal scan data mining through
VSD of primary doses administered to 1.2 million adolescents aged 11–18 years during
the same period identified no new or unexpected adverse events within 42 days after
MenACWY-D  administration  (114).  Several  smaller  studies,  including  VSD-  and
manufacturer-sponsored studies conducted during 2005–2014, similarly did not identify
any additional safety concerns for MenACWY-D among infants, children, adolescents, or
adults  (111–113).  MenACWY-CRM  was  first  licensed  in  the  United  States  in  2010.
MenACWY-CRM  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  immunogenic  among  persons  aged  2
months–55  years  (88,89,99,117–130).  Antibody  waning  occurs  by  3–5  years  after
primary  vaccination,  and  booster  vaccination  elicits  a  robust  immune  response
(83,84,131–133).  No  consistent  or  clinically  relevant  concerns  about  MenACWY-CRM
administered  simultaneously  with  other  vaccines  have  been  identified  (134–136).
Clinical trials have demonstrated an acceptable safety profile, with injection site pain
and  erythema  as  the  most  common  local  reactions  (88,118–124,126,127,129,137).
Irritability and sleepiness were the most commonly reported systemic adverse events
among  infants  and  toddlers.  Among  children,  irritability,  myalgia,  headache,  and
sleepiness  were  the  most  commonly  reported  systemic  adverse  events,  whereas
myalgia,  headache,  and  fatigue  were  the  most  commonly  reported  systemic  adverse
events among adolescents and adults. Most adverse events were mild to moderate and
resolved  within  3  days.  One  study  observed  an  increased  risk  for  Bell’s  palsy  among
adolescents  after  MenACWY-CRM  vaccination,  although  this  was  based  on  a  small
number  of  cases  and  the  importance  of  this  finding  is  uncertain  (138).  No  additional
safety  concerns  have  been  identified  in  postlicensure  surveillance,  although
administration  errors  appear  more  common  than  with  other  vaccines,  predominantly
because  of  the  need  to  reconstitute  the  vaccine  using  lyophilized  and  liquid
components  (139,140).  Among  infants  vaccinated  at  ages  2,  4,  and  6  months  with
MenACWY-CRM  and  routine  vaccines,  76%–89%  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  for
serogroup  A  and  ≥94%  for  serogroups  C,  W,  and  Y  1  month  after  the  third  dose
(119,124,128,130,141).  Antibody  titers  waned  by  age  12  months,  particularly  for
serogroup A. Following the fourth dose in the infant series at age 12–17 months, the
proportions  of  infants  with  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  were  89%–96%  for  serogroup  A  and
≥95% for serogroups C, W, and Y. Administration of MenACWY-CRM simultaneously with
routine  vaccines  did  not  result  in  reduced  immune  responses  to  meningococcal
serogroups A, C, W, or Y or diphtheria, tetanus, hepatitis B, poliovirus, measles, mumps,
rubella, varicella, H. influenzae type b, or most pneumococcal antigens (136). For the
few pneumococcal serotypes for which noninferiority criteria were not met, results were
not  consistent  across  studies  and  age  of  administration  (136).  Noninferiority  was  not
consistently  met  for  pertussis  antigens  across  studies  when  MenACWY-CRM  was
administered with routine vaccines; however, the clinical relevance is unclear because
of the lack of clinical correlates of protection for pertussis antigens. By age 2 years, or 1
year after completion of a 4-dose MenACWY-CRM series, 88%–89% achieved an hSBA
titer ≥1:8 for serogroups W and Y, 61% for serogroup C, and 39% for serogroup A (141).
By age 40 months, most children still had an hSBA titer ≥1:8 for serogroups W and Y
(76%  and  67%,  respectively),  although  this  proportion  was  only  34%  for  serogroup  C
and 10% for serogroup A. By age 60 months, similar but slightly lower proportions were
observed;  following  a  single  booster  dose,  ≥96%  of  recipients  achieved  hSBA  titers
≥1:8 across all serogroups. After a 2-dose series among older infants and toddlers at
either  ages  7–9  months  and  12  months  or  12  and  15  months,  the  proportions  who
achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  1  month  after  the  second  dose  were  88%–97%  for
serogroup  A  and  ≥96%  for  serogroups  C,  W,  and  Y  (125,130).  Administration  of
MenACWY-CRM simultaneously with routine vaccines did not result in reduced immune
responses to meningococcal serogroups A, C, W, or Y or measles, mumps, rubella, or
varicella  antigens  (136).  Among  children  who  received  the  2-dose  primary  series  at
ages  12–13  and  15  months,  serogroup-specific  antibody  waning  patterns  similar  to
those among infants also were observed; however, the proportion of recipients with an
hSBA titer ≥1:8 was higher at age 40 months (85%, 79%, 55%, and 31% for serogroups
W, Y, C, and A, respectively) among this group (131). Similar results were observed by
age  60  months;  after  a  single  booster,  all  subjects  achieved  hSBA  titers  ≥1:8  for  all
serogroups (131). Among children who received a single dose at age 2–10 years, the
proportions  who  achieved  hSBA  titers  ≥1:8  (≥1:4  in  one  study)  were  72%–89%  for
serogroup A, 68%–94% for serogroup C, 90%–96% for serogroup W, and 65%–91% for
serogroup  Y  (88,118,120,121,123,126).  No  data  are  available  on  MenACWY-CRM
administered  simultaneously  with  routine  vaccines  among  this  age  group.  Twelve
months  after  the  primary  dose,  the  proportion  with  seroprotective  titers  declined,
particularly  for  serogroups  A  and  C  (118,123).  Five  years  after  a  primary  dose
administered  at  age  2–10  years,  14%–22%  of  recipients  remained  seroprotected
against  serogroup  A,  32%–56%  against  serogroup  C,  74%–80%  against  serogroup  W,
and  48%–53%  against  serogroup  Y;  these  proportions  were  lower  among  those
vaccinated at age 2–5 years compared with age 6–10 years. One month after a single
booster  dose,  all  recipients  achieved  hSBA  titers  ≥1:8  for  all  serogroups  (132).  One
month  after  a  single  MenACWY-CRM  dose  among  adolescents  and  adults  aged  11–75
years, 66%–92% of recipients achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:8 for serogroup A, 79%–98%
for  serogroup  C,  84%–99%  for  serogroup  W,  and  79%–96%  for  serogroup  Y
(89,99,117,120–122,126,127,129).
 In
 one
 study
 that
 reported
 immunogenicity
separately  for  adults  aged  ≥55  years,  those  aged  56–65  years  had  results  similar  to
those  aged  19–55  years  (129).  Administration  of  MenACWY-CRM  simultaneously  with
other  vaccines  did  not  result  in  reduced  immune  responses  to  meningococcal
serogroups A, C, W, or Y or tetanus, diphtheria, HPV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, typhoid,
yellow  fever,  Japanese  encephalitis,  or  rabies  antigens  (117,135,142–146).  After
simultaneous  administration  of  MenACWY-CRM  and  MenB-4C,  a  robust  immune
response  to  meningococcal  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  and  to  select  meningococcal
serogroup  B  strains  was  observed,  although  the  majority  of  persons  had  high
prevaccine hSBA titers across serogroups (134). Noninferiority criteria were not met for
two  pertussis  antigens  (i.e.,  pertussis  toxoid  and  pertactin)  when  MenACWY-CRM  and
Tdap  were  administered  simultaneously,  although  the  clinical  relevance  of  this  is
unclear  (135).  By  12–22  months  postvaccination,  substantial  antibody  waning  was
observed for serogroup A, though the majority of recipients remained seroprotected for
serogroups  C,  W,  and  Y  (86,122).  After  this  initial  decline,  hSBA  titers  remained
relatively stable at 3 and 5 years postvaccination, with 28%–32% of recipients having
an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  against  serogroup  A,  59%–76%  against  serogroup  C,  72%–82%
against serogroup W, and 64%–76% against serogroup Y (83,133). One month after a
single MenACWY-CRM booster dose administered at 3–6 years after the primary dose,
≥94%  of  subjects  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  across  all  serogroups.  Booster
vaccination elicited a robust immune response whether MenACWY-CRM or MenACWY-D
was  used  for  the  primary  dose  (83,147).  By  2  years  after  the  booster  dose,  the
proportion of recipients with an hSBA titer ≥1:8 decreased to 79% for serogroup A but
remained  at  ≥95%  for  serogroups  C,  W,  and  Y  (84).  Among  infants  and  toddlers
vaccinated  with  a  MenACWY-CRM  series  (4-dose  and  2-dose  series,  respectively)
administered  with  routine  vaccines,  injection  site  pain  (19%–39%)  and  erythema
(12%–22%) were the most common local reactions after the third or fourth infant doses
and  second  toddler  dose  (119,124,137,141).  Irritability  (36%–50%),  sleepiness
(22%–31%),  and  decreased  appetite  (15%–20%)  were  the  most  common  systemic
adverse  events;  fever  was  reported  in  5%–9%  of  recipients.  Reactogenicity  among
infants and toddlers vaccinated with a 4- or 2-dose series, respectively, did not increase
with  subsequent  MenACWY-CRM  doses.  Among  children  aged  2–10  years  vaccinated
with  a  single  dose,  injection  site  pain  (<40%)  and  erythema  (<32%)  were  the  most
commonly reported local reactions (88,118,120,121,123,126). Irritability was reported
in 7%–26%, myalgia in <29%, headache in <21%, and fatigue in <21%. Adverse events
were similar whether vaccination was administered at ages 2–5 or 6–10 years. Adverse
events were similar after a booster dose administered 5 years after primary vaccination
(132).  Among  adolescents  and  adults  aged  11–75  years  who  received  a  single
MenACWY-CRM dose, injection site pain occurred in 8%–54%, erythema in <39%, and
induration  in  <24%.  Commonly  reported  systemic  adverse  events  include  headache
(8%–41%),  myalgia  (<43%),  and  fatigue  (3%–23%)  (99,120–122,126,127,129,148).
When  MenACWY-CRM  was  administered  simultaneously  with  HPV  and  Tdap  vaccines,
headache,  malaise,  myalgia,  and  arthralgia  occurred  more  often  than  when
MenACWY-CRM  was  administered  alone  (117).  In  addition,  adverse  events  after  a
booster  dose  administered  4–6  years  after  primary  vaccination  were  similar  to  those
among persons receiving a first dose. Across age groups, whether MenACWY-CRM was
administered alone or simultaneously with other vaccines, adverse events were mild to
moderate  and  typically  resolved  within  3  days.  In  a  manufacturer-sponsored  cohort
study  of  approximately  49,000  vaccinated  adolescents  aged  11–21  years  with  a
self-controlled  case  series  analysis,  a  statistically  significant  increased  risk  for  Bell’s
palsy  during  the  84  days  after  vaccination  was  observed  when  MenACWY-CRM  was
administered  simultaneously  with  other  vaccines  but  not  when  MenACWY-CRM  was
administered alone (138). However, this finding was based on only eight patients, most
of whom received simultaneous vaccine administration, and several were noted to have
had  conditions  or  infections  that  might  precede  Bell’s  palsy.  Thus,  the  importance  of
this finding remains uncertain. No other safety signals were observed among the other
predefined events of interest in this evaluation (138). No increased risk for Bell’s palsy
or  any  other  new  safety  concerns  were  observed  in  smaller  studies  conducted  in  the
same  health  system  among  children  aged  2  months–10  years  (140,149).  A
comprehensive  review  of  VAERS  reports  from  2010  through  2015,  during  which  8.2
million  MenACWY-CRM  doses  were  distributed,  was  conducted  with  no  new  safety
concerns identified (139). A total of 2,614 reports about MenACWY-CRM were received,
primarily  related  to  adolescents  aged  11–18  years  in  whom  MenACWY-CRM  was
administered  simultaneously  with  other  vaccines.  Reported  adverse  events  were
consistent  with  the  findings  from  prelicensure  studies.  The  reporting  rate  of  GBS  or
Bell’s  palsy  was  proportionate  to  the  rate  reported  for  other  vaccines.  However,
administration errors were reported more commonly for MenACWY-CRM, predominantly
because  of  administration  of  only  one  component  (most  commonly  the  liquid
component) rather than reconstituting the vaccine by mixing the liquid and lyophilized
components  together  before  administration.  MenACWY-TT  was  first  licensed  in  the
United  States  in  2020  for  the  prevention  of  meningococcal  disease  caused  by
serogroups A, C, W, and Y in persons aged ≥2 years (68). As a result, relatively limited
data  on  MenACWY-TT  safety  and  immunogenicity  are  available  compared  with  other
licensed  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccines.  MenACWY-TT  has  been  administered  to
nearly 5,000 persons aged ≥2 years to date through clinical trials, with demonstrated
immunogenicity  in  this  age  group  and  elicitation  of  a  boost  response  among
adolescents  vaccinated  with  MenACWY-TT  who  previously  received  MenACWY-D  or
MenACWY-CRM  (68,150–155).  No  clinically  relevant  concerns  about  MenACWY-TT
administered simultaneously with HPV or Tdap vaccines among adolescents have been
identified  (151).  Clinical  trials  have  demonstrated  an  acceptable  safety  profile,  with
injection  site  pain  as  the  most  common  local  adverse  event,  and  myalgia,  headache,
and  malaise  as  the  most  commonly  reported  systemic  adverse  events  across  age
groups  (68,150–155).  Most  adverse  events  were  mild  to  moderate  (68,150–155).
Because  MenACWY-TT  is  currently  only  licensed  for  persons  aged  ≥2  years  in  the
United  States,  immunogenicity  and  safety  data  for  children  aged  <2  years  are  not
presented in this report. Among children who received a single dose at age 2–9 years,
the proportions who achieved hSBA titers ≥1:8 1 month after vaccination were 86% for
serogroup  A,  98%  for  serogroup  C,  95%  for  serogroup  W,  and  99%  for  serogroup  Y
(155). MenACWY-TT seroresponse rates were demonstrated to be noninferior to those
observed for MenACWY-CRM (155). No data are available on MenACWY-TT administered
simultaneously  with  routine  vaccines  or  on  persistence  of  the  immune  response  to
MenACWY-TT among this age group; data will be reviewed as they become available to
inform vaccine recommendations. One month after a single MenACWY-TT dose among
adolescents  and  adults  aged  10–55  years,  the  proportions  who  achieved  hSBA  titers
≥1:8  were  94%–96%  for  serogroup  A,  94%–99%  for  serogroup  C,  95%–99%  for
serogroup W, and 97%–99% for serogroup Y (151,154). Among adults aged ≥56 years,
these proportions were 89%–94%, 75%–90%, 77%–80%, and 81%–92% for serogroups
A,  C,  W,  and  Y,  respectively  (152,153).  Across  these  age  groups,  MenACWY-TT
seroresponse  rates  were  noninferior  to  those  of  the  comparator  meningococcal
vaccines  (68,151,153).  MenACWY-TT  administered  simultaneously  with  HPV  and  Tdap
vaccines in adolescents did not result in reduced immune responses to meningococcal
serogroups  or  tetanus,  diphtheria,  or  HPV  antigens  (151).  Noninferiority  criteria  were
not met for three pertussis antigens when MenACWY-TT and Tdap were administered
simultaneously, although the clinical relevance of this is unclear. No data are available
on persistence of the immune response to MenACWY-TT. When available, data will be
reviewed  to  inform  booster  dose  recommendations  for  persons  primed  with
MenACWY-TT. Among adolescents and adults aged ≥15 years primed with MenACWY-D
or MenACWY-CRM 4–10 years previously, >99% achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:8 across all
serogroups  at  1  month  after  booster  vaccination  with  MenACWY-TT  (150).  Among
children aged 2–9 years vaccinated with a single MenACWY-TT dose, injection site pain
occurred  in  39%,  erythema  in  23%,  and  swelling  in  14%;  systemic  adverse  events
included malaise in 21%, myalgia in 20%, headache in 13%, and fever in 2% within 7
days of vaccine administration (68). Among adolescents and adults aged 10–55 years,
the  most  common  local  adverse  event  was  injection  site  pain  (35%–45%);  erythema
and  swelling  occurred  in  5%  and  4%–5%,  respectively  (68,151).  Systemic  adverse
events  included  myalgia  (27%–36%),  headache  (27%–30%),  and  malaise  (19%–26%);
fever  occurred  in  1%  (68,151).  Rates  of  local  and  systemic  adverse  events  were
typically  similar  in  adults  aged  ≥56  years  compared  with  other  age  groups:  injection
site  pain  (26%–31%),  erythema  (5%–12%),  swelling  (5%–8%),  myalgia  (22%–35%),
headache  (19%–24%),  malaise  (15%–22%),  and  fever  (2%).  When  MenACWY-TT  was
administered simultaneously with HPV and Tdap vaccines in adolescents, rates of local
and  systemic  adverse  events  were  typically  similar  to  those  when  MenACWY-TT  was
administered  alone,  although  myalgia  occurred  more  frequently  (151).  In  addition,
adverse  events  after  a  MenACWY-TT  booster  dose  administered  4–10  years  after
primary  vaccination  with  either  MenACWY-D  or  MenACWY-CRM  were  similar  to  those
among persons receiving a first MenACWY-TT dose (150). Across age groups, whether
MenACWY-TT  was  administered  alone  or  simultaneously  with  other  vaccines,  adverse
events  were  mild  to  moderate  (68,150–155).  Given  the  recent  licensure  of
MenACWY-TT,  no  postlicensure  data  were  available  at  the  time  of  publication  of  this
report.  Data  from  VAERS  and  VSD  will  be  monitored  as  part  of  postlicensure  safety
monitoring. (See Reporting of Vaccine Adverse Events for information on how to report
MenACWY-TT adverse events to VAERS.) Complement-mediated bactericidal activity is
important  for  protection  against  meningococcal  disease;  opsonophagocytic  killing
elicited  by  meningococcal  antibodies  is  another  defense  against  infection  and  is  the
presumed  primary  mechanism  for  vaccine-induced  protection  against  meningococcal
disease  among  persons  with  complement  deficiency  (35,156).  No  data  about
immunogenicity  of  U.S.-licensed  MenACWY  vaccines  (MenACWY-D,  MenACWY-CRM,  or
MenACWY-TT)  are  available  for  persons  with  complement  deficiency.  Antibody  titers
after vaccination with MPSV4, a vaccine that is no longer available in the United States,
are  similar  among  persons  with  late  complement  deficiency  compared  with  healthy
persons  and  the  antibodies  produced  are  capable  of  eliciting  opsonophagocytosis;
however,  antibody  titers  might  wane  more  rapidly  among  persons  with  complement
deficiency  and  higher  antibody  levels  might  be  needed  for  opsonophagocytosis  to
function  (35,157–160).  Data  are  lacking  to  establish  the  efficacy  of  meningococcal
conjugate  vaccines  among  persons  with  complement  deficiency.  Thus,  persons  with
complement  deficiency  are  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  even  if  they
develop antibodies postvaccination (66–68). Limited data are available about efficacy of
meningococcal vaccines among persons taking complement inhibitors. However, some
studies  suggest  that  opsonophagocytic  killing  of  meningococci  in  the  presence  of
eculizumab in sera from persons vaccinated with MenACWY either does not occur or is
insufficient  to  prevent  meningococcal  proliferation  (161).  In  addition,  reports  of
meningococcal  disease  despite  recent  vaccination  among  persons  taking  eculizumab
indicate  that  meningococcal  vaccines  do  not  provide  complete  protection  among
persons  taking  complement  inhibitors,  even  if  antibodies  develop  after  vaccination
(42,66–68,161).  Although  no  data  are  available  for  U.S.-licensed  MenACWY  vaccines
(MenACWY-D,  MenACWY-CRM,  or  MenACWY-TT),  adults  with  anatomic  asplenia  had  a
reduced  immunologic  response  compared  with  healthy  persons  after  1  dose  of  a
serogroup  C  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine;  after  a  second  dose,  most  persons
achieved seroprotection (162–164). Among children and adolescents vaccinated with a
conjugate  MenACWY-TT  vaccine  licensed  outside  the  United  States,  similar  immune
responses  were  observed  in  children  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia  compared
with healthy controls after each of 2 doses (165). However, antibodies appear to wane
rapidly  after  serogroup  C  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccination  among  children  with
functional  asplenia  due  to  sickle  cell  disease,  particularly  among  those  who  received
primary  vaccination  at  age  <2  years  (166).  Among  adolescents  with  HIV  infection,
immunogenicity  to  MenACWY-D  is  reduced  compared  with  adolescents  without  HIV
infection.  By  4  weeks  postvaccination  with  a  single  dose,  52%–73%  of  HIV-infected
adolescents  had  a  greater  than  fourfold  increase  in  rSBA  across  the  meningococcal
serogroups.  Lower  CD4  percentage,  higher  viral  load,  and  a  more  advanced  clinical
stage were inversely associated with seroprotection against serogroup C (167). By 72
weeks subsequent to a second dose, a significantly greater proportion of adolescents
with a CD4 percentage ≥15% had seroprotective rSBA titers, although this proportion
was  lesser  for  serogroup  C  than  other  serogroups,  compared  with  those  with  a  CD4
percentage of <15%, among whom seroprotection rates for all serogroups was reduced
(168). Among children aged 2–10 years with HIV infection and a CD4 percentage ≥25%,
antibody titers against serogroup C waned substantially by 72 weeks after vaccination
(169). Similar trends were observed subsequent to vaccination of HIV-infected children
and  adolescents  with  serogroup  C  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (170–173).
Although data are limited, vaccination of persons with asplenia or HIV infection appears
to be safe and well tolerated, with similar types of adverse events as reported among
healthy controls or during clinical trials (165,167,169,171). Among HIV-infected children
and  adolescents  vaccinated  with  MenACWY-D,  rates  of  adverse  events  typically  were
lower  than  those  reported  during  clinical  trials  of  healthy  children  and  adolescents,
although these lower adverse event rates were not consistently observed among those
vaccinated  with  a  serogroup  C  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (80,167,169–171).
Among children with asplenia who received a conjugate MenACWY-TT vaccine licensed
outside  the  United  States,  an  acceptable  safety  profile  was  observed  among  all  age
groups, although higher rates of adverse events were reported compared with healthy
controls;  however,  the  small  study  size  limits  the  interpretation  of  this  finding
(165,170,171). Adverse outcomes (e.g., spontaneous abortion or birth defects) are risks
for  all  pregnancies,  occurring  in  approximately  15%–20%  and  3%,  respectively,  of
clinically recognized pregnancies in the United States (174,175). Although evidence is
limited,  rates  of  these  outcomes  after  MenACWY  vaccination  during  pregnancy  are
consistent with the estimated background rates, and no additional concerning maternal
or  neonatal  safety  patterns  have  been  identified  (66,67,112,139,176,177).  No
controlled trials have been conducted to specifically assess the safety of meningococcal
vaccination  among  pregnant  women  and  birth  outcomes  of  vaccinated  women.
However,  among  approximately  2,000  pregnant  Malian  women  vaccinated  during  the
third trimester with MenACWY-D as a control group in an influenza vaccine trial, rates of
local and systemic adverse events were lower than those observed during MenACWY-D
clinical trials of adolescents and adults and serious obstetric and nonobstetric adverse
events  were  rare,  with  similar  rates  between  MenACWY-D  and  influenza  vaccination
groups (176). In the MenACWY-D vaccinated group, 98% of pregnancies resulted in live
births,  and  among  infants,  0.3%  had  low  birthweight  and  0.2%  had  a  congenital
malformation;  no  differences  in  these  outcomes  were  observed  among  women  who
received  influenza  vaccine.  Among  approximately  5,000  adolescent  or  adult  females
enrolled in MenACWY clinical trials, pregnancy was reported in 43 women during the 6
months  postvaccination  (37  who  received  MenACWY-CRM  and  six  who  received
MenACWY-D)  (66,67).  Of  these,  seven  (19%)  MenACWY-CRM  recipients  reported
spontaneous  abortion  (estimated  dates  of  conception  were 5 days  before vaccination
for  one  woman,  6–17  weeks  postvaccination  for  five  women,  and  6  months
postvaccination for one woman). Congenital anomaly (hydrocephalus) was reported in
the  infant  of  one  MenACWY-D  recipient  with  an  estimated  conception  date  15  weeks
after  vaccination.  Although  data  are  limited,  no  concerning  safety  signals  have  been
identified
 through
 postlicensure
 surveillance.
 In
 reviews
 of
 VAERS,
 127
pregnancy-associated  reports  were  identified  during  the  periods  evaluated:  113  for
MenACWY-D  (2005–2011)  and  14  for  MenACWY-CRM  (2010–2015);  the  differences  in
number  of  reports  by  vaccine  type  probably  reflect  differences  in  numbers  of  doses
administered  during  these  periods  (139,177).  The  majority  of  vaccine  administrations
occurred  during  the  first  trimester.  Among  the  113  pregnant  women  who  received
MenACWY-D, spontaneous abortion was reported in 17% and congenital anomaly was
reported  in  <1%  of  VAERS  reports  (177).  Following  MenACWY-CRM  vaccination  in
pregnancy,  only  three  VAERS  reports  had  information  on  birth  outcome,  with  no
adverse events reported (139). Among patients in a large health care organization, one
spontaneous  abortion  was  identified  among  18  MenACWY-D  exposures  during
pregnancy  with  known  outcome  (112).  Manufacturers  of  MenACWY  vaccines  maintain
registries  that  monitor  pregnancy  outcomes  of  women  exposed  to  MenACWY  during
pregnancy.  Among  87  pregnant  women  exposed  to  MenACWY-D  during  2005–2016
from  30  days  before  or  at  any  time  during  pregnancy  who  had  known  pregnancy
outcome  and  who  were  enrolled  in  the  registry  before  outcome  being  known,
spontaneous abortion was reported in 7% and major congenital anomalies in 2% (67).
Among 82 pregnant women exposed to MenACWY-CRM during 2014–2017 from 28 days
before or at any time during pregnancy who had known outcome, spontaneous abortion
was  reported  in  12%  and  congenital  anomaly  in  4%  (GlaxoSmithKline,  unpublished
data,  2019).  No  information  is  available  from  the  MenACWY-TT  pregnancy  registry
because of the recent licensure of the vaccine. Overall vaccine effectiveness of a single
dose of MenACWY-D against meningococcal disease caused by serogroups A, C, W, or Y
among adolescents in the United States is estimated at 69% (95% confidence interval
[CI]:  51%–80%)  in  the  8  years  after  vaccination:  77%  (95%  CI:  57%–88%)  against
serogroup C and 51% (95% CI: 1%–76%) against serogroup Y (178). Effectiveness was
79% (95% CI: 49%–91%) in the first year but decreased to 69% (95% CI: 44%–83%) 1 to
<3 years postvaccination and 61% (95% CI: 25%–79%) 3 to <8 years postvaccination.
No  data  are  available  on  the  effectiveness  of  MenACWY-CRM  or  MenACWY-TT.
Measuring  the  association  between  adolescent  MenACWY  vaccination  on  rates  of
meningococcal  disease  has  been  challenging  because  of  the  low  and  decreasing
incidence  of  meningococcal  disease  among  all  age  groups.  However,  from  MenACWY
introduction through 2017, adolescents experienced the greatest percentage decreases
(>90%)  in  meningococcal  disease  incidence  due  to  serogroups  C,  W,  or  Y  combined
compared with other age groups (179). In the setting of 85% coverage with at least 1
dose of MenACWY-D or MenACWY-CRM among U.S. adolescents aged 13–17 years and
44%  coverage  with  at  least  2  doses  among  adolescents  aged  17  years  by  2017,  a
twofold to threefold increase in the rate of decline in incidence was observed during the
postvaccination  period  compared  with  the  prevaccination  period  among  adolescents,
suggesting  that  vaccination  with  MenACWY-D  or  MenACWY-CRM  is  associated  with
reductions  in  disease  rates  in  adolescents  (179,180).  No  data  are  available  for
MenACWY-TT.  Although  vaccination  with  a  serogroup  C  meningococcal  conjugate
vaccine in Europe and a serogroup A meningococcal conjugate vaccine in sub-Saharan
Africa  has  been  associated  with  reductions  in  oropharyngeal  carriage  of  these  N.
meningitidis  serogroups  and  resulted  in  herd  immunity  in  the  population  (181–183),
data  are  limited  for  MenACWY  vaccines.  In  the  United  States,  carriage  prevalence  of
meningococcal serogroups C, W, or Y combined among college students in the setting
of high MenACWY vaccination coverage is now extremely low (<1%); however, no direct
evidence exists that this low prevalence is a result of vaccination (184–186). In a small
observational  study  of  Polish  military  recruits,  those  vaccinated  with  a  MenACWY
vaccine  1–3  years  earlier  had  lower  rates  of  meningococcal  carriage  compared  with
unvaccinated  recruits  (187).  In  a  randomized  controlled  trial  of  United  Kingdom
university students, those who received MenACWY-CRM had significantly lower carriage
prevalence than controls for serogroup Y (39% carriage reduction) and serogroups C,
W, and Y combined (36% carriage reduction) at 2 months postvaccination, although no
differences  in  carriage  acquisition  rates  were  observed  (188).  In  contrast,  in  a  study
conducted  in  a  different  United  Kingdom  university  population  vaccinated  with
MenACWY-CRM  in  response  to  rapid  expansion  of  a  serogroup  W  clone  in  England,
serogroup  W  carriage  of  this  clone  increased  despite  relatively  high  vaccination
coverage  (189).  However,  because  carriage  acquisition  among  university  students  is
known to rapidly increase at the beginning of the academic year (190), the majority of
serogroup  W  transmissions  might  have  occurred  simultaneously  with  vaccination
activities  (i.e.,  during  September).  Cost-effectiveness  of  MenACWY  vaccines  in  the
United  States  was  last  assessed  in  2010  using  Monte  Carlo  simulation  (191).  In  this
evaluation, cost per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) of vaccinating at ages 11 and 16
years  was  similar  to  vaccinating  at  either  age  11  or  15  years  ($212,000–$256,000),
although  the  estimated  number  of  cases  and  deaths  averted  among  the  vaccinated
cohort  was  substantially  higher  with  a  2-dose  strategy  (184  and  22,  respectively)
compared  with  a  single-dose  strategy  (94–115  and  11–14,  respectively)  (16).  Top
MenB-FHbp  is  only  licensed  for  persons  aged  10–25  years  in  the  United  States;
therefore,  immunogenicity  and  safety  data  for  children  aged  <10  years  are  not
presented  in  this  report.  Available  data  for  this  age  group  have  recently  been
summarized  elsewhere  (192).  Clinical  trials  have  demonstrated  that  although
vaccination  of  adolescents  and  young  adults  with  either  a  2-  or  3-dose  schedule  of
MenB-FHbp
 is
 immunogenic,
 antibody
 titers
 wane
 substantially
 by
 1
 year
postvaccination and then remain stable for up to 4 years (94,193–199). Subsequent to
booster  vaccination  4  years  after  primary  series  completion,  a  robust  response  is
observed  and  persistence  at  26  months  after  the  booster  dose  is  superior  to  the
response at a comparable period after primary series completion for both 2-dose and
3-dose  primary  series  recipients  (19,200).  No  clinically  relevant  concerns  related  to
MenB-FHbp  administered  simultaneously  with  other  vaccines  have  been  identified
(94,196,201).  MenB-FHbp  is  safe  and  well  tolerated,  although  more  reactogenic  than
MenACWY  (94,194–199,201).  In  clinical  trials,  the  most  common  local  reactions  were
injection site pain, induration, and erythema, and the most common systemic adverse
events  were  headache,  fatigue,  and  myalgia.  Symptoms  typically  resolved  within  5
days  (94,194–199,201).  Adverse  events  reported  through  postlicensure  safety
surveillance are consistent with the clinical trial data, and no new safety concerns have
been  identified  (202).  Clinical  trials  for  MenB-FHbp  immunogenicity  against  four
reference strains, each expressing an FHbp antigen different from those included in the
vaccine,  among  persons  aged  10–25  years  were  conducted  using  several  dosing
schedules, including the licensed formulations of a 3-dose schedule (0, 1, and 6 months
or  0,  2,  and  6  months)  and  a  2-dose  schedule  (0  and  6  months).  By  1  month  after
completion of either of the 3-dose schedules, the proportion of persons with hSBA titers
≥1:8 or at or above the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) of the assay (LLOQ: ≥1:8 or
≥1:16  depending  on  the  strain)  was  91%–98%  for  test  strain  A22,  ≥99%  for  A56,
81%–95% for B24, 86%–96% for B44, and 84%–94% for the composite response (i.e.,
response  against  all  test  strains)  (94,193–199).  The  proportions  of  persons  with
seroprotective  hSBA  titers  were  similar  between  0-,  1-,  and  6-months  and  0-,  2-,  and
6-months schedules. In the study that assessed the 2-dose schedule (0 and 6 months),
the  proportion  with  hSBA  titers  ≥LLOQ  was  97%  for  A22,  99%  for  A56,  81%  for  B24,
78%  for  B44,  and  77%  for  the  composite  response  (182,198).  Administration  of
MenB-FHbp  simultaneously  with  other  vaccines  did  not  result  in  reduced  immune
response to MenB-FHbp antigens, meningococcal serogroups A, C, W, or Y or diphtheria,
tetanus, or pertussis antigens (94,201). Noninferiority criteria were not met for HPV 18
antigen,  although  the  GMTs  were  high  and  for  each  of  the  four  HPV  types  in  the
quadrivalent HPV vaccine (including type 18), ≥99% of persons seroconverted (197). By
6 months postcompletion of a 3-dose (0, 2, and 6 months) schedule among adolescents
aged 11–18 years, the proportions with hSBA titers ≥LLOQ were 60% for A22, 89% for
A56,  57%  for  B24,  37%  for  B44,  and  26%  for  the  composite  response  (193).  By  12
months  postcompletion  of  any  3-dose  series,  the  proportion  with  hSBA  titers  ≥LLOQ
was  41%–54%  for  A22,  69%–76%  for  A56,  41%–55%  for  B24,  23%–29%  for  B44,  and
22%  for  the  composite  response  (193,198).  These  proportions  remained  relatively
stable thereafter (at 18, 24, 36, and 48 months postprimary series) (range: 35%–59%
for A22, 47%–73% for A56, 41%–57% for B24, 17%–27% for B44, and 16%–19% for the
composite  response)  (193,198).  After  a  2-dose  schedule,  the  proportion  of  recipients
with hSBA titers ≥LLOQ was slightly lower than that observed for the 3-dose series but
similarly  stable  12–48  months  after  series  completion  (range:  36%–48%  for  A22,
54%–60% for A56, 31%–37% for B24, 16%–20% for B44, and, by 48 months, 16% for
the composite response) (193,198). One month after a booster dose administered 48
months  after  primary  series  completion,  94%–98%  of  persons  who  received  a  2-dose
primary series and ≥97% of those who received a 3-dose primary series achieved an
hSBA  titer  ≥1:4  against  the  four  test  strains  (19).  Twelve  months  after  MenB-FHbp
booster  administration,  62%–82%  of  those  who  received  a  2-dose  primary  series  and
73%–93%  of  those  who  received  a  3-dose  primary  series  achieved  hSBA  titers  ≥1:4
across  the  test  strains  (composite  response  of  63%  for  both  groups).  By  26  months
postbooster, further antibody titer waning was observed among persons who received a
2-dose  series  but  not  among  those  who  received  a  3-dose  series:  59%–67%  and
71%–90% achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:4 for the four test strains, respectively, although
decreases  were  observed  in  the  composite  response  for  both  groups  (42%  and  46%,
respectively). In addition to these trials demonstrating immunogenicity to the four test
strains, several evaluations have assessed immunogenicity against genetically diverse
and  clinically  relevant  strains.  In  one  of  the  clinical  trials,  63%–99%  of  persons
vaccinated with a 2-dose primary series at 0 and 2 months and 75%–99% vaccinated
with  a  3-dose  primary  series  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥LLOQ  against  10  additional
strains  (195).  In  a  manufacturer-sponsored  evaluation,  hSBA  responses  measured
against  27  clinically  relevant  strains  (including  strains  from  four  U.S.  university
outbreaks)  demonstrated  that  ≥32%  of  persons  vaccinated  with  2  doses  and  ≥56%
vaccinated with 3 doses achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:8 against all test strains (203). The
proportion of persons who achieved seroprotective hSBA titers was greater for strains
expressing  the  most  common  FHbp  variants  in  the  United  States  (B24  and  A22)  at
≥81%
 and
 88%–95%,
 respectively,
 after
 the
 third
 dose.
 In
 another
manufacturer-sponsored  study,  1  month  after  the  third  MenB-FHbp  dose  ≥73%  of
adolescents  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:4  against  eight  French  serogroup  B  outbreak
strains  (204).  In  an  independent  study  among  vaccinated  U.S.  health  care  workers,
≥93%  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:4  against  14  serogroup  B  strains  (including  strains
from  six  university  outbreaks)  by  1  month  after  the  third  dose;  by  9–11  months
postvaccination,  27%–90%  remained  seroprotected  against  nine  strains  tested  (205).
Among  adolescents  and  young  adults,  injection  site  pain  (72%–93%),  induration
(21%–37%),  and  erythema  (10%–24%)  were  commonly  observed  local  reactions  after
any  dose  in  either  a  2-  or  3-dose  series  (94,194–197,199).  Headache  (27%–67%),
fatigue  (30%–66%),  myalgia  (21%–40%),  and  arthralgia  (11%–33%)  were  the  most
commonly  reported  systemic  adverse  events;  fever  was  reported  in  2%–23%  of
recipients. Reactogenicity did not increase with increasing number of doses. Rates and
types  of  adverse  events  subsequent  to  a  booster  dose  administered  4  years  after
primary series completion were similar to those observed after the primary series (198).
Most adverse events were mild to moderate, and symptoms typically resolved within 5
days  of  onset  (94,194–199).  Because  MenB-FHbp  contains  factor  H  binding  protein,  a
theoretical  risk  exists  for  development  of  factor  H  autoantibodies  (implicated  in
diseases  such  as  atypical  hemolytic  uremic  syndrome  and  C3  glomerulonephropathy)
postvaccination  (206,207);  however,  whether  factor  H  autoantibodies  develop  after
MenB-FHbp vaccination and, if so, whether they are clinically significant is not known.
Among persons who received MenB-FHbp in clinical trials, the proportion with a newly
diagnosed autoimmune disease during the trial or during the 6-month follow-up period
was low (0.14%) and similar to unvaccinated controls (208). Furthermore, the onset of
symptoms consistent with the diagnosis occurred before the first vaccination in most of
these  persons.  In  a  comprehensive  review  of  VAERS  reports  from  licensure  in  2014
through  June  2018,  no  new  safety  concerns  were  identified  (CDC,  unpublished  data,
2020).  A  total  of  1,719  reports  involving  MenB-FHbp  were  identified;  among  these
reports,  the  median  patient  age  at  vaccination  was  17  years,  and  36%  involved
simultaneous  administration  with  other  vaccines.  The  most  common  adverse  events
reported were fever, headache, and injection site pain. Reported adverse events (e.g.,
headache,  fever,  chills,  and  myalgia)  are  consistent  with  those  identified  in  clinical
trials. No safety signals related to autoimmune or renal diseases were detected. After a
MenB-FHbp  mass  vaccination  campaign  in  response  to  a  serogroup  B  meningococcal
disease  outbreak  on  a  university  campus  in  which  approximately  10,000  doses  were
administered,  adverse  events  were  solicited  via  survey  subsequent  to  each  of  the  3
doses (202). Among survey respondents, rates of injection site pain, fatigue, myalgia,
fevers, and chills were similar to those reported during clinical trials, and no new safety
concerns  were  identified.  MenB-4C  was  first  licensed  in  the  United  States  in  2015.
MenB-4C  is  licensed  for  persons  aged  10–25  years  in  the  United  States;  therefore,
immunogenicity and safety data for children aged <10 years are not presented in this
report.  Available  data  for  this  age  group  have  been  summarized  elsewhere  (209).
Among adolescents and young adults, a 2-dose MenB-4C primary series is immunogenic
(148,210–213).  Although  antibody  persistence  is  difficult  to  assess  because  of
heterogeneous results by vaccine antigens (FHbp, NhbA, NadA, and PorA) or between
studies,  different  points  assessed  in  different  studies,  and  elevated  baseline  titers  in
certain  studies,  antibody  titers  appear  to  wane  by  2  years  postvaccination
(148,213–216). A robust immune response is demonstrated after either a MenB-4C or
investigational  serogroups  A,  B,  C,  W,  and  Y  (MenABCWY)  vaccine  booster  dose
administered 2, 4, or 7.5 years after a MenB-4C primary series (215,217). Although data
are  limited,  persistence  after  a  booster  dose  likely  lasts  for  several  years  based  on
observed and modeled data (218). MenB-4C vaccine is safe and well tolerated, although
more  reactogenic  than  MenACWY  (188,210–213).  In  clinical  trials,  the  most  common
local reactions were injection site pain, erythema, and swelling and the most common
systemic adverse events were headache, fatigue, and myalgia. In postlicensure safety
surveillance, local and systemic adverse events reported are consistent with the clinical
trial  data  (219–221).  Clinical  trials  were  conducted  to  assess  immunogenicity  to  four
test strains among persons aged 10–25 years using a 2-dose primary series schedule (0
and 1–2 months), with seroprotection defined as an hSBA titer ≥1:4 or ≥1:5. One month
after the second dose, ≥98% of recipients achieved seroprotection against FHbp, ≥97%
against  NadA,  ≥75%  against  PorA,  and  ≥68%  against  NhbA  (148,210–213).  At  5–6
months  after  the  primary  series,  ≥82%  remained  seroprotected  against  FHbp,  ≥93%
against  NadA,  and  ≥75%  against  PorA  (NhbA  was  not  assessed)  (148,213).  Antibody
persistence at further points was variable between studies. In a study conducted among
United  Kingdom  college  students,  in  which  the  proportion  of  persons  with  baseline
(prevaccination)  titers  ≥1:4  ranged  from  57%  to  69%  for  FHbp,  NadA,  and  PorA,
85%–97%  of  vaccinated  students  remained  seroprotected  for  these  antigens  at  11
months postcompletion of the primary series (148). In a study of Chilean adolescents, in
whom baseline titers were also elevated, 75%–93% were seroprotected against FHbp,
NadA,  and  PorA  by  18–23  months  after  the  primary  series  and  29%–84%  had
seroprotection  at  7.5  years  (215,216).  However,  the  proportion  seroprotected  at  7.5
years was not significantly different from baseline for three of the four antigens in the
original  study  cohort,  although  higher  than  an  age-matched  unvaccinated  population
for  three  of  four  antigens.  Among  participants  in  two  different  clinical  trials  in  which
most had low baseline titers, results at 2 years (United States and Poland) and 4 years
(Canada
 and
 Australia)
 postvaccination
 were
 relatively
 consistent:
 30%–34%
seroprotection  against  FHbp,  84%–94%  against  NadA,  9%–16%  against  PorA,  and
50%–75% against NhbA (214,215). In a small clinical trial of adult laboratory workers, in
which most participants had high baseline hSBA titers to serogroups A, C, W, and Y and
select serogroup B strains, simultaneous administration of MenACWY-CRM and a 3-dose
MenB-4C  series  resulted  in  robust  immune  responses  through  4  months  after  the
second dose and 1 month after the third dose (134). In extension studies conducted in
Chile, Canada, and Australia, a MenB-4C booster was administered either 4 or 7.5 years
after completion of the primary series (215). One month after booster administration,
≥93% of persons achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:4 across the four vaccine antigens. No data
on  persistence  of  the  immune  response  after  a  booster  dose  are  available  for  this
cohort. However, modeling of the clinical trial data demonstrates that persistence likely
lasts  for  several  years  (218).  In  an  extension  of  the  U.S.-Poland  study,  11  persons
previously  vaccinated  with  a  MenB-4C  primary  series  were  randomized  to  receive  an
investigational  pentavalent  (serogroups  A,  B,  C,  W,  and  Y)  vaccine,  in  which  the
serogroup  B  component  was  identical  to  the  components  of  the  licensed  MenB-4C
product,  as  a  booster  dose  2  years  postcompletion  of  the  primary  series  (217).  One
month postbooster, ≥91% of persons achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:5 against FHbp, NadA,
and  NhbA,  and  82%  achieved  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:5  against  PorA.  At  12  months
postbooster, all recipients achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:5 against NadA, 82% against FHbp
and NhbA, and 45% against PorA, although confidence intervals were wide because of
the  small  study  size  (217).  In  addition  to  clinical  trials,  several  observational
immunogenicity studies have been undertaken. After a 2013 mass MenB-4C vaccination
campaign  at  a  U.S.  university  in  response  to  a  serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease
outbreak caused by a strain predicted by the MATS assay to be covered by both the
FHbp and NhbA antigens in MenB-4C, 66% of serosurvey participants achieved an hSBA
titer  ≥1:4  against  the  outbreak  strain  at  2  months  after  receipt  of  the  2-dose  series;
immunogenicity against two vaccine antigen reference strains was high (222). Antibody
titers  against  the  outbreak  strain  appeared  to  wane  rapidly  postvaccination;  by  20
months postvaccination, 24% of recipients remained seroprotected (223). Antibody titer
waning also was observed among students vaccinated with MenB-4C during a different
U.S. university outbreak. The proportion of students with an hSBA titer ≥1:4 against the
outbreak  strain  and  three  additional  university  outbreak  strains  ranged  from  53%  to
93%  1.5–2  months  after  completion  of  the  series,  and  this  proportion  decreased  to
31%–86% at 7 months (224). In another evaluation using sera from vaccinated adults,
hSBA  activity  against  18  genetically  diverse  serogroup  B  strains  (including  three
reference  strains  and  six  university  outbreak  strains)  demonstrated  that  at  1  month
postvaccination, ≥85% of recipients achieved an hSBA titer ≥1:4 against most strains;
however, this proportion decreased to 70% for 14 of the strains and 45%–62% for the
remaining  four  strains  (two  from  outbreaks)  by  4–6  months  postvaccination  (225).
Among  adolescents  and  adults,  injection  site  pain  (82%–98%),  erythema  (35%–68%),
swelling  (26%–47%),  and  induration  (10%–48%)  were  commonly  reported  local
reactions after primary vaccination (188,210–213). Headache (21%–65%), fatigue and
malaise (18%–73%), myalgia (17%–75%), arthralgia (8%–42%), and nausea (8%–35%)
were  commonly  reported  systemic  adverse  events;  fever  was  reported  in  1%–10%  of
recipients. In a clinical trial conducted among laboratory workers in which MenB-4C was
administered simultaneously with MenACWY-CRM, local injection site adverse reactions
were  more  common  in  the  arms  in  which  MenB-4C  was  administered  compared  with
MenACWY-CRM;  nausea  and  headache  were  more  frequently  reported  when  the  two
vaccines  were  administered  simultaneously  compared  with  MenB-4C  administration
alone (134). After a MenB-4C or investigational MenABCWY booster dose, rates of local
or  systemic  adverse  events  typically  were  similar  to  those  observed  among  persons
who  received  doses  as  part  of  primary  vaccination  (215,217).  As  with  MenB-FHbp,
MenB-4C contains components that include factor H binding protein. Animal models and
an  evaluation  in  humans  demonstrated  that  antibodies  generated  after  MenB-4C
vaccination were cross-reactive with human factor H (226–228). In the human study, a
small  proportion  of  persons  vaccinated  with  MenB-4C  had  transient  development  of
factor  H  autoantibodies,  although  factor  H  function  was  unaffected  (228).  Although
these findings do not suggest that factor H autoantibodies from MenB vaccination are
likely  to  cause  factor  H–associated  autoimmune  conditions,  the  clinical  significance
remains uncertain, and additional postlicensure safety surveillance will be important. In
FDA’s  review  of  MenB-4C  clinical  trial  data,  among  study  participants  with  an
autoimmune  disorder  diagnosed  during  the  study  follow-up  period,  the  onset  of
symptoms  consistent  with  the  disorder  occurred  before  the  first  vaccination  in  most
trial  participants  (70).  MenB-4C  safety  surveillance  was  conducted  as  part  of  several
mass  vaccination  campaigns  in  the  United  States  and  Canada  (219–221).  MenB-4C
mass  vaccination  campaigns  were  implemented  in  response  to  outbreaks  at  two  U.S.
universities  (approximately  31,000  doses  administered),  under  an  expanded  access
investigational  new  drug  protocol  before  U.S.  licensure  of  the  vaccine,  and  one
university  in  Canada  (approximately  5,000  doses  administered)  (220,221).  The  most
commonly reported adverse events were consistent with findings from clinical trial data
(e.g., fever, injection site pain, and arm pain), although 0.88 syncopal events per 1,000
persons  in  the  U.S.  evaluation  were  reported.  Similarly,  safety  surveillance  for  mass
vaccination to control increased incidence of serogroup B meningococcal disease in a
region of Quebec, Canada, in which nearly 60,000 doses were administered to persons
aged ≤20 years, demonstrated local and systemic adverse events consistent with those
described  in  clinical  trials,  although  adverse  event–related  absenteeism  or  medical
consultations  were  frequent  (219).  However,  four  cases  of  likely  idiopathic  nephrotic
syndrome  were  identified  in  vaccinated  children  aged  2–5  years  during  the  1-year
postvaccination safety monitoring period (229). Because of the small number of cases
and wide confidence intervals of risk estimates, whether this finding represents a safety
signal is unclear. In a comprehensive review of VAERS reports from licensure in 2015
through  June  2018,  no  new  safety  concerns  were  identified  (CDC,  unpublished  data,
2020).  A  total  of  1,470  reports  involving  MenB-4C  vaccination  were  received;  the
median patient age was 17 years, and 39% involved simultaneous administration with
other vaccines. The most commonly reported adverse events were injection site pain,
fever, and headache. Transient decreased mobility of the arm where the vaccine was
injected  was  disproportionately  reported  for  MenB-4C  compared  with  other  vaccines.
Overall,  the  reported  adverse  events  were  consistent  with  the  findings  from  clinical
trials.  No  autoimmune  or  renal  disease–related  safety  signals  were  detected.
Immunogenicity of MenB-4C was assessed in children and adolescents aged 2–17 years
with  certain  underlying  conditions  (230).  One  month  postcompletion  of  a  2-dose
primary series, the proportion of persons with complement deficiency or complement
inhibitor use with hSBA titers ≥1:5 was 87% for FHbp, 95% for NadA, 68% for PorA, and
73%  for  NhbA  when  exogenous  complement  was  used.  Among  those  with  asplenia,
≥84%  had  seroprotection  against  these  four  antigens,  which  was  similar  to  the
proportion
 observed
 in
 healthy
 control
 participants.
 However,
 among
complement-deficient  persons,  when  endogenous  complement  was  used,  only
41%–68%  had  seroprotection  against  the  four  antigens;  among  those  with  terminal
component  deficiencies  or  complement  inhibitor  use,  only  17%  demonstrated  any
bactericidal  activity  postvaccination.  In  addition,  a  lack  of  opsonophagocytic  killing  of
meningococci  in  the  presence  of  eculizumab  in  sera  from  persons  vaccinated  with
MenB-4C  has  been  observed,  and  cases  of  serogroup  or  genogroup  B  meningococcal
disease  have  been  reported  despite  recent  vaccination  among  persons  using
eculizumab (161,231,232). Although data are limited for MenB-FHbp, similar concerns
exist for the lack of complete protection in vaccinated persons (69). Thus, persons with
complement deficiency or complement inhibitor use might remain at increased risk for
meningococcal disease even if they develop antibodies postvaccination (69,70,94,201).
The  safety  profile  of  MenB-4C  among  children  and  adolescents  aged  2–17  years  with
certain underlying medical conditions was similar to that observed in healthy controls
(230). In a small Spanish evaluation in adults with complement deficiency, eculizumab
use,  asplenia,  and  history  of  meningococcal  disease,  plus  a  microbiologist  with  an
immunodeficiency, the reactogenicity profile of MenB-4C was similar to that reported in
clinical trials in adolescents and adults except for a slightly higher rate of fever (13%).
Vaccination
 in
 general
 might
 activate
 complement.
 Thus,
 patients
 with
complement-mediated diseases, such as those in whom complement inhibitors are used
for  treatment  (e.g.,  paroxysmal  nocturnal  hemoglobinuria  and  atypical  hemolytic
uremic syndrome), might experience increased signs and symptoms of their underlying
disease  after  vaccination.  In  a  safety  review  of  patients  treated  with  eculizumab  in
Canada,  an  increased  risk  for  anemia  or  hemolysis  was  observed  when  patients
receiving eculizumab were vaccinated with MenB-4C, particularly in those who received
an eculizumab dose within 2 weeks of vaccination (233). The Canadian package insert
for eculizumab was updated with the manufacturer’s recommendation that patients be
vaccinated (with any recommended meningococcal vaccine, not specifically MenB-4C)
before  or  at  the  same  time  as  eculizumab  initiation;  those  receiving  eculizumab
treatment are recommended to be vaccinated only when their disease is controlled and
the  eculizumab  concentration  in  the  blood  is  considered  to  be  high  (234).  No  similar
safety  concerns  have  been  identified  in  the  United  States  to  date;  however,
meningococcal  vaccination  is  likewise  recommended  at  least  2  weeks  before
complement  inhibitor  initiation  (39,40).  Data  on  safety  of  MenB  vaccines  in  pregnant
women are limited. No controlled trials have been conducted to specifically assess the
safety of MenB vaccination among pregnant women and birth outcomes of vaccinated
women.  Among  approximately  6,000  adolescent  or  adult  females  enrolled  in
MenB-FHbp  clinical  trials,  pregnancy  was  reported  during  the  trial  or  in  the  follow-up
period in 34 women who had received at least 1 dose (94,194–199,201). Among these,
four  (12%)  spontaneous  abortions  were  reported.  Among  approximately  2,000
adolescent  or  adult  females  enrolled  in  MenB-4C  clinical  trials,  no  pregnancies  were
reported  in  the  published  literature  (188,210–213,215).  Evaluation  of  VAERS  through
June 2018 identified three reports related to MenB-FHbp vaccination during pregnancy,
with no maternal or fetal adverse events reported, and four related to MenB-4C, with
one spontaneous abortion reported (CDC, unpublished data, 2020). Both manufacturers
maintain pregnancy registries to collect information on birth outcomes after maternal
vaccination;  however,  no  data  are  available  (GlaxoSmithKline  and  Pfizer,  personal
communications,  2019).  After  a  mass  vaccination  program  among  persons  aged  2
months–20 years in a region of Canada experiencing increased incidence of serogroup
B  meningococcal  disease  due  predominantly  to  a  single  clone,  MenB-4C  vaccine
effectiveness among all target age groups was estimated at 79% (95% CI: −231% to
99%)  in  the  4  years  postvaccination,  although  the  wide  confidence  intervals
encompassing  the  null  effect  value  limit  the  interpretation  of  the  finding  (235).  No
additional data on MenB-4C effectiveness are available for adolescents and adults. In
the United Kingdom, where infants are vaccinated with MenB-4C at ages 2, 4, and 12
months, vaccine effectiveness among children who completed the series was estimated
at  59.1%  (95%  CI:  −31.1%  to  87.2%)  for  all  serogroup  B  strains  in  the  3  years  after
vaccination  (236).  No  data  are  available  on  MenB-FHbp  vaccine  effectiveness  in  any
age  group.  No  information  is  available  on  the  association  between  MenB  vaccination
and meningococcal disease incidence in the United States. This association cannot be
assessed because of the low incidence of serogroup B meningococcal disease and low
vaccination  coverage  after  the  2015  ACIP  recommendation  that  adolescents  be
vaccinated on the basis of shared clinical decision-making (22% of adolescents aged 17
years  received  ≥1  MenB  dose  in  2019)  (237).  Current  evidence  suggests  that  MenB
vaccines probably do not have a substantial effect on the prevalence or acquisition of
N.  meningitidis  oropharyngeal  carriage.  In  a  large  randomized  controlled  trial  in
Australia, MenB-4C vaccination of adolescents did not result in a reduction of carriage
with  N.  meningitidis  serogroup  B  or  other  disease-causing  N.  meningitidis  serogroups
(238). In a smaller randomized controlled trial of United Kingdom university students,
no immediate reduction in meningococcal carriage was observed in the 1 month after
MenB-4C vaccination. By 3 months postvaccination, significantly lower carriage of any
meningococcal strain and of capsular groups B, C, W, and Y was observed; however, no
specific effect of MenB-4C on serogroup B carriage was observed (188). No data from
large  randomized  controlled  trials  for  MenB-FHbp  are  available.  However,  two
observational  carriage  evaluations  after  vaccination  of  U.S.  university  students
primarily  with  MenB-FHbp  during  serogroup  B  outbreaks  demonstrated  stable
serogroup  B  carriage  rates  before  and  after  vaccination,  suggesting  that  MenB-FHbp
does not have a large or rapid effect on carriage (185,186). Cost-effectiveness of MenB
vaccines  among  U.S.  adolescents  was  first  assessed  in  2015  and  most  recently
evaluated in 2018 (10,239). Vaccination strategies included a MenB primary series at
age 11 years with a booster at age 16 years, a series at age 16 years, a series at age
18  years,  and  a  series  among  college  students.  Cost  per  QALY  saved  for  these  four
strategies  ranged  from  $9.6  million  to  $12.7  million,  with  the  number  needed  to
vaccinate to prevent a case ranging from 152,000 to 305,000 and the number needed
to  vaccinate  to  prevent  a  death  ranging  from  1.6  million  to  2.8  million  (239).  Top
MenACWY-D,  MenACWY-CRM,  MenACWY-TT,  MenB-FHbp,  and  MenB-4C  are  all
administered  intramuscularly  at  a  dose  of  0.5  mL.  However,  for  MenACWY-CRM,  the
lyophilized MenA component must be reconstituted with the liquid MenCWY component
immediately  before  administration.  If  the  liquid  MenCWY  component  is  inadvertently
administered  alone  without  the  lyophilized  MenA  component,  revaccination  is  not
necessary for persons who are not planning to travel internationally because serogroup
A meningococcal disease is rarely reported in the United States. However, revaccination
is necessary if the person plans to travel internationally, particularly to a region where
serogroup A meningococcal disease is endemic, or where vaccination is required, such
as to the Hajj pilgrimage. In this case, a dose prepared according to the manufacturer’s
instructions  should  be  administered  as  soon  as  feasible.  Additional  information  on
meningococcal vaccine administration is available in the package inserts (66–70). Top
ACIP  recommends  routine  administration  of  a  MenACWY  vaccine  for  all  persons  aged
11–18 years (Table 2). In addition, ACIP recommends a MenB vaccine series for persons
aged 16–23 years on the basis of shared clinical decision-making to provide short-term
protection  against  most  strains  of  serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease  (Table  2).  The
preferred age for MenB vaccination is 16–18 years. ACIP recommends a single dose of
MenACWY  at  age  11  or  12  years  followed  by  a  booster  dose  administered  at  age  16
years  (Table  2).  Children  who  received  MenACWY  at  age  10  years  do  not  need  an
additional  dose  at  age  11–12  years  but  should  receive  the  booster  dose  at  age  16
years. Children who received MenACWY before age 10 years and with no ongoing risk
for  meningococcal  disease  for  which  boosters  are  recommended  should  still  receive
MenACWY according to the recommended adolescent schedule, with the first dose at
age 11–12 years and a booster dose at age 16 years. For example, a healthy child who
received  MenACWY  at  age  9  years  because  of  short-term  travel  to  a  country  where
meningococcal  disease  is  hyperendemic  or  epidemic  and  who  is  not  otherwise  at
increased  risk  should  receive  the  MenACWY  at  age  11–12  years  according  to  the
recommended ACIP adolescent vaccination schedule. Children who received MenACWY
before age 10 years and for whom boosters are recommended because of an ongoing
increased risk for meningococcal disease (e.g., those with complement deficiency, HIV
infection, or asplenia) should follow the booster schedule for persons at increased risk.
Adolescents who receive their first dose at age 13–15 years should receive a booster
dose at age 16–18 years; the booster dose can be administered at any time, as long as
a minimum interval of 8 weeks between doses is maintained. Adolescents who receive
a first dose after their 16th birthday do not need a booster dose unless they become at
increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease.  Persons  aged  19–21  years  who  have  not
received a dose after their 16th birthday can receive a single MenACWY dose as part of
catch-up  vaccination.  MenACWY  vaccines  are  interchangeable;  the  same  vaccine
product  is  recommended,  but  not  required,  for  all  doses.  MenACWY  vaccines  can  be
administered simultaneously with other vaccines indicated for this age group, but at a
different anatomic site, if feasible. MenACWY-TT, which is conjugated to tetanus toxoid,
is only licensed for the prevention of meningococcal disease; use of this vaccine does
not  replace  doses  or  affect  the  dosing  intervals  of  routinely  recommended  tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccines  in  any  age  group.  MenB  vaccination  is  not  routinely
recommended for all adolescents. Instead, ACIP recommends a MenB series for persons
aged  16–23  years  (preferred  age  16–18  years)  on  the  basis  of  shared  clinical
decision-making  (240)  (Table  2).  Shared  clinical  decision-making  refers  to  an
individually  based  vaccine  recommendation  informed  by  a  decision-making  process
between the health care provider and the patient or parent/guardian. Considerations for
shared clinical decision-making for vaccine administration and timing of administration
might include the serious nature of meningococcal infections, with high rates of death
and  permanent  sequelae  in  those  who  develop  invasive  disease;  the  low  number  of
serogroup B meningococcal disease cases (average of 34 serogroup B cases annually
among  persons  aged  16–23  years  in  the  United  States  during  2015–2018);  the
increased  risk  among  college  students,  especially  those  who  are  freshmen,  attend  a
4-year university, live in on-campus housing, or participate in sororities and fraternities;
the  protection  provided  by  MenB  vaccines  against  most  strains  of  serogroup  B  N.
meningitidis;  the  estimated  relatively  short  duration  of  MenB  protection  (antibody
waning  within  1–2  years  postcompletion  of  the  primary  series);  and  the  evidence  to
date suggesting that MenB vaccination has no effect on meningococcal carriage (i.e.,
MenB  vaccines  might  provide  individual  protection  against  serogroup  B  disease  but
herd protection is unlikely). For adolescents who are not otherwise at increased risk for
meningococcal  disease  (e.g.,  due  to  complement  deficiency  or  asplenia),  a  2-dose
series  of  MenB  vaccine  should  be  administered  as  follows:  2  doses  of  MenB-FHbp
administered  at  0  and  6  months  or  2  doses  of  MenB-4C  administered  at  0  and  ≥1
month. If the second dose of MenB-FHbp is administered earlier than 6 months after the
first dose, a third dose should be administered at least 4 months after the second dose.
Either of the MenB vaccines can be used when indicated; ACIP does not state a product
preference.  However,  MenB  vaccines  are  not  interchangeable,  and  the  same  vaccine
product  must  be  used  for  all  doses.  If  one  MenB  dose  was  received  but  the  vaccine
product  is  unknown,  the  series  must  be  restarted  with  either  product  to  ensure
completion  of  a  2-dose  series  using  the  same  product.  If  2  doses  were  administered
using different MenB products, one product should be selected for administration of an
additional dose at an appropriate interval to ensure valid completion of a MenB series;
the  dose  from  the  product  not  selected  for  series  completion  should  be  considered
invalid.  For  situations  in  which  a  MenB  dose  or  doses  must  be  repeated,  a  minimum
interval  of  4  weeks  should  be  used  between  any  2  doses.  MenB  vaccines  can  be
administered simultaneously with other vaccines indicated for this age group, but at a
different anatomic site, if feasible. Persons at increased risk for meningococcal disease
are  recommended  to  receive  routine  meningococcal  vaccination.  Vaccine  product,
number of doses, and booster dose recommendations are based on age and risk factors
(Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10). Although evidence suggests that vaccination might
not  adequately  prevent  meningococcal  infections  among  persons  with  certain
complement deficiencies or those using a complement inhibitor (66–70), these persons
should continue to be vaccinated according to recommendations because of a possible
benefit among persons at high risk for infection (Table 4). Persons using complement
inhibitor should be vaccinated at least 2 weeks before complement inhibitor initiation
unless the risks for delaying treatment outweigh the risks for developing meningococcal
disease. Among unvaccinated patients for whom complement inhibitor therapy cannot
be delayed, antimicrobial prophylaxis (e.g., penicillin) should be administered alongside
meningococcal  vaccination  and  continued  for  2  weeks  after  vaccine  administration
(39,40). In addition, providers might consider antimicrobial prophylaxis for the duration
of  complement  inhibitor  therapy.  Among  persons  undergoing  elective  splenectomy,
meningococcal  vaccines  should  be  administered  at  least  2  weeks  before  surgery,  if
possible;  otherwise,  they  should  be  administered  after  the  procedure  as  soon  as  the
patient’s condition is stable (241). Children at increased risk for meningococcal disease
caused by serogroups A, C, W, or Y (Box 1) who received MenACWY at age <11 years
and  for  whom  booster  vaccination  is  recommended  because  of  an  ongoing  increased
risk should follow the booster dose schedule (Tables 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9), not the routine
adolescent schedule. For example, a child with HIV infection who received MenACWY at
age 9 years should receive the next dose at age 14 years. Booster doses administered
to children aged <15 years, repeated booster doses, and booster doses administered at
an  interval  of  <4  years  are  not  licensed  in  the  United  States  and  are  considered
off-label  (Table  11).  Because  of  the  high  risk  for  invasive  pneumococcal  disease,
children with functional or anatomic asplenia or HIV infection should not be vaccinated
with MenACWY-D before age 2 years to avoid interference with the immune response to
13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13); MenACWY-CRM should be used in
this group. If MenACWY-D is used in persons of any age with these conditions, it should
not be administered until at least 4 weeks after completion of all PCV doses. In addition,
MenACWY-D should be administered either before or at the same time as DTaP to avoid
interference  of  DTaP  with  the  immune  response  to  meningococcal  vaccine  among
children  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease.  If  MenACWY-D  cannot  be  given
before or at the same time as DTaP, it should be administered 6 months after DTaP,
unless the child is at increased risk for meningococcal disease because of travel to an
area where disease is hyperendemic or epidemic or where an outbreak is occurring, in
which case MenACWY-D should be administered regardless of timing of DTaP receipt. If
MenACWY-D is inadvertently administered in the 6 months after DTaP administration,
the dose does not need to be repeated. If a healthy person aged ≥2 years previously
vaccinated with a single dose of MenACWY develops an underlying condition for which
meningococcal vaccination is recommended as a 2-dose primary series, a second dose
should be administered as soon as possible, provided that an 8-week minimum interval
between doses is maintained. For example, a person who received a single MenACWY
dose before travel and then years later developed asplenia should receive another dose
as  soon  as  possible  to  complete  the  2-dose  series  recommended  for  persons  with
asplenia;  restarting  the  2-dose  series  is  not  required.  Booster  doses  should  then  be
administered  according  to  the  schedule  (Tables  4,  5,  and  6),  with  the  first  dose
administered either 3 or 5 years after completion of the primary series, depending on
age.  MenACWY  vaccines  are  interchangeable;  the  same  vaccine  product  is
recommended,  but  not  required,  for  all  doses.  Administration  of  MenACWY-D  or
MenACWY-CRM  in  persons  aged  ≥56  years,  a  2-dose  MenACWY  primary  series  in
persons aged ≥2 years at increased risk for meningococcal disease, administration of
>1 booster dose, and administration of a booster dose in persons aged <15 years or at
an interval of <4 years since the last dose are not licensed in the United States and are
considered off-label ACIP recommendations (Table 11). First-year college students living
in  residence  halls  should  receive  at  least  1  dose  of  MenACWY  within  5  years  before
college  entry.  The  preferred  timing  of  the  most  recent  dose  is  on  or  after  their  16th
birthday. If only 1 dose of vaccine was administered before the 16th birthday, a booster
dose should be administered before enrollment. Adolescents who received a first dose
after their 16th birthday do not need another dose before college entry unless >5 years
have elapsed since the dose. For persons at increased risk for meningococcal disease
(Box 1), including during serogroup B meningococcal disease outbreaks, either a 3-dose
MenB-FHbp  series  or  2-dose  MenB-4C  primary  series  should  be  administered.  For
persons  who  previously  completed  a  MenB  primary  series  who  become  or  remain  at
increased risk for meningococcal disease, booster vaccination should be administered
according to the dosing schedule (Tables 4, 5, 7, and 8). Primary series vaccination in
persons  aged  ≥26  years  and  booster  vaccination  in  persons  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal  disease  are  not  licensed  in  the  United  States  and  are  considered
off-label (Table 11). For the MenB-FHbp primary series, the 3-dose series (at 0, 1–2, and
6  months)  should  be  administered  to  provide  earlier  protection  and  maximize
short-term  immunogenicity.  If  the  second  dose  is  administered  at  an  interval  of  ≥6
months, a third dose does not need to be administered. If the third dose is administered
earlier than 4 months after the second dose, a fourth dose should be repeated at least
4 months after the third dose. For MenB-4C, doses should be administered at 0 and ≥1
months.  The  two  MenB  vaccines  are  not  interchangeable;  the  same  vaccine  product
must  be  used  for  all  doses,  including  booster  doses.  Because  efficacy  has  not  been
established  for  persons  receiving  MenB  vaccines  interchangeably,  every  effort  should
be made to determine vaccine product for all received doses, including booster doses,
because  receiving  mismatched  MenB  vaccine  products  might  result  in  inadequate
protection (see Vaccination of Adolescents and Adults). For situations in which a dose or
doses must be repeated, a minimum interval of 4 weeks should be used between any 2
doses.  MenB  vaccines  can  be  administered  simultaneously  with  other  vaccines
indicated for this age group, but at a different anatomic site, if feasible. ACIP does not
recommend  evaluation  of  antibody  titers  against  meningococcal  serogroups  for  the
purposes of establishing immunity or the need for vaccination. Commercially available
immunoglobulin (e.g., IgG) testing should not be used to infer individual seroprotection
against  meningococcal  disease.  Because  postvaccine  syncope  can  occur  with  all
injectable  vaccines,  procedures  should  be  in  place  to  prevent  falling  injuries  and
manage
 syncopal
 reactions.
 Vaccine
 providers,
 particularly
 when
 vaccinating
adolescents, should consider observing patients (with patients seated or lying down) for
15 minutes after vaccination to decrease the risk for injury should they faint. If syncope
develops,  patients  should  be  observed  until  symptoms  resolve  (241).  Similarly,
anaphylaxis  can  occur  after  any  vaccination.  Furthermore,  because  the  tip  caps  of
prefilled  MenB-4C  syringes  contain  natural  rubber  latex  and  might  cause  allergic
reactions,  latex  sensitivity  is  included  as  a  precaution  for  MenB-4C  (70).  Appropriate
medical  treatment  must  be  available  should  an  acute  allergic  reaction,  including  an
anaphylactic  reaction,  occur.  In  addition,  because  apnea  after  intramuscular
vaccination  has  been  observed  in  some  infants  born  prematurely,  prematurity  is  a
precaution  for  MenACWY-CRM  vaccination  (66).  Finally,  although  postlicensure  data
have not established a risk for Guillain-Barré syndrome after MenACWY-D vaccination,
previous history of Guillain-Barré syndrome is listed as a precaution for MenACWY-D in
the package insert (67). For all meningococcal vaccines, severe allergic reaction to a
previous  dose  or  any  component  of  the  vaccine  is  a  contraindication  to  vaccination
(66–70). For MenACWY-D and MenACWY-CRM, severe allergic reaction to any diphtheria
toxoid–  or  CRM197–containing  vaccine  is  also  a  contraindication  (66,67).  For
MenACWY-TT, severe allergic reaction to a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine is also a
contraindication (68). Pregnant and lactating women should receive MenACWY vaccine
if indicated. Because limited data are available for MenB vaccination during pregnancy,
vaccination with MenB should be deferred unless the woman is at increased risk and,
after  consultation  with  her  health  care  provider,  the  benefits  of  vaccination  are
considered  to  outweigh  the  potential  risks.  Adverse  events  that  occur  in  a  patient
following  meningococcal  vaccination  can  be  reported  to  VAERS.  Reporting  is
encouraged for any clinically significant adverse event even if it is uncertain whether
the  vaccine  caused  the  event.  Information  on  how  to  submit  a  report  to  VAERS  is
available  at  https://vaers.hhs.gov  or  by  calling  1-800-822-7967.  Top  Although
meningococcal disease incidence in the United States is low and decreasing, continued
surveillance and evaluations are needed to assess the safety and effectiveness of MenB
vaccines,  including  repeated  booster  doses  among  persons  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal disease. In addition to MenB, continued monitoring of MenACWY use is
necessary  to  help  evaluate  the  meningococcal  vaccination  program  and  provide
information about the need and strategy for additional meningococcal vaccines, such as
investigational serogroups A, B, C, W, and Y (MenABCWY) vaccines, in the United States
(210,242).  Furthermore,  efforts  are  under  way  to  reduce  the  global  incidence  of
meningococcal disease and other causes of meningitis through a strategy that includes
optimizing the use of current vaccines as well as developing additional vaccines, such
as an expanded conjugate vaccine that includes serogroups A, C, W, Y, and X for use in
sub-Saharan Africa (243,244). Top Amy Blain, Elizabeth Briere, Doug Campos-Outcalt,
James  Cope,  Amanda  Cohn,  Temitope  Folaranmi,  LeAnne  Fox,  Andrew  Kroger,  Lucy
McNamara, Ismael Ortega-Sanchez, Monica Patton, and Xin Wang, CDC. Membership as
of June 1, 2020 Chair: Jose Romero, MD, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences and
Arkansas Children’s Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas. Executive Secretary: Amanda Cohn,
MD, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Robert  Atmar,  MD,  Baylor  College  of  Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;  Kevin  Ault,
MD,  University  of  Kansans  Medical  Center,  Kansas  City,  Kansas;  Lynn  Bahta,  RN,
Minnesota  Department  of  Health,  Saint  Paul,  Minnesota;  Beth  Bell,  MD,  University  of
Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  Henry  Bernstein,  Zucker  School  of  Medicine  at
Hofstra/Northwell Cohen Children’s Medical Center, New Hyde Park, New York; Sharon
Frey,  MD,  Saint  Louis  University  Medical  School,  St.  Louis,  Missouri;  Paul  Hunter,  MD,
City  of  Milwaukee  Health  Department,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin;  Grace  Lee,  MD,  Lucile
Packard  Children’s  Hospital,  Stanford,  California;  Veronica  McNally,  JD,  Franny  Strong
Foundation,  West  Bloomfield,  Michigan;  José  Romero,  MD,  University  of  Arkansas  for
Medical  Sciences  and  Arkansas  Children’s  Hospital,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas;  Katherine
Poehling,  MD,  Wake  Forest  School  of  Medicine,  Winston-Salem,  North  Carolina;  Pablo
Sánchez,  MD,  Research  Institute  at  Nationwide  Children’s  Hospital,  Columbus,  Ohio;
Peter Szilagyi, MD, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California; Helen
Keipp Talbot, MD, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee. Ex Officio Members: Mary
Beth  Hance,  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Eric
Deussing, MD, U.S. Department of Defense, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia; Jane Kim, MD, U.S.
Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  Doran  Fink,  MD,  Food  and
Drug  Administration,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Thomas  Weiser  MD,  Indian  Health  Service,
Portland,  Oregon;  John  Beigel,  MD,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;
Tammy  Beckham,  DVM,  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  District  of
Columbia.  Liaison  Representatives:  American  Academy  of  Family  Physicians,  Pamela
Rockwell, DO, Ann Arbor, Michigan; American Academy of Pediatrics, David Kimberlin,
MD,  Birmingham,  Alabama,  Bonnie  Maldonado  MD,  Stanford,  California;  American
Academy  of  Physician  Assistants,  Marie-Michèle  Léger,  MPH,  Alexandria,  Virginia;
American  College  Health  Association,  Susan  Even,  MD,  Columbia,  Missouri;  American
College  of  Nurse  Midwives,  Carol  Hayes,  CNM,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  American  College  of
Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,  Linda  O’Neal  Eckert,  MD,  Seattle,  Washington;
American  College  of  Physicians,  Jason  Goldman,  Boca  Raton,  Florida;  American
Geriatrics  Society,  Kenneth  Schmader,  MD,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  American
Immunization  Registry  Association,  Rebecca  Coyle,  MSEd,  Washington,  DC;  American
Medical Association, Sandra Adamson Fryhofer, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; American Nurses
Association,  Charles  Rittle,  DNP,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania;  American  Osteopathic
Association,  Stanley  Grogg,  DO,  Tulsa,  Oklahoma;  American  Pharmacists  Association,
Stephan Foster, PharmD, Memphis, Tennessee; Association of Immunization Managers,
Christine  Finley,  RN,  Burlington,  Vermont;  Association  for  Prevention  Teaching  and
Research,  W.  Paul  McKinney,  MD,  Louisville,  Kentucky;  Association  of  State  and
Territorial  Health  Officials,  Nathaniel  Smith,  MD,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas;  Biotechnology
Industry Organization, Phyllis Arthur, MBA, Washington, DC; Canadian National Advisory
Committee on Immunization, Caroline Quach, MD, Montréal, Canada; Council of State
and  Territorial  Epidemiologists,  Christine  Hahn,  MD,  Boise,  Idaho;  Infectious  Diseases
Society  of  America,  Carol  Baker,  MD,  Seattle,  Washington;  International  Society  for
Travel Medicine, Elizabeth Barnett, MD, Boston, Massachusetts; National Association of
County  and  City  Health  Officials,  Matthew  Zahn,  MD,  Santa  Ana,  California;  National
Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners, Patricia Stinchfield, RN, St. Paul, Minnesota;
National  Foundation  for  Infectious  Diseases,  William  Schaffner,  MD,  Nashville,
Tennessee;  National  Immunization  Council  and  Child  Health  Program,  Mexico,  Luis
Duran,  MD,  Mexico;  National  Medical  Association,  Patricia  Whitley-Williams,  MD,  New
Brunswick,  New  Jersey;  Pediatric  Infectious  Diseases  Society,  Sean  O’Leary,  MD,
Denver,  Colorado;  Pharmaceutical  Research  and  Manufacturers  of  America,  David
Johnson,  MD,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania;  Society  for  Adolescent  Health  and  Medicine,
Amy Middleman, MD, Houston, Texas; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America,
David  Weber,  MD,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina.  Membership  as  of  June  1,  2020  Chair:
Veronica McNally, JD, East Lansing, Michigan. Members: Nina Ahmad, MD, Albany, New
York;  Oliver  Baclic,  MD,  Ottawa,  Canada;  Carol  Baker,  MD,  Houston,  Texas;  Henry
Bernstein,  MD,  New  Hyde  Park,  New  York;  Michael  Brady,  MD,  Columbus,  Ohio;  Ruth
Brenner,  MD,  Falls  Church,  Virginia;  Susan  Even,  MD,  Columbia,  Missouri;  Kathleen
Harriman,  Richmond,  California;  Mary  Healy,  Houston,  Texas;  Rachel  Herlihy,  Denver,
Colorado; Nneka Holder, MD, Jackson, Mississippi; Lucia Lee, MD, Rockville, Maryland;
Martin  Luta,  MD,  Dover,  Delaware;  Ruth  Lynfield,  MD,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota;  Paul
McKinney, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; Cody Meissner, MD, Boston, Massachusetts; Kelly
Moore,  MD,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  Paul  Offit,  MD,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  Anuja
Rastogi, MD, Rockville, Maryland; Lorry Rubin, MD, New Hyde Park, New York; William
Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee. CDC contributors: Alison Albert, MPH; Amy Blain,
MPH;  Douglas  Campos-Outcalt,  MD;  Amanda  Cohn,  MD;  James  Cope,  PhD;  Jonathan
Duffy, MD; LeAnne Fox, MD; Rachel Gorwitz, MD; Susan Hariri, PhD; Angela Jiles, MPH;
Andrew Kroger, MD; Jessica MacNeil, MPH; Sarah Mbaeyi, MD; Sara Oliver, MD; Ismael
Ortega-Sanchez,  PhD;  Xin  Wang,  PhD;  Charnetta  Williams,  MD.  Secretariat:  Lucy
McNamara,  PhD,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Sarah  A.  Mbaeyi,
MD, Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunizations and Respiratory
Diseases,  CDC.  Telephone:  404-639-3158;  E-mail:  smbaeyi@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of
Bacterial  Diseases,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;
2Immunization  Safety  Office,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious
Diseases, CDC; 3Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children’s Medical Center of New York,
New Hyde Park, New York, and Hofstra North Shore–LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead,
New  York;  4Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  5Office  of  the
Director,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC  Top  All
authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal
Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of
interest  were  disclosed.  This  report  includes  discussion  of  the  unlabeled  use  of
meningococcal  vaccines  in  the  following  situations:  Top  CDC  Adoption  of  ACIP
Recommendations for MMWR Recommendations and Reports, MMWR Policy Notes, and
Immunization Schedules (Child/Adolescent, Adult)
Recommendations for routine use of vaccines for children, adolescents, and adults are
developed  by  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  ACIP  is
chartered  as  a  federal  advisory  committee  to  provide  expert  external  advice  and
guidance to the Director of CDC on use of vaccines and related agents for the control of
vaccine-preventable  diseases  in  the  civilian  population  of  the  United  States.
Recommendations  for  routine  use  of  vaccines  for  children  and  adolescents  are
harmonized  to  the  greatest  extent  possible  with  recommendations  made  by  the
American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP),  the  American  Academy  of  Family  Physicians
(AAFP),  the  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists  (ACOG),  and  the
American  College  of  Nurse-Midwives  (ACNM).  Recommendations  for  routine  use  of
vaccines for adults are harmonized with recommendations of the American College of
Physicians (ACP), AAFP, ACOG, and ACNM. ACIP recommendations approved by the CDC
Director become agency guidelines on the date published in the Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly
 Report
 (MMWR).
 Additional
 information
 is
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip.
 Top
 Top
 Abbreviations:
MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  oligosaccharide  diphtheria
CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal
groups
 A,
 C,
 W,
 and
 Y
 polysaccharide
 tetanus
 toxoid
 conjugate
 vaccine;
MenB-4C
 =
 four-component
 meningococcal
 group
 B
 vaccine;
MenB-FHbp = meningococcal group B factor H binding protein vaccine.* Two licensed
meningococcal  vaccines  are  no  longer  available  in  the  United  States  (Menomune  –
A/C/Y/W-135 [Source: Menomune – A/C/Y/W-135. Package insert. Swiftwater, PA: Sanofi
Pasteur;  2016.  https://www.fda.gov/media/83562/download]  and  MenHibrix  [Source:
MenHibRix.  Package  insert.  Rixensart,  Belgium:  GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals;  2012.
https://www.fda.gov/media/83688/download]).†  Source:  Menactra.  Package  insert.
Swiftwater,  PA:  Sanofi  Pasteur;  2018.  https://www.fda.gov/media/75619/download§
Source:  Menveo.  Package  insert.  Sovicille,  Italy:  GlaxoSmithKline  Vaccines;  2019.
https://www.fda.gov/media/78514/download¶
 Source:
 MenQuadfi.
 Package
 insert
Swiftwater,  PA:  Sanofi  Pasteur;  2020.  https://www.fda.gov/media/137306/download**
Source:
 Trumenba.
 Package
 insert.
 Philadelphia,
 PA:
 Pfizer;
 2018.
https://www.fda.gov/media/89936/download††
 Source:
 Bexsero.
 Package
 insert.
Sovicille,
 Italy:
 GlaxoSmithKline
 Vaccines;
 2018.
https://www.fda.gov/media/90996/download
 Top
 
 ACIP
 recommends
 MenACWY
vaccination  for  the  following  groups:  ACIP  recommends  MenB  vaccination  for  the
following groups: Abbreviations: ACIP = Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices;
MenACWY  =  quadrivalent  (serogroups  A,  C,  W,  Y)  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine;
MenB = serogroup B meningococcal vaccine. Top   2005
FDA  licensed  MenACWY-D  for  persons  aged  11–55  years.  ACIP  recommended  routine
vaccination  of  adolescents  with  a  single  MenACWY-D  dose  at  age  11–12  years  and
persons aged 11–55 years at increased risk for meningococcal disease. 2006
Because  of  limited  vaccine  supply,  MenACWY-D  vaccination  was  limited  to  cohorts  of
adolescents  entering  high  school  and  college  and  persons  aged  11–55  years  at
increased risk for meningococcal disease. 2007
After  vaccine  supply  became  sufficient,  ACIP  recommended  vaccination  for  all
adolescents aged 11–18 years. FDA expanded licensure of MenACWY-D to children aged
2–10 years, and ACIP recommended routine vaccination of children in this age group at
increased risk for meningococcal disease. 2010
FDA  licensed  a  second  vaccine,  MenACWY-CRM,  for  persons  aged  11–55  years.  ACIP
added a MenACWY booster dose at age 16 years and recommended a 2-dose primary
series  be  used  for  certain  persons  aged  11–55  years  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal  disease  because  of  asplenia,  persistent  complement  component
deficiency, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection (with another indication for
vaccination). 2011
FDA  extended  licensure  of  MenACWY-CRM  to  children  aged  2–10  years  and  of
MenACWY-D to those aged 9–23 months. ACIP recommended a 2-dose primary series of
MenACWY-D  for  children  aged  9–23  months  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal
disease. 2012
FDA licensed Hib-MenCY-TT and ACIP recommended a 4-dose primary series for children
aged 2–8 months at increased risk for meningococcal disease. 2013
FDA  extended  licensure  of  MenACWY-CRM  to  children  aged  2–23  months  and  ACIP
recommended a 4-dose primary series for children in this age group at increased risk
for meningococcal disease. 2014
FDA licensed MenB-FHbp as a 3-dose series for persons aged 10–25 years. 2015
FDA  licensed  MenB-4C  as  a  2-dose  series  for  persons  aged  10–25  years.  ACIP
recommended persons at increased risk for serogroup B meningococcal disease receive
a  MenB  series,  and  persons  aged  16–23  years  were  recommended  to  be  vaccinated
with a MenB series on the basis of shared clinical decision-making. 2016
FDA licensed MenB-FHbp as a 2-dose series for persons aged 10–25 years. 2016
ACIP  recommended  persons  with  HIV  infection  be  routinely  vaccinated  with  a  2-dose
MenACWY primary series. 2017
ACIP  updated  its  recommendations  for  use  of  MenB-FHbp  following  a  change  in
licensure  that  allowed  both  a  2-  and  3-dose  series.  Distribution  of  MPSV4  and
Hib-MenCY-TT was discontinued in the United States. 2019
ACIP  recommended  that  persons  with  certain  medical  conditions  and  microbiologists
routinely exposed to Neisseria meningitidis isolates receive a MenB booster dose 1 year
after primary series completion, then every 2–3 years thereafter. During an outbreak, a
single  MenB  booster  dose  was  recommended  if  it  had  been  ≥1  year  since  primary
series completion (interval of ≥6 months may be considered if recommended by public
health officials). 2020
FDA licensed MenACWY-TT for persons aged ≥2 years. Abbreviations: ACIP = Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices;  FDA  =  Food  and  Drug  Administration;
Hib-MenCY-TT  =  meningococcal  groups  C  and  Y  and  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b
tetanus toxoid vaccine (MenHibrix); MenACWY-CRM = meningococcal groups A, C, W,
and
 Y
 oligosaccharide
 diphtheria
 CRM197
 conjugate
 vaccine
 (Menveo);
MenACWY-D = meningococcal groups A, C, W, and Y polysaccharide diphtheria toxoid
conjugate  vaccine  (Menactra);  MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine  (MenQuadfi);  MenB  =  serogroup  B
meningococcal  vaccine;  MenB-4C  =  meningococcal  group  B  vaccine  (Bexsero);
MenB-FHbp  =  meningococcal  group  B  vaccine  (Trumenba);  MPSV4  =  meningococcal
polysaccharide vaccine, groups A, C, Y, and W combined (Menomune – A/C/Y/W-135).
Top  Abbreviations:  MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
oligosaccharide  diphtheria  CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal
groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;
MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid
conjugate  vaccine;  MenB-4C  =  four-component  meningococcal  group  B  vaccine;
MenB-FHbp = meningococcal group B factor H binding protein vaccine.* MenB vaccines
are licensed in the United States only for persons aged 10–25 years.† College freshmen
living  in  residence  halls  should  receive  at  least  1  dose  of  MenACWY  within  5  years
before college entry. The preferred timing of the most recent dose is on or after their
16th birthday. If only 1 dose of vaccine was administered before the 16th birthday, a
booster  dose  should  be  administered  before  enrollment.  Adolescents  who  received  a
first dose after their 16th birthday do not need another dose before college entry unless
it has been more than 5 years since the dose. Certain schools, colleges, and universities
have  policies  requiring  vaccination  against  meningococcal  disease  as  a  condition  of
enrollment.§ When given to healthy adolescents who are not otherwise at increased risk
for meningococcal disease, 2 doses of MenB-FHbp should be administered at 0 and 6
months.  For  persons  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  and  for  use  during
serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease  outbreaks,  3  doses  of  MenB-FHbp  should  be
administered  at  0,  1–2,  and  6  months  to  provide  earlier  protection  and  maximize
short-term immunogenicity. Top Abbreviations: HIV = human immunodeficiency virus;
MenACWY = meningococcal groups A, C, W, and Y; MenB = meningococcal group B.
* Persons aged ≥2 months in these risk groups are recommended to receive MenACWY
vaccination.
†  Persons  aged  ≥10  years  in  this  risk  group  are  recommended  to  receive  MenB
vaccination.  Top  Abbreviations:  DTaP  =  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular
pertussis  vaccine;  MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
oligosaccharide  diphtheria  CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal
groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;
MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid
conjugate  vaccine;  MenB-4C  =  four-component  meningococcal  group  B  vaccine;
MenB-FHbp  =  meningococcal  group  B  factor  H  binding  protein  vaccine.*  Persistent
complement deficiencies include C3, C5–C9, properdin, factor H, or factor D.† Includes
eculizumab  (Soliris)  and  ravulizumab  (Ultomiris).  Meningococcal  vaccines  should  be
administered at least 2 weeks before the first dose of complement inhibitor, unless the
risk for delaying complement therapy outweighs the risk for developing meningococcal
disease.§  Licensed  in  the  United  States  only  for  persons  aged  9  months–55  years.
Vaccination of persons aged ≥56 years is considered off-label.¶ Licensed in the United
States  only  for  persons  aged  2  months–55  years.  Vaccination  of  persons  aged  ≥56
years is considered off-label.** Licensed in the United States only for persons aged ≥2
years.†† Licensed in the United States only for persons aged 10–25 years. Vaccination
of  persons  aged  ≥26  years  is  considered  off-label.§§  If  MenACWY-CRM  is  initiated  at
ages 3–6 months, catch-up vaccination includes doses at intervals of 8 weeks until the
infant is aged ≥7 months, at which time an additional dose is administered at age ≥7
months,  followed  by  a  dose  at  least  12  weeks  later  and  after  the  1st  birthday.¶¶
Primary  vaccination  licensed  as  a  single  dose  in  persons  aged  2–55  years  for
MenACWY-D and MenACWY-CRM or ≥2 years for MenACWY-TT. Two-dose primary series
is  considered  off-label.***  MenACWY-D  should  be  given  either  before  or  at  the  same
time  as  DTaP  to  avoid  interference  with  the  immune  response  to  meningococcal
vaccine in children.††† Licensed in the United States only for a single booster dose for
persons aged 15–55 years for MenACWY-D and MenACWY-CRM or aged ≥15 years for
MenACWY-TT. Booster doses administered outside of these ages or administration of >1
booster  dose  are  considered  off-label.§§§  Licensed  in  the  United  States  only  for  a
primary  series.  Administration  of  booster  doses  is  considered  off-label.  Top
Abbreviations: DTaP = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine;
MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  oligosaccharide  diphtheria
CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal
groups
 A,
 C,
 W,
 and
 Y
 polysaccharide
 tetanus
 toxoid
 conjugate
 vaccine;
MenB-4C
 =
 four-component
 meningococcal
 group
 B
 vaccine;
MenB-FHbp
 =
 meningococcal
 group
 B
 factor
 H
 binding
 protein
 vaccine;
PCV = pneumococcal conjugate vaccine.* Licensed in the United States only for persons
aged  9  months–55  years.  Vaccination  of  persons  aged  ≥56  years  is  considered
off-label.†  Licensed  in  the  United  States  only  for  persons  aged  2  months–55  years.
Vaccination of persons aged ≥56 years is considered off-label.§ Licensed in the United
States  only  for  persons  aged  ≥2  years.¶  If  MenACWY-CRM  is  initiated  at  ages  3–6
months, catch-up vaccination includes doses at intervals of 8 weeks until the infant is
aged ≥7 months, at which time an additional dose is administered at age ≥7 months,
followed by a dose at least 12 weeks later and after the 1st birthday.** Licensed in the
United  States  only  for  persons  aged  10–25  years.  Vaccination  of  persons  aged  ≥26
years is considered off-label.†† Primary vaccination licensed as a single dose in persons
aged  2–55  years  for  MenACWY-D  and  MenACWY-CRM  or  ≥2  years  for  MenACWY-TT.
Two-dose primary series is considered off-label.§§ MenACWY-D should be given either
before or at the same time as DTaP to avoid interference with the immune response to
meningococcal  vaccine  in  children.¶¶  Because  of  the  high  risk  for  invasive
pneumococcal  disease,  children  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia  or  human
immunodeficiency virus infection should not be vaccinated with MenACWY-D (Menactra)
before  age  2  years  to  avoid  interference  with  the  immune  response  to  PCV.  If
MenACWY-D  is  used  in  a  person  (of  any  age)  with  these  conditions,  it  should  not  be
administered until at least 4 weeks after completion of all PCV doses.*** Licensed in the
United  States  only  for  a  single  booster  dose  for  persons  aged  15–55  years  for
MenACWY-D  and  MenACWY-CRM  or  aged  ≥15  years  for  MenACWY-TT.  Booster  doses
administered outside of these ages or administration of >1 booster dose are considered
off-label.††† Licensed in the United States only for a primary series. Administration of
booster doses is considered off-label. Top Abbreviations: DTaP = diphtheria and tetanus
toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine; MenACWY-CRM = meningococcal groups A, C,
W,
 and
 Y
 oligosaccharide
 diphtheria
 CRM197
 conjugate
 vaccine;
MenACWY-D = meningococcal groups A, C, W, and Y polysaccharide diphtheria toxoid
conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;  MenB-4C  =  four-component
meningococcal group B vaccine; MenB-FHbp = meningococcal group B factor H binding
protein vaccine; PCV = pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; Td = tetanus and diphtheria
toxoids  vaccine;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular
pertussis  vaccine.*  Licensed  in  the  United  States  only  for  persons  aged  9  months–55
years. Vaccination of persons aged ≥56 years is considered off-label.† Licensed in the
United States only for persons aged 2 months–55 years. Vaccination of persons aged
≥56 years is considered off-label.§ Licensed in the United States only for persons aged
≥2  years.¶  If  MenACWY-CRM  is  initiated  at  ages  3–6  months,  catch-up  vaccination
includes doses at intervals of 8 weeks until the infant is aged ≥7 months, at which time
an additional dose is administered at age ≥7 months, followed by a dose at least 12
weeks later and after the 1st birthday.** Primary vaccination licensed as a single dose
in  persons  aged  2–55  years  for  MenACWY-D  and  MenACWY-CRM  or  ≥2  years  for
MenACWY-TT. Two-dose primary series is considered off-label.†† MenACWY-D should be
given either before or at the same time as DTaP to avoid interference with the immune
response to meningococcal vaccine in children. MenACWY-D may be given at any time
in relation to Tdap or Td.§§ Because of the high risk for invasive pneumococcal disease,
children  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia  or  human  immunodeficiency  virus
infection should not be vaccinated with MenACWY-D (Menactra) before age 2 years to
avoid interference with the immune response to PCV. If MenACWY-D is used in a person
(of  any  age)  with  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia  or  HIV  infection,  it  should  not  be
administered until at least 4 weeks after completion of all PCV doses.¶¶ Licensed in the
United  States  only  for  a  single  booster  dose  for  persons  aged  15–55  years  for
MenACWY-D  and  MenACWY-CRM  or  aged  ≥15  years  for  MenACWY-TT.  Booster  doses
administered outside of these ages or administration of >1 booster dose are considered
off-label.  Top  Abbreviations:  MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
oligosaccharide  diphtheria  CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal
groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;
MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid
conjugate  vaccine;  MenB-4C  =  four-component  meningococcal  group  B  vaccine;
MenB-FHbp = meningococcal group B factor H binding protein vaccine.* Licensed in the
United States only for persons aged 9 months–55 years. Vaccination of persons aged
≥56 years is considered off-label.† Licensed in the United States only for persons aged
2  months–55  years.  Vaccination  of  persons  aged  ≥56  years  is  considered  off-label.§
Licensed in the United States only for persons aged ≥2 years.¶ Licensed in the United
States  only  for  persons  aged  10–25  years.  Vaccination  of  persons  aged  ≥26  years  is
considered off-label.** Licensed in the United States only for a single booster dose for
persons aged 15–55 years for MenACWY-D and MenACWY-CRM or aged ≥15 years for
MenACWY-TT. Booster doses administered outside of these ages or administration of >1
booster dose are considered off-label.†† Licensed in the United States only for a primary
series. Administration of booster doses is considered off-label. Top Abbreviations: DTaP
=
 diphtheria
 and
 tetanus
 toxoids
 and
 acellular
 pertussis
 vaccine;
MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  oligosaccharide  diphtheria
CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal
groups
 A,
 C,
 W,
 and
 Y
 polysaccharide
 tetanus
 toxoid
 conjugate
 vaccine;
MenB-4C
 =
 four-component
 meningococcal
 group
 B
 vaccine;
MenB-FHbp  =  meningococcal  group  B  factor  H  binding  protein  vaccine.*  Detailed
recommendations
 on
 outbreak
 management
 are
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/downloads/meningococcal-outbreak-guidance.pdf.†
Licensed in the United States only for persons aged 9 months–55 years. Vaccination of
persons aged ≥56 years is considered off-label.§ Licensed in the United States only for
persons aged 2 months–55 years. Vaccination of persons aged ≥56 years is considered
off-label.¶ Licensed in the United States only for persons aged ≥2 years.** Licensed in
the United States only for persons aged 10–25 years. Vaccination of persons aged ≥26
years  is  considered  off-label.††  If  MenACWY-CRM  is  initiated  at  ages  3–6  months,
catch-up vaccination includes doses at intervals of 8 weeks until the infant is aged ≥7
months, at which time an additional dose is administered at age ≥7 months, followed
by a dose at least 12 weeks later and after the 1st birthday.§§ MenACWY-D should be
given either before or at the same time as DTaP to avoid interference with the immune
response to meningococcal vaccine in children.¶¶ Licensed in the United States only for
a single booster dose for persons aged 15–55 years for MenACWY-D and MenACWY-CRM
or aged ≥15 years for MenACWY-TT. Booster doses administered outside of these ages
or administration of >1 booster dose are considered off-label.*** Licensed in the United
States only for a primary series. Administration of booster doses is considered off-label.
Top  Abbreviations:  DTaP  =  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis
vaccine;  MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  oligosaccharide
diphtheria CRM197 conjugate vaccine; MenACWY-D = meningococcal groups A, C, W,
and
 Y
 polysaccharide
 diphtheria
 toxoid
 conjugate
 vaccine;
MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid
conjugate  vaccine;  MenB-4C  =  four-component  meningococcal  group  B  vaccine;
MenB-FHbp  =  meningococcal  group  B  factor  H  binding  protein  vaccine;  Td  =  tetanus
and diphtheria toxoids vaccine; Tdap = tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and
acellular pertussis vaccine.* For international travelers, vaccination is recommended for
those visiting the parts of sub-Saharan Africa known as the meningitis belt during the
dry  season  (December–June).  Vaccination  may  also  be  considered  for  travelers  to
countries  that  contain  areas  included  in  the  meningitis  belt  but  who  travel  to  areas
outside  of  the  meningitis  belt  zone.  Advisories  for  travelers  to  other  countries  are
issued
 by
 CDC
 when
 epidemics
 of
 meningococcal
 disease
 caused
 by
vaccine-preventable serogroups are detected. Traveler’s health information is available
from
 CDC
 toll
 free
 by
 calling
 1-877-394-8747
 (1-877-FYI-TRIP)
 or
 at
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel. Additional information about geographic areas for which
vaccination  is  recommended  can  be  obtained  from  international  health  clinics  for
travelers and state health departments.† Licensed in the United States only for persons
aged  9  months–55  years.  Vaccination  of  persons  aged  ≥56  years  is  considered
off-label.§  Licensed  in  the  United  States  only  for  persons  aged  2  months–55  years.
Vaccination of persons aged ≥56 years is considered off-label.¶ Licensed in the United
States only for persons aged ≥2 years.** MenACWY-D should be given either before or
at  the  same  time  as  DTaP  to  avoid  interference  with  the  immune  response  to
meningococcal vaccine in children. MenACWY-D may be given at any time in relation to
Tdap  or  Td.††  Some  countries  recommend  routine  use  of  MenB  vaccines  for  infants;
persons  living  in  these  countries  might  follow  the  vaccination  recommendations  of
these  countries.§§  If  MenACWY-CRM  is  initiated  at  ages  3–6  months,  catch-up
vaccination includes doses at intervals of 8 weeks until the infant is aged ≥7 months, at
which time an additional dose is administered at age ≥7 months, followed by a dose at
least 12 weeks later and after the 1st birthday.¶¶ Licensed in the United States only for
a single booster dose for persons aged 15–55 years for MenACWY-D and MenACWY-CRM
or aged ≥15 years for MenACWY-TT. Booster doses administered outside of these ages
or administration of >1 booster dose are considered off-label.*** International travelers
should  receive  a  booster  dose  of  MenACWY  if  the  last  dose  was  administered  3–5  or
more  years  previously  (depending  on  the  age  at  most  recent  dose  received).
Vaccination is required by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) for all travelers to Mecca
during  the  Hajj  and  Umrah  pilgrimages.  Travelers  should  confirm  current  vaccination
requirements
 with
 the
 KSA
 embassy.
 Top
 Abbreviations:
MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  oligosaccharide  diphtheria
CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal
groups
 A,
 C,
 W,
 and
 Y
 polysaccharide
 tetanus
 toxoid
 conjugate
 vaccine;
MenB-4C
 =
 four-component
 meningococcal
 group
 B
 vaccine;
MenB-FHbp  =  meningococcal  group  B  factor  H  binding  protein  vaccine.*  College
freshmen living in residence halls should receive at least 1 dose of MenACWY within 5
years before college entry. The preferred timing of the most recent dose is on or after
their 16th birthday. If only 1 dose of vaccine was administered before the 16th birthday,
a booster dose should be administered before enrollment. Adolescents who received a
first dose after their 16th birthday do not need another dose before college entry unless
it has been more than 5 years since the dose. Some schools, colleges, and universities
have  policies  requiring  vaccination  against  meningococcal  disease  as  a  condition  of
enrollment.† Licensed in the United States only for persons aged 9 months–55 years.
Vaccination of persons aged ≥56 years is considered off-label.§ Licensed in the United
States  only  for  persons  aged  2  months–55  years.  Vaccination  of  persons  aged  ≥56
years is considered off-label.¶ Licensed in the United States only for persons aged ≥2
years.** Licensed in the United States only for a single booster dose for persons aged
15–55 years for MenACWY-D and MenACWY-CRM or aged ≥15 years for MenACWY-TT.
Booster doses administered outside of these ages or administration of >1 booster dose
are  considered  off-label.††  Vaccination  recommendations  for  military  personnel  are
made by the U.S. Department of Defense on the basis of high-risk travel requirements.
Top  Abbreviations:  MenACWY  =  quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine;
MenACWY-CRM  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  oligosaccharide  diphtheria
CRM197  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-D  =  meningococcal  groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y
polysaccharide  diphtheria  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;  MenACWY-TT  =  meningococcal
groups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  polysaccharide  tetanus  toxoid  conjugate  vaccine;  MenB  =
serogroup B meningococcal vaccine. Top Suggested citation for this article: Mbaeyi SA,
Bozio CH, Duffy J, et al.  Meningococcal Vaccination: Recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices,  United  States,  2020.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep
2020;69(No. RR-9):1–41. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6909a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/rr6909a1.htm
