A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Meningococcal Disease from the Infection
Control  in  Healthcare  Personnel:  Epidemiology  and  Control  of  Selected  Infections
Transmitted
 Among
 Healthcare
 Personnel
 and
 Patients
 (2024)
 guideline.
Healthcare-associated  transmission  of  Neisseria  meningitidis  (N.  meningitidis)  is
uncommon.  In  rare  instances,  N.  meningitidis  has  been  transmitted  from  patients  to
healthcare personnel (HCP) through contact with the respiratory secretions of patients
with meningococcal disease and handling isolates of N. meningitidis1234. Prevention of
transmission  of  N.  meningitidis  in  healthcare  settings  involves:  Guidelines  for
meningococcal  vaccination  of  certain  HCP  (e.g.,  persons  with  known  asplenia  or
persistent  complement  component  deficiencies,  personnel  who  are  traveling  to
countries in which meningococcal disease is hyperendemic or epidemic) are maintained
by  the  Advisory  Committee  of  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  described  in
Immunization
 of
 Health-Care
 Personnel:
 Recommendations
 of
 the
 ACIP
(https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6007a1.htm37).
 Vaccination
 is
recommended for HCP who are employed as microbiologists who are exposed routinely
to isolates of N. meningitidis38910. Further information about meningococcal vaccines
is  provided  on  the  CDC  Meningococcal:  Who  Needs  to  Be  Vaccinated  website
(https://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/hcp/vaccine-recommendations/index.html)9.
 N.
meningitidis  can  be  transmitted  person-to-person  through  unprotected  direct  contact
with  the  respiratory  secretions  or  saliva  of  a  person  with  clinical  disease,  such  as
meningitis or bacteremia1112. Exposures in healthcare may include mucous membrane
contact with infectious secretions from close, face-to-face contact during activities such
as  mouth-to-mouth  resuscitation,  endotracheal  tube  placement  or  management,  or
open  airway  suctioning  while  not  wearing  or  correctly  using  recommended  personal
protective equipment (PPE)361213. Brief, non-face-to-face contact, such as standing in
the doorway of a patient's room, cleaning a patient's room, delivering a medication or
food  tray,  starting  an  IV,  or  performing  a  routine  physical  exam,  is  generally  not
considered an exposure14. Unprotected direct contact with the respiratory secretions
or  saliva  of  a  person  colonized  with  N.  meningitidis,  without  clinical  disease,  is  not
considered  an  exposure.  Exposures  to  N.  meningitidis  in  laboratory  settings  are
described  in  Biosafety  in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories  (BMBL),  5th
Edition (https://www.cdc.gov/biosafety/publications/bmbl5/index.htm).10 Meningococcal
disease  is  a  serious  and  potentially  life-threatening  infection.  Common  signs  and
symptoms of meningococcal disease include sudden onset of high fever, neck stiffness,
confusion,  nausea,  vomiting,  lethargy,  and  petechial  or  purpuric  rash12.  Without
prompt  and  appropriate  treatment,  the  infection  can  progress  rapidly  and  result  in
death12. Asymptomatic nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis is common, but few
carriers  develop  invasive  disease,  and  carriers  without  an  exposure  do  not  require
treatment or chemoprophylaxis111213. Persons who have close contact with persons
with  invasive  disease  are  at  substantially  increased  risk  for  acquiring  carriage  and
disease12.  Patients  infected  with  N.  meningitidis  may  be  contagious  in  the  7  days
before  symptom  onset  and  are  rendered  noninfectious  by  24  hours  of  effective
antimicrobial therapy1213. Cases occur in all age groups; however, children less than 2
years  old,  adolescents  16  through  23  years  old,  and  adults  85  years  of  age  or  older
have higher rates of disease than other age groups11. In addition, people with certain
medical  conditions,  such  as  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia;  persistent  complement
component  deficiencies  (e.g.,  C3,  C5-9,  properdin,  factor  H,  factor  D  or  are  taking
eculizumab or ravulizumab); and HIV infection are at increased risk for meningococcal
disease111215. The incubation period of meningococcal disease is 3 to 4 days, with a
range  of  1  to  10  days.  Diagnosis  of  meningococcal  disease  can  pose  challenges
because its initial clinical manifestations are similar to more common, but less serious,
illnesses12.  Hence,  laboratory  testing  is  helpful  in  confirming  the  diagnosis.  N.
meningitidis  is  confirmed  through  culture  or  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  of  fluid
collected  from  a  normally  sterile  site,  such  as  blood  or  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF)16.
Gram stain is still used for identification of N. meningitidis and continues to be a reliable
and rapid method for presumptive identification, though it is not a confirmatory test12.
Additional information on laboratory testing for N. meningitidis is available on the CDC
Laboratory
 Methods
 for
 the
 Diagnosis
 of
 Meningitis
 website
(https://www.cdc.gov/streplab/index.html).17  Chemoprophylaxis  is  administered  as
soon  as  possible  after  exposure,  ideally  less  than  24  hours  after  identification  of  an
index  patient13.  Chemoprophylaxis  administered  more  than  14  days  after  onset  of
illness  in  an  index  patient  is  probably  of  limited  or  no  value1213.  In  the  event  of  an
exposure  involving  a  patient  with  possible  meningococcal  meningitis  without
microbiologic  confirmation  (e.g.,  culture  negative,  Gram  stain  negative,  or  lumbar
puncture  (LP)  unable  to  be  performed),  decisions  about  use  of  PEP  are  made  on  a
case-by-case  basis  considering  the  epidemiologic  and  clinical  likelihood  of  N.
meningitidis  in  the  source  patient.  Rifampin,  ciprofloxacin,  and  ceftriaxone  are
90%-95% effective in reducing nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis and are all
acceptable  antimicrobial  agents  for  chemoprophylaxis1318.  Azithromycin  is  not
routinely  recommended,  nor  is  it  a  first-line  agent  for  PEP,  but  it  may  be  used  as
chemoprophylaxis  in  situations  such  as  sustained  ciprofloxacin-resistant  strains  of  N.
meningitidis  in  a  community121920.  Detailed  information  regarding  dosage  and
administration of PEP for N. meningitidis is available in the Manual for the Surveillance
of
 Vaccine-Preventable
 Diseases
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt08-mening.html).12 In the setting
of a healthcare facility meningococcal disease outbreak, meningococcal vaccination or
use  of  chemoprophylaxis  in  a  wider  group  than  exposed  HCP  may  be  considered  in
consultation  with  public  health  officials.  Additional  guidance  regarding  meningococcal
disease  outbreaks  is  described  in  Guidance  for  the  Evaluation  and  Public  Health
Management  of  Suspected  Outbreaks  of  Meningococcal  Disease  [PDF  –  16  Pages]
(https://www.cdc.gov/meningococcal/downloads/meningococcal-outbreak-guidance.pdf)
.16 CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the
risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/healthcare-personnel-epidemiology-control/meningococcal-dise
ase.html
