A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Staphylococcus aureus (staph) is a very common germ. About one out of every three
people have the germ on their skin or in their nose. This germ does not cause problems
for most people. MRSA is a type of staph that can be resistant to several antibiotics.
Anyone  can  get  a  MRSA  infection  or  carry  MRSA.  The  risk  increases  for  people  with
hospitalizations  or  nursing  home  stays,  skin-to-skin  contact  with  others  (such  as  in
contact sports), and exposure to crowded and unhygienic places.  The symptoms of an
S.  aureus  infection,  including  MRSA,  depend  on  the  part  of  the  body  that  is  infected.
Broken  skin,  such  as  scrapes  or  cuts,  is  often  the  site  of  a  MRSA  infection.    Most  S.
aureus skin infections, including MRSA, appear as a bump or infected area on the skin
that might be:  You cannot tell by looking at the skin if it's a MRSA infection. People
sometimes confuse some MRSA skin infections with a spider bite. However, unless you
actually see the spider, the irritation is likely not a spider bite. Contact your healthcare
provider,  especially  if  the  symptoms  include  a  fever  or  do  not  improve  within  48
hours.Do not pick at or pop the bump or sore. Cover the area with clean, dry bandages
until you can see a healthcare provider. Clean your hands often. MRSA infections can
cause  serious  problems  in  and  outside  of  healthcare  settings,  including:  Although
anyone can get MRSA, some groups have a higher risk: 
 MRSA  spreads  in  the  community  through  contact  with  infected  people,  wounds,  or
things that have touched infected skin and are carrying the bacteria. Some people who
carry  MRSA  can  go  on  to  get  a  MRSA  infection.  You  can  reduce  your  risk  of  MRSA
infections  and  help  prevent  their  spread.  A  healthcare  provider  must  send  a  clinical
specimen to a laboratory to determine if MRSA is the cause of an infection.  Healthcare
providers often prescribe antibiotics to treat MRSA infections. Some types of S. aureus
infections need surgery to drain infected areas. Your healthcare provider will determine
which treatments are best for you. While MRSA can be resistant to several antibiotics,
meaning these drugs cannot cure the infections, there are antibiotics available to treat
MRSA infections. MRSA is a germ that is resistant to some antibiotics. It can spread in
hospitals,  other  healthcare  facilities,  and  in  the  community.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mrsa/about/index.html
