Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  This  guidance  is  intended  for  people  who  have  had  mpox
exposures  in  the  community.  Guidance  for  exposures  in  healthcare  settings  can  be
found  here:  Infection  Prevention  and  Control  of  Mpox  in  Healthcare  Settings.  Anyone
with  an  exposure  to  people  or  animals  with  mpox  should  monitor  their  health  or  be
monitored  for  signs  or  symptoms  consistent  with  mpox  for  21  days  after  their  last
exposure.  Information  about  human-to-human  transmission  of  monkeypox  virus  is
described  in  How  it  Spreads  |  Mpox  |  Poxvirus  |  CDC.  Monitoring  should  include
assessing the person for signs and symptoms of mpox, including a thorough skin and
mouth (oral) exam in good lighting. Skin examination can be performed by the person
in isolation, a caregiver, or a healthcare provider and should include examination of the
genitals and anus for rash or lesions. During the 21-day monitoring period: Isolation and
prevention  practices  can  be  ended  prior  to  5  days  if  a  healthcare  provider  or  public
health authority believes the rash, signs, or symptoms are not due to mpox and there is
a clear alternative diagnosis made that doesn’t require isolation. The decision on when
to  end  symptom  monitoring  and  home  isolation,  either  during  the  21-day  monitoring
period  or  any  5-day  extension,  should  be  made  with  input  from  public  health
authorities.  Individuals  exposed  to  monkeypox  virus  can  continue  their  routine  daily
activities (e.g., go to work or school) as long as they do not have signs or symptoms
consistent with mpox. To date, there have been no cases of mpox transmitted by blood
transfusion, organ transplantation, or implantation, transplantation, infusion, or transfer
of human cells, tissues, or cellular or tissue-based products (HCT/Ps). As a precaution,
patients  with  exposures  should  not  donate  blood,  cells,  tissue,  breast  milk,  or  semen
while  they  are  being  monitored  for  symptoms.  Given  the  morbidity  and  mortality
among individuals awaiting organ transplantation, persons who have been exposed, but
who  are  asymptomatic  and  without  evidence  of  monkeypox  virus  infection,  could  be
considered  for  organ  donation  following  appropriate  risk-benefit  considerations.
Decisions  on  how  to  monitor  exposed  persons  are  at  the  discretion  of  public  health
authorities.  In  general,  the  type  of  monitoring  recommended  reflects  the  risk  for
transmission,  with  more  active-monitoring  approaches  used  for  people  who  have  had
higher-risk exposures. Self-monitoring approaches are usually sufficient for people with
exposures that carry a lesser risk for transmission. Evsen higher-risk exposures may be
appropriate for a self-monitoring strategy if public health authorities determine that it is
appropriate.  Ultimately,  the  person’s  exposure  risk  level,  their  reliability  in  reporting
signs or symptoms that might develop, the number of people needing monitoring, time
since  exposure,  and  receipt  of  post  exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  are  all  factors  when
determining  the  type  of  monitoring  to  be  used.  Some  people  may  be  unable  to
communicate  onset  of  symptoms,  such  as  newborns,  young  children,  or  people  with
cognitive disorders. Parents and other caregivers should watch for changes in behavior
and  temperament  that  could  signal  that  the  person  is  experiencing  uncomfortable
symptoms such as fatigue or headache. Each risk level category in the table below is
intended to highlight the need for monitoring and assist with determining the need for
postexposure  prophylaxis  (PEP).  The  exposure  risk  level  of  any  incident  may  be
recategorized  to  another  risk  level  at  the  discretion  of  the  treating  clinician  or  public
health  authorities  due  to  the  unique  circumstances  of  each  exposure  incident.  Mpox
typically spreads through prolonged close, skin-to-skin contact with a person who has
mpox, or their contaminated materials (e.g., clothing, bed sheets). Transmission during
quick interactions (e.g., brief conversation), between people in close proximity has not
been  reported  for  any  persons  with  mpox.  There  may  be  settings  in  which  contact
tracing is not feasible due to the characteristics of the setting (e.g., level of crowding,
types of interactions occurring). In settings where contact tracing is not feasible, people
who spent time in the same area as someone with mpox should be considered to have
intermediate or lower degree of exposure. For Monitoring and Postexposure Prophylaxis
(PEP)  in  Individuals  Exposed  to  Mpox  Virus  in  a  Community  Setting  Exposure
Characteristics
 Recommendations
 Exposure
 Characteristics
 Recommendations
Exposure
 Characteristics
 Recommendations
 Recommendations
 Exposure
Characteristics ¶ JYNNEOS and ACAM2000 are available for PEP † Disinfection using a
disinfectant  registered  with  the  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA),  such  as
those with an emerging viral pathogens claim found on EPA’s List Q Factors that may
increase the risk of mpox transmission include (but are not limited to): the person with
mpox had clothes that were soiled with bodily fluids or secretions (e.g., discharge, skin
lesion  crusts  or  scabs  on  clothes)  or  was  coughing  while  not  wearing  a  mask  or
respirator,  or  the  exposed  individual  is  not  previously  vaccinated  against  smallpox  or
mpox.  People  who  may  be  at  increased  risk  for  severe  disease  include  (but  are  not
limited  to):  young  children  (<1  year  of  age),  individuals  who  are  pregnant  or
immunocompromised, and individuals with a history of atopic dermatitis or eczema.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/clinicians/monitoring.html
