Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Vaccines  are  the  best  defense  against  infections  that  may
have  serious  complications  such  as  pneumonia,  meningitis,  cancer,  and  even  death.
CDC recommends vaccinations before the age of two years to protect children against
14  infectious  diseases:  measles,  mumps,  rubella  (German  measles),  varicella
(chickenpox), hepatitis A, hepatitis B, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough),
Haemophilus influenzae Type b (Hib), polio, influenza (flu), rotavirus, and pneumococcal
disease. Children are given shots (vaccines) at a young age because this is when they
are at highest risk of getting sick or dying if they get these diseases. Newborn babies
are  immune  to  some  diseases  because  they  have  antibodies  they  get  from  their
mothers, usually before they are born. However, this immunity lasts a few months. Most
babies  do  not  get  protective  antibodies  against  diphtheria,  whooping  cough,  polio,
tetanus, hepatitis B, or Hib from their mothers. This is why it’s important to vaccinate a
child  before  she  or  he  is  exposed  to  a  disease.  Vaccines  contain  weakened  or  killed
versions  of  the  germs  that  cause  a  disease.  These  elements  of  vaccines,  and  other
molecules  and  micro-organisms  that  stimulate  the  immune  system,  are  called
“antigens.”  Babies  are  exposed  to  thousands  of  germs  and  other  antigens  in  the
environment  from  the  time  they  are  born.  When  a  baby  is  born,  his  or  her  immune
system is ready to respond to the many antigens in the environment and the selected
antigens  in  vaccines.  Many  vaccines  are  recommended  early  in  life  to  protect  young
children from dangerous infectious diseases. In order to reduce the number of shots a
child receives in a doctor’s visit, some vaccines are offered as combination vaccines. A
combination vaccine is two or more different vaccines that have been combined into a
single  shot.  Combination  vaccines  have  been  in  use  in  the  United  States  since  the
mid-1940s. Examples of combination vaccines are: DTap (diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis),
trivalent IPV (three strains of inactivated polio vaccine), MMR (measles-mumps-rubella),
DTap-Hib,  and  Hib-Hep  B.  Often,  more  than  one  shot  will  be  given  during  the  same
doctor’s  visit,  usually  in  separate  limbs  (e.g.  one  in  each  arm).  For  example,  a  baby
might get DTaP in one arm or leg and IPV in another arm or leg during the same visit.
First,  children  should  be  given  their  vaccines  as  quickly  as  possible  to  give  them
protection  during  the  vulnerable  early  months  of  their  lives.  Second,  giving  several
shots at the same time means fewer office visits. This saves parents time and money,
and  can  be  less  traumatic  for  the  child.  Scientific  data  show  that  getting  several
vaccines at the same time does not cause any chronic health problems. A number of
studies  have  been  done  to  look  at  the  effects  of  giving  various  combinations  of
vaccines, and when every new vaccine is licensed, it has been tested along with the
vaccines already recommended for a particular aged child. The recommended vaccines
have  been  shown  to  be  as  effective  in  combination  as  they  are  individually.
 Sometimes,  certain  combinations  of  vaccines  given  together  can  cause  fever,  and
occasionally  febrile  seizures;  these  are  temporary  and  do  not  cause  any  lasting
damage.  Based  on  this  information,  both  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices  and  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  recommend  getting  all  routine
childhood  vaccines  on  time.  From  the  moment  babies  are  born,  they  are  exposed  to
numerous  bacteria  and  viruses  on  a  daily  basis.  Eating  food  introduces  new  bacteria
into the body; numerous bacteria live in the mouth and nose; and an infant places his
or  her  hands  or  other  objects  in  his  or  her  mouth  hundreds  of  times  every  hour,
exposing the immune system to still more germs. When a child has a cold, he or she is
exposed  to  up  to  10  antigens,  and  exposure  to  “strep  throat”  is  about  25  to  50
antigens.  Each  vaccine  in  the  childhood  vaccination  schedule  has  between  1-69
antigens.  A child who receives all the recommended vaccines in the 2018 childhood
immunization schedule may be exposed to up to 320 antigens through vaccination by
the  age  of  2.  In  fact,  a  1994  report  from  the  Institute  of  Medicine,  Adverse  Events
Associated  with  Childhood  Vaccines,  states:  “In  the  face  of  these  normal  events,  it
seems unlikely that the number of separate antigens contained in childhood vaccines
…would represent an appreciable added burden on the immune system that would be
immunosuppressive.”  Wang  SV,  Abdurrob  A,  Spoendlin  J,  Lewis  E,  Newcomer  SR,
Fireman  B,  Daley  MF,  Glanz  JM,  Duffy  J,  Weintraub  ES,  Kulldorff  M.  Methods  for
addressing  “innocent  bystanders”  when  evaluating  safety  of  concomitant  vaccines.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2018 Apr; 27(4):405-412. Daley MF, Shoup JA, Newcomer
SR,  Jackson  ML,  Groom  HC,  Jacobsen  SJ,  McLean  HQ,  Klein  NP,  Weintraub  ES,  McNeil
MM,  Glanz  JM.  Assessing  Potential  Confounding  and  Misclassification  Bias  When
Studying the Safety of the Childhood Immunization Schedule. Acad Pediatr. 2018 Mar
28.  pii:  S1876-2859(18)30132-3.  Glanz  JM,  Newcomer  SR,  Daley  MF,  DeStefano  F,
Groom  HC,  Jackson  ML,  Lewin  BJ,  McCarthy  NL,  McClure  DL,  Narwaney  KJ,  Nordin  JD,
Zerbo O. Association between Estimated Cumulative Vaccine Antigen Exposure through
the  First  23  Months  of  Life  and  Non-Vaccine-Targeted  Infections  from  24  through  47
Months  of  Age.  JAMA.  2018  Mar  6;319(9):906-913.  Sukumaran  L,  McCarthy  NL,
Kharbanda  EO,  Vazquez-Benitez  G,  Lipkind  HS,  Jackson  L,  Klein  NP,  Naleway  AL,
McClure DL, Hechter RC, Kawai AT, Glanz JM, Weintraub ES. Infant Hospitalizations and
Mortality after Maternal Vaccination. Pediatrics 2018 Feb 20. McCarthy N, et al. Patterns
of  Childhood  Vaccination  and  All-Cause  Mortality.  Vaccine  2017;  35:  6643-6648.
Dec;22(12):1263-70.McCarthy  NL,  Sukumaran  L,  Newcomer  S,  Glanz  J,  Daley  MF,
McClure D, Klein NP, Irving S, Jackson ML, Lewin B, Weintraub E. Patterns of childhood
immunization  and  all-cause  mortality.  Vaccine.  2017  Dec  4;35(48  Pt  B):6643-6648.
Glanz JM, Newcomer SR, Jackson ML, Omer SB, Bednarczyk RA, Shoup JA, DeStefano F,
Daley  MF,  Goddard  K,  Panneton  M,  Groom  H,  Plotkin  SA,  Orenstein  WA,  Marcuse  EK,
Brookhart MA, Kulldorff M, Shimabukuro T, McNeil M, Gee J, Weintraub E, Sukumaran L,
White  Paper  on  studying  the  safety  of  the  childhood  immunization  schedule  in  the
Vaccine  Safety  Datalink,  Vaccine,  2016  Oct;34(1):A1-A29  Glanz  JM,  et  al.  Cumulative
and  episodic  vaccine  aluminum  exposure  in  a  population-based  cohort  of  young
children. Vaccine. 2015; 33:6736-44 Glanz JM,  Newcomer SR, Daley MF, McClure DL,
Baxter  RP,  Jackson  ML,  Naleway  AL,  Lugg  MM,  DeStefano  F,  Cumulative  and  episodic
vaccine  aluminum  exposure  in  a  population-based  cohort  of  young  children,  Vaccine.
2015 Oct;33(48): 6736-6744. Iqbal S, Barile JP, Thompson WW, DeStefano F. Number of
antigens  in  early  childhood  vaccines  and  neuropsychological  outcomes  at  age  7-10
years.  Pharmacoepidemiol  Drug  Safety.  2013;  DeStefano  F,  Price  CS,  Weintraub  ES.
Increasing exposure to antibody-stimulating proteins and polysaccharides in vaccines is
not  associated  with  risk  of  autism.  J  Pediatr.  2013  Aug;163(2):561-7.  Iqbal  S,  et  al.
Number  of  antigens  in  early  childhood  vaccines  and  neuropsychological  outcomes  at
age 7-10 years Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Safe 2013; 22:1263-1270. DeStefano F, et al.
Increasing exposure to antibody-stimulating proteins and polysaccharides in vaccines is
not  associated  with  risk  of  autism.  J  Pediatr  2013;  163:561-567.  To  receive  email
updates about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/concerns/multiple-vaccines-immunity.html
