A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Health  departments  can  also  request  a
modifiable  version  of  the  job-aid  by  emailing  the  CDC  Mumps  Team.  Please  include
"Mumps  Testing  Job-Aid"  in  the  subject  line.  The  modifiable  version  can  be  edited  to
include the following: For persons presenting with symptoms of mumps without known
epidemiologic-linkage, multiplex testing for other infectious etiologies is recommended
concurrent  with  mumps  testing  to  better  interpret  the  clinical  picture  alongside
laboratory  results.  Consider  testing  for  other  infectious  etiologies  such  as  influenza,
parainfluenza, EBV, & adenovirus that can cause parotitis. If mumps testing is negative
and  there  is  a  more  likely  alternative  diagnosis  with  a  positive  laboratory  result,
individuals can be classified as not a mumps case. For mumps PCR, specimen should be
ideally  collected  0–3  days  after  parotitis  onset  but  can  be  collected  up  to  10  days.  If
>10 days since symptom onset, PCR testing no longer recommended. For mumps IgM,
collecting specimens >3 days after parotitis onset improves the ability to detect IgM.
Persons  being  tested  have  exposure  to  a  confirmed  case  or  linkage  to  a
group/community defined by public health officials during an outbreak of mumps. For
mumps PCR, specimen should be ideally collected 0–3 days after parotitis onset but can
be collected up to 10 days. If >10 days since symptom onset, PCR testing no longer
recommended.  For  mumps  IgM,  collecting  specimens  >3  days  after  parotitis  onset
improves the ability to detect IgM. Top of chart “Patient has parotitis or other salivary
gland swelling" Then question: "Has it been ≤ 3 days+ since symptom onset?"
 If "Yes", then "Collect buccal specimen for PCR at first contact with patient."
 If  "No"  Collect  buccal  specimen  for  PCR  and  serology  for  IgM  at  first  contact  with
patient."  Top of chart begins "Patient does not have parotitis but has an acute potential
mumps complication of uncertain etiology:" Then Collect buccal specimen for PCR and
serology for IgM at first contact with patient.   Introduction for scenarios 1 and 2 below:
At the start of a mumps outbreak, persons suspected to have mumps should be tested
by RT-PCR to confirm mumps. Once the outbreak is confirmed, testing of subsequent
persons  is  optional  depending  on  volume/resources.  Epidemiologically-linked  persons
with parotitis, orchitis, or oophoritis can be classified as probable cases without testing.
Top of chart begins "Patient has parotitis or other salivary gland swelling." Then Q: "Has
it been ≤ 3 days+ since symptom onset?"
 If "Yes", then "CAN Collect buccal specimen for PCR at first contact with patient."
 If "No," then "CAN Collect buccal specimen for PCR and serology for IgM at first contact
with patient."
 Top  of  chart  begins  "Patient  does  not  have  parotitis  but  has  either  orchitis  or
oophoritis."  Then  "CAN  Collect  buccal  specimen  for  PCR  and  serology  for  IgM  at  first
contact with patient."
 Top of chart begins: "Patient does not have parotitis, orchitis, or oophoritis, but has an
acute potential mumps complication of uncertain etiology." Complication includes: Then
"Collect buccal specimen for PCR and serology for IgM at first contact with patient"
 Mumps is a contagious disease that can be serious to both children and adults. The
best protection against measles is the MMR vaccine. Languages Language Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mumps/php/public-health-strategy/mumps-testing-aid.html
