Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. You can learn to manage needle fears Many people do not like
needles as part of medical procedures when they receive care. But for some, the fear of
needles is so great that it might prevent them from getting life-saving medical care, like
vaccinations. This fear often affects children but can affect adults, too. Fear of needles
is also common in people with certain conditions that cause difficulties with managing
strong  sensations,  such  as  in  people  with  mental,  emotional,  or  behavioral  disorders.
Fear of needles can also be common in people with disabilities that make it hard for
them to understand the procedures and communicate their concerns. There are ways to
manage this fear. Learn what you can do so fear does not get in the way of important
medical care including vaccines. Getting medications or vaccines through a needle – or
having blood or other fluids taken by a needle – can be painful. Many people remember
the  discomfort  and  pain  and  worry  about  it  occurring  again  when  they  return  to  get
health procedures involving needles. This is typical. Younger children have fewer ways
to handle their fears and need help and comfort from their parents or other caregivers.
As children get older, many find ways to handle their fears on their own. But for some,
these fears are more severe, can persist into adolescence and adulthood, and are best
described as phobias. Needle phobias can be learned from a past experience of pain,
but there is also a biological component that makes some people react very strongly to
the idea of procedures involving a needle. Phobia means extreme fear that does not fit
the danger or damage involved. Phobias are sometimes called ‘irrational’ because the
feelings  are  real  but  much  more  extreme  than  the  actual  danger  or  harm.  These
phobias  can  make  procedures  feel  more  painful,  lead  to  severe  panic,  and  in  some
cases to a physical response that causes fainting. This can make it extremely difficult to
consider getting medical procedures involving needles. Estimates show that as many as
2 in 3 children and 1 in 4 adults have strong fears around needles.  As many as 1 in 10
people might delay the COVID-19 vaccine due to these fears. People who have mental,
emotional,  or  behavioral  disorders  such  as  anxiety  disorders,  people  with  certain
disabilities, and people with certain conditions that affect how they manage sensations
like  touch  or  movement,  may  have  more  difficulty  managing  such  fears.  People  with
disabilities may be less likely to get vaccinations even though they may be more at risk
for  certain  illnesses,  such  as  severe  effects  of  COVID-19.  Parents  who  have  fears  of
needles  themselves  may  hesitate  to  have  their  children  vaccinated.  Showing  fear  is
typical for younger children; but having extreme fear that lasts into adolescence and
adulthood may lead to feelings of shame. People with phobias can include those who
are  highly  tolerant  of  pain  and  risk,  like  those  who  play  sports,  manage  injuries  and
illness without complaint, or even work in healthcare settings. The danger is imagined,
but to the person, the fear or phobia is real and not a choice. It can feel like a part of
the brain is playing tricks on the rest of the brain. Having a phobia does not mean using
the fear to seek attention – people with a phobia might even hide the phobia and use
other  reasons  to  avoid  getting  the  health  care  they  need.  Being  around  people  who
react negatively (by becoming angry or overly worried or fearful of the person’s fear)
can  make  the  fear  worse.  There  are  many  positive  ways  parents,  caregivers,  and
partners of people with a phobia can be supportive. Fears and phobias can vary from
mild to severe. For milder cases, preparation, support, and pain management can help.
9 Things to Make Shots Less Stressful for You and Your Child Stay safe from COVID-19:
How I get my COVID-19 shot (Easy Read Social Story) For extreme fears, it is best to
talk to a mental health provider to understand how severe the problem is and plan the
best  strategies  to  treat  the  phobia.  Treatment  for  phobias  can  include  counseling,
exposure  therapy  where  the  person  gradually  faces  their  fears  with  the  support  of  a
mental  health  provider  in  carefully  planned  steps,  and/or  medication.  Families  and
healthcare  providers  can  help  manage  fears  People  with  fears  and  phobias  need
support  as  they  work  to  manage  their  feelings  during  procedures  involving  needles.
Having a trusted person who understands the fear, remains calm, and provides comfort
during  the  procedure  can  help  the  fearful  person.  It  is  also  helpful  to  let  the  fearful
person know there is no shame in having fears, even when the danger is not real. Fear
is not a choice, and it is not necessary to make the fear go away; the goal is to manage
fear enough to get the important potentially life-saving procedure. Family and friends
can  become  part  of  the  plan  that  works  best  for  a  person  and  help  encourage  and
support the person’s choices to cope and manage their fears. Healthcare providers can
increase  their  own  awareness  of  needle  fears  and  phobias.  Providers  can  let  their
patients  and  family  members  know  they  understand  that  extreme  fears  and  phobias
are a real concern. Healthcare providers can offer information and support to decrease
feelings of shame and fear and assist people with developing a plan to manage their
fears.  Different  strategies  for  pain  management  can  be  offered  as  a  routine  part  of
procedures  involving  needles.  People  who  have  fears  may  not  talk  about  them  with
their  providers  and  may  hesitate  getting  medical  care  that  involves  a  possibility  of
needles.  Telehealth  may  provide  a  way  to  talk  with  patients  about  their  fears  and
develop trust as the first step to getting the care that is needed. Healthcare providers
can work with families and caregivers to find ways to make getting vaccinations easier.
For people with severe fears, a referral to a mental health provider may be appropriate.
Managing  fears   Information  about  COVID-19  and  vaccines  To  receive  email  updates
about this topic, enter your email address:  
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/childrensmentalhealth/features/needle-fears-and-phobia.html
