Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Surveillance Summaries / July 15, 2016 / 65(7);1–19 Robert D.
Kirkcaldy, MD1; Alesia Harvey1; John R. Papp, PhD1; Carlos del Rio, MD2; Olusegun O.
Soge, PhD3; King K. Holmes, MD3; Edward W. Hook III, MD4; Grace Kubin, PhD5; Stefan
Riedel,  MD6,7;  Jonathan  Zenilman,  MD7;  Kevin  Pettus1;  Tremeka  Sanders1;  Samera
Sharpe1;  Elizabeth  Torrone,  PhD1  (View  author  affiliations)  Views  equals  page  views
plus  PDF  downloads  Figure  1  Figure  2  Figure  3  Figure  4  Figure  5  Figure  6  Figure  7
Figure  8  Figure  9  Figure  10  Figure  11  Table  1  Table  2  Table  3    Problem/Condition:
Gonorrhea  is  the  second  most  commonly  reported  notifiable  disease  in  the  United
States; 350,062 gonorrhea cases were reported in 2014. Sexually transmitted infections
caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae are a cause of pelvic inflammatory disease in women,
which can lead to serious reproductive complications including tubal infertility, ectopic
pregnancy,  and  chronic  pelvic  pain.  Prevention  of  sequelae  and  of  transmission  to
sexual  partners  relies  largely  on  prompt  detection  and  effective  antimicrobial
treatment.  However,  treatment  has  been  compromised  by  the  absence  of  routine
antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  in  clinical  care  and  evolution  of  antimicrobial
resistance to the antibiotics used to treat gonorrhea. Period Covered: 2014. Description
of  the  System:  The  Gonococcal  Isolate  Surveillance  Project  (GISP)  was  established  in
1986 as a sentinel surveillance system to monitor trends in antimicrobial susceptibilities
of N. gonorrhoeae strains in the United States. Each month, N. gonorrhoeae isolates are
collected from up to the first 25 men with gonococcal urethritis attending each of the
participating  sexually  transmitted  disease  (STD)  clinics  at  27  sites.  The  number  of
participating  sites  has  varied  over  time  (21–30  per  year).  Selected  demographic  and
clinical data are abstracted from medical records. Isolates are tested for antimicrobial
susceptibility using agar dilution at one of five regional laboratories. Results: A total of
5,093 isolates were collected in 2014. Of these, 25.3% were resistant to tetracycline,
19.2% to ciprofloxacin, and 16.2% to penicillin (plasmid-based, chromosomal, or both).
Reduced
 azithromycin
 susceptibility
 (Azi-RS)
 (defined
 as
 minimum
 inhibitory
concentration  [MIC]  ≥2.0  µg/mL)  increased  from  0.6%  in  2013  to  2.5%  in  2014.  The
increase  occurred  in  all  geographic  regions,  but  was  greatest  in  the  Midwest,  and
among all categories of sex of sex partners (men who have sex with men [MSM], men
who  have  sex  with  men  and  women  [MSMW],  and  men  who  have  sex  with  women
[MSW]).  No  Azi-RS  isolates  exhibited  reduced  cefixime  or  ceftriaxone  susceptibility
(Cfx-RS  and  Cro-RS,  respectively).  The  prevalence  of  Cfx-RS  (MIC  ≥0.25  µg/mL)
increased  from  0.1%  in  2006  to  1.4%  in  both  2010  and  2011,  decreased  to  0.4%  in
2013, and increased to 0.8% in 2014. Cro-RS (MIC ≥0.125 µg/mL) increased following a
similar pattern but at lesser percentages (increased from 0.1% in 2008 to 0.4% in 2011
and  decreased  to  0.1%  in  2013  and  2014).  The  percentage  of  isolates  resistant  to
tetracycline, ciprofloxacin, penicillin, or all three antimicrobials, was greater in isolates
from  MSM  than  from  MSW.  Interpretation:  This  is  the  first  report  to  present
comprehensive  surveillance  data  from  GISP  and  summarize  gonococcal  susceptibility
over time, as well as underscore the history and public health implications of emerging
cephalosporin  resistance.  Antimicrobial  susceptibility  patterns  vary  by  geographic
region within the United States and by sex of sex partner. Because dual therapy with
ceftriaxone plus azithromycin is the only recommended gonorrhea treatment, increases
in azithromycin and cephalosporin MICs are cause for concern that resistance to these
antimicrobial  agents  might  be  emerging.  It  is  unclear  whether  increases  in  the
percentage  of  isolates  with  Azi-RS  mark  the  beginning  of  a  trend.  The  percentage  of
isolates  with  elevated  cefixime  MICs  increased  during  2009–2010,  then  decreased
during  2012–2013  after  treatment  recommendations  were  changed  in  2010  to
recommend dual therapy (with a cephalosporin and a second antibiotic) and a higher
dosage  of  ceftriaxone.  Subsequently,  the  treatment  recommendations  were  changed
again  in  2012  to  no  longer  recommend  cefixime  as  part  of  first-line  therapy  (leaving
ceftriaxone-based  dual  therapy  as  the  only  recommended  therapy).  Despite  the  MIC
decrease  (i.e.,  trend  of  improved  cefixime  susceptibility)  during  2012–2013,  the
increase in the number of strains with Cfx-RS in 2014 underscores the potential threat
of cephalosporin-resistant N. gonorrhoeae. Public Health Action: The National Strategy
for  Combating  Antibiotic-Resistant  Bacteria  identifies  prevention,  rapid  detection,  and
control of outbreaks of ceftriaxone-resistant N. gonorrhoeae infection as a priority for
U.S. public health action. Antimicrobial susceptibility surveillance is conducted to guide
development  of  treatment  recommendations  for  effective  therapy  and  prevention  of
complications from and transmission of gonorrhea. Federal agencies can use GISP data
to  develop  national  treatment  recommendations  and  set  research  and  prevention
priorities. Local and state health departments can use GISP data to determine allocation
of STD prevention services and resources, guide prevention planning, and communicate
best treatment practices to health care providers. Continued surveillance, appropriate
treatment, development of new antibiotics, and prevention of transmission remain the
best  strategies  to  reduce  gonorrhea  incidence  and  morbidity.  Top  Neisseria
gonorrhoeae is a sexually transmitted pathogen that causes infections at the anatomic
site of exposure (e.g., urethra, cervix, pharynx, and rectum) and in the eyes of newborn
infants.  Urethral  infections  often  cause  discharge  and  pain  with  urination;  cervical,
pharyngeal, and rectal infections are frequently asymptomatic. In women, gonorrhea is
a  major  cause  of  pelvic  inflammatory  disease,  which  can  lead  to  severe  reproductive
health  complications  (e.g.,  infertility,  ectopic  pregnancy,  and  chronic  pelvic  pain).
Infrequently, disseminated gonococcal infection can result in localized septic arthritis,
endocarditis,  and  meningitis  (1).  Infants  born  to  infected  mothers  can  acquire  eye
infections that lead to blindness. Gonococcal infections can increase the risk for sexual
transmission  of  human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  (2).  Gonorrhea  has  been  a
nationally  notifiable  disease  since  1944  (3).  From  1968  to  1994,  gonorrhea  was
consistently the most commonly reported notifiable disease in the United States (4,5).
Since  1995  (and  with  the  advent  of  chlamydia  as  a  nationally  notifiable  disease),
gonorrhea has been consistently the second most commonly reported notifiable disease
in the United States; 350,062 cases were reported in 2014 (6,7). In 2014, the rate of
reported gonorrhea cases was higher in the southern United States (131.4 per 100,000
population) than in the midwestern, western, and northeastern regions of the country.
The reported case rate among women decreased from 108.0 per 100,000 population to
101.3  per  100,000  population  during  2011–2014  but  beginning  in  2009,  the  reported
case rate among men increased from 91.0 per 100,000 population to 120.1 per 100,000
population  in  2014.  Prevention  of  gonorrhea  sequelae  and  of  transmission  to  sexual
partners  relies  largely  on  prompt  detection  of  infection  and  effective  antimicrobial
treatment. However, gonorrhea treatment has been compromised by the evolution of
antimicrobial  resistance  to  each  recommended  antibiotic  agent  (8).  Surveillance  is
critical  for  detecting  and  monitoring  gonococcal  resistance.  N.  gonorrhoeae  culture  is
not routinely available in most clinical settings (because of the shift in clinical practice
in the United States and other developed countries toward the use of nonculture-based
diagnostic  tests,  such  as  nucleic  acid  amplification  tests  [NAATs])  and  antimicrobial
susceptibility  testing  is  not  routinely  conducted  in  most  laboratories  (9).  Thus,
gonorrhea case reporting does not include reporting of antimicrobial susceptibility and
supplemental  surveillance  approaches  have  been  used.  In  the  1970s,  CDC  monitored
antimicrobial susceptibility of N. gonorrhoeae through periodic large-scale surveys such
as the National Gonorrhea Therapy Monitoring Study (10). In the late 1970s and 1980s,
surveillance of penicillinase-producing N. gonorrhoeae (PPNG) was conducted by health
departments and incorporated into case reporting to CDC (11). However, the approach
lacked consistent sampling frames and methodologies (11). This report presents data
from the Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project (GISP) to describe trends in gonococcal
antimicrobial susceptibility in the United States during 2000–2014 and summarizes data
collected during January–December 2014. Federal agencies can use the findings in this
report  to  develop  national  treatment  recommendations  and  set  research  and
prevention  priorities.  Local  and  state  health  departments  can  use  GISP  data  to
determine  allocation  of  STD  prevention  services  and  resources,  guide  prevention
planning, and communicate best treatment practices to health care providers. Top In
1986, CDC established the Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project (GISP) as a sentinel
surveillance system to monitor trends in N. gonorrhoeae antimicrobial susceptibilities in
the  United  States  (12).  Data  collection  began  in  1987.  Each  sentinel  site  has  used  a
standard protocol, sampling frames, and culture-based laboratory methods consistently
since GISP’s inception. Urethral N. gonorrhoeae isolates and demographic and clinical
data are collected each month from up to the first 25 men with gonococcal urethritis in
participating
 STD
 clinics
 (i.e.,
 maximum
 300
 isolates
 per
 site
 annually)
(http://www.cdc.gov/std/gisp/gisp-protocol-may-2016.pdf). In 2014, 27 sites participated
in  GISP  (range:  21–30  sites  during  1987–2014)  (Table  1).  State  and  local  health
departments  competitively  applied  to  participate  in  GISP  as  part  of  the  funding
opportunity  Improving  STD  Programs  Through  Assessment,  Assurance,  Policy
Development,
 and
 Prevention
 Strategies
 (CDC-RFA-PS14-1402)
(http://www.cdc.gov/std/foa/aapps/ps14-1402-foa-amendment-i-final_07-08-13.pdf).
 In
2014, 24 state and city health departments (comprising 27 clinic sites) participated in
GISP (Table 2). GISP is not designed to be nationally representative, but rather to detect
changes  in  antimicrobial  susceptibility  across  a  wide  sample  of  geographic  settings.
Because resistant gonococcal strains, such as PPNG, are thought to have been imported
into  the  United  States  from  elsewhere,  most  often  East  Asia,  GISP  has  preferentially
included sites that are major ports of entry and transit hubs (12). Regional laboratories
applied  to  participate  in  GISP  through  a  competitive  application  process  as  part  of  a
separate  funding  opportunity  (STD  Laboratory-Based  Surveillance  and  Gonococcal
Isolate
 Surveillance
 Project
 [CDC-RFA-PS14-1401])
(http://www.cdc.gov/std/gisp/foa-8-2013.htm).
 In
 2014,
 the
 five
 participating
laboratories  were  located  at  Emory  University  (Atlanta,  Georgia);  Johns  Hopkins
University  (Baltimore,  Maryland);  Texas  Department  of  State  Health  Services  (Austin,
Texas);  University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham;  and  University  of  Washington  (Seattle,
Washington).  Sampling  of  urethral  N.  gonorrhoeae  isolates  with  a  paired  clinical  and
sexual history allows for monitoring of antimicrobial susceptibility in isolates from men
stratified  by  sex  of  sex  partners  and  other  epidemiological  characteristics.  Urethral
infections  in  men  are  more  likely  to  be  symptomatic  (prompting  health  care–seeking
behavior)  than  genitourinary  infections  in  women  and  also  might  be  presumptively
identified  by  Gram  stain;*  thus,  sampling  of  urethral  infections  in  men  is  an  efficient
means  to  detect  gonococcal  infection.  Consistent  sampling  minimizes  potential
confounding  by  changes  in  screening  or  testing  practices,  as  well  as  changes  in
population  samples,  thus  allowing  for  reliable  analyses  of  antimicrobial  susceptibility
trends. Antimicrobial susceptibility in isolates from MSW has been demonstrated to be a
reliable proxy of antimicrobial susceptibility in isolates from women (13,14). In addition,
population-level susceptibility of urethral isolates from MSM has been similar to that of
population-level  susceptibility  of  pharyngeal  and  rectal  isolates  from  this  population
(15).
 Presumptive
 identification
 of
 N.
 gonorrhoeae
 is
 based
 on
 growth
 of
typical-appearing colonies on Thayer-Martin selective media incubated at 95.0°–97.7°F
(35.0°–36.5°C)  in  5.0%  CO2,  a  positive  oxidase  test,  and  the  observation  of
gram-negative diplococci in stained smears. Gonococcal isolates are then subcultured
from  the  selective  primary  medium  to  chocolate  agar  with  1.0%  IsoVitaleX  (Becton,
Dickinson  and  Company,  Franklin  Lakes,  New  Jersey)  noninhibitory  media  to  obtain  a
pure  colony  of  the  isolate.  After  18–20  hours  of  incubation,  growth  from  the  pure
culture is suspended heavily in trypticase soy broth containing 20.0% (v/v) glycerol and
immediately  frozen  to  -94.0°F  (-70.0°C).  Frozen  isolates  are  shipped  monthly  to  the
assigned  regional  laboratory  for  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing.  Demographic  and
clinical  data  are  abstracted  from  medical  records  by  clinic  staff  and  submitted  each
month  using  an  electronic  web-based  application  provided  by  CDC.  Abstracted
information includes age, race/ethnicity, sex, sex of sex partners,† previous diagnoses
of  gonorrhea,  HIV  status,  selected  behavioral  characteristics  including  recent  travel,
and  antimicrobial  gonorrhea  treatment.  Clinical  outcome  is  not  collected  for  GISP.
De-identified data are transmitted to CDC through a secure data portal. Jurisdictions are
required to uphold the CDC National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB
Prevention’s  Data  Security  and  Confidentiality  Guidelines  for  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis,
Sexually
 Transmitted
 Diseases,
 and
 Tuberculosis
 Programs
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/programintegration/docs/pcsidatasecurityguidelines.pdf).
The  GISP  protocol  has  been  reviewed  periodically  by  the  CDC  Human  Research
Protection Office and deemed to be a surveillance and disease control activity and not
to  be  human  subject  research  (most  recent  review,  May  2016).  Regional  laboratories
determine  β-lactamase  production  and  antimicrobial  susceptibilities  of  all  submitted
isolates  according  to  a  standard  protocol.  In  2014,  antimicrobial  susceptibilities  to
azithromycin,  cefixime,  ceftriaxone,  ciprofloxacin,  penicillin,  spectinomycin,  and
tetracycline were determined for each isolate by the agar dilution procedure on Difco
GC  medium  base  (Becton,  Dickinson  and  Company,  Franklin  Lakes,  New  Jersey)
inoculated  with  104  colony  forming  units.  Antimicrobial  susceptibility  results  are
reported  as  minimum  inhibitory  concentrations  (MICs),  which  are  the  lowest
antimicrobial  concentrations  that  inhibit  visible  growth  of  a  microorganism  in  the
laboratory.
 As
 MICs
 increase,
 organisms
 can
 grow
 at
 higher
 antimicrobial
concentrations, providing early warning of potentially impending resistance. Results are
transmitted monthly to CDC through a secure data portal. Results are also transmitted
to  the  clinical  sites,  but  because  the  results  are  available  approximately  2–3  months
after  specimen  collection,  results  are  not  used  to  guide  clinical  management.  For
quality assurance, regional laboratories include a set of seven control strains with each
testing run. Control strain results must be within a defined MIC range for the run to be
valid.  In  addition,  the  regional  laboratories  participate  in  biannual  external  quality
assessments  that  include  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  of  a  set  of  15  blinded
cultures provided by CDC. GISP isolates that meet specific criteria are archived in the
CDC/ATSDR Specimen Packaging, Inventory and Repository (CASPIR). Isolates from GISP
are included in the Food and Drug Administration–CDC Antimicrobial Resistance Isolate
Bank
 (http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resistance-bank/index.html),
 which
 is
available
 to
 support
 and
 advance
 development
 of
 diagnostic
 devices
 and
antimicrobials.  To  minimize  overrepresentation  of  individual  geographic  sites,  the
number  of  isolates  in  the  analytic  data  set  is  limited  to  300  per  site  each  year.  All
numbers and percentages in this report are unweighted. Men were categorized by sex
of sex partner as MSM, MSMW, or MSW. Antimicrobial susceptibility trends are stratified
by  census  region  and  sex  of  sex  partners  and  are  interpreted  according  to  criteria
established by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) when such criteria
are available (16). For antibiotics for which CLSI has not established resistance criteria
(i.e.,  cefixime,  ceftriaxone,  and  azithromycin),  the  surveillance  definition  of  reduced
susceptibility  is  applied  to  isolates  with  MICs  higher  than  wild-type  distributions
(cefixime  MIC  ≥0.25  µg/mL  [Cfx-RS],  ceftriaxone  MIC  ≥0.125  µg/mL  [Cro-RS],  and
azithromycin MIC ≥2.0 µg/mL [Azi-RS]). Treatment outcome data from Toronto, Canada,
suggest  that  the  surveillance  case  definition  for  Cfx-RS  correlates  well  with
unsuccessful  treatment  (17).  In  2005,  the  GISP  surveillance  definition  of  Azi-RS  was
changed from ≥1.0 µg/mL to ≥2.0 µg/mL. Descriptive analyses of annual prevalences of
resistance  phenotypes  were  performed.  Bivariate  analyses  of  epidemiological
characteristics  were  conducted  by  chi-square,  with  significance  level  of  p<0.05.  Top
During  2000–2014,  a  total  of  86,517  isolates  were  submitted  (annual  median:  5,693;
range: 5,093–6,552), including 5,093 isolates submitted from 27 sites in 2014 (Table 1).
In 2014, 40.0% of the isolates were collected in the West and approximately 25.0% in
the Midwest (Table 2). The West is relatively overrepresented when accounting for the
proportion of reported gonorrhea cases among men (40.0% of GISP isolates and 24.9%
of reported cases in 2014), and the South is relatively underrepresented (23.4% of GISP
isolates  versus  41.4%  of  reported  cases  in  2014)  (7).  The  median  age  of  men  from
whom isolates were collected was 28 years (interquartile range [Q3–Q1]: 23–36 years).
The  majority  of  participants  were  black;  the  racial/ethnic  composition  of  GISP
participants approximates that of reported gonorrhea cases among men in the United
States (7). In 2014, associated sex of sex partner data were available for 5,032 isolates
(98.8%  of  total);  37.1%  of  the  isolates  were  from  MSM  or  MSMW.  This  percentage
increased  from  13.9%  in  2000  and  coincides  with  increases  during  2009–2014  in
reported  gonorrhea  case  rates  among  men  in  the  United  States  (7).  In  2014,  HIV
co-infection  and  recent  antibiotic  use  were  more  often  reported  by  MSM  and  MSMW
than MSW (Table 3). During 2000–2014, treatment data were submitted for 98.6% of
isolates;  data  were  submitted  for  99.3%  in  2014.  The  percentage  of  isolates  with
treatment  recorded  as  ceftriaxone  250  mg  as  a  single  intramuscular  dose  increased
from  10.0%  in  2005  to  94.3%  in  2014  (Figure  1)  and  coincided  with  changes  in  STD
treatment  guidelines  (18,19).  Among  men  treated  with  ceftriaxone  250  mg  in  2014,
96.4%  were  co-treated  with  azithromycin,  2.2%  with  doxycycline,  and  0.1%  with
another antibiotic; 1.3% were not treated with a second antibiotic. Those not treated
with ceftriaxone 250 mg were treated with ceftriaxone 125 mg, ciprofloxacin, cefixime,
or  levofloxacin  (all  <1.0%),  or  a  study  drug  as  part  of  a  clinical  trial  (2.9%).  The
percentage of men treated with azithromycin 2 g as monotherapy ranged from 0.04%
in 2000 to 3.2% in 2012; in 2014 the percentage was 1.9%. The percentage of Azi-RS
isolates remained low during 2000–2013 but increased from 0.6% in 2013 to 2.5% in
2014  (Figure  2),  representing  the  highest  prevalence  since  1992  when  GISP  began
testing for azithromycin susceptibility. The increase during 2013–2014 was observed in
all regions, but was greatest in the Midwest (Figure 3). In 2014, the largest numbers of
Azi-RS isolates per site were collected in Minnesota (23), Texas (11), and Arizona (10).
When  stratified  by  sex  of  sex  partner,  the  percentage  of  Azi-RS  isolates  increased  in
2004  among  MSM  and  MSMW,  then  decreased  (Figure  4).  During  2013–2014,  the
percentage increased among all categories of sex of sex partner: MSW (0.4% to 1.4%),
MSM  (0.9%  to  4.3%),  and  MSMW  (1.4%  to  3.2%)  (Figure  4).  Of  men  whose  isolates
exhibited Azi-RS in 2014 and for whom data were available (96.8%), 45.2% were white,
35.5%  were  black,  57.4%  were  MSM,  36.1%  were  MSW,  and  6.6%  were  MSMW.  In
addition,
 21.0%
 reported
 recent
 travel
 (versus
 8.7%
 of
 men
 with
azithromycin-susceptible  isolates,  p<0.001)  and  14.4%  reported  recent  antibiotic  use
(versus  7.8%  of  men  with  azithromycin-susceptible  isolates,  p  =  0.016).  Ten  isolates
with high-level azithromycin MIC (≥16.0 µg/mL) were identified in 2014. Of the seven
with  MIC  =  16.0  µg/mL,  three  were  from  the  West  (two  MSM  and  one  MSMW),  three
were from the Northeast (all MSW), and one was from the Midwest (MSM). One isolate
had  MIC  =  32.0  µg/mL  (MSM  in  the  West),  one  had  MIC  =  64.0  µg/mL  (MSM  in  the
West), and one had MIC ≥256.0 µg/mL (MSM in the West). The percentage of Cfx-RS
isolates (MIC ≥0.25 µg/mL) increased from 2006 (0.1%) to 2010 (1.4%), decreased to
0.4% in 2013, and then increased to 0.8% in 2014 (Figure 2). Isolates from the West
were more likely to be Cfx-RS than those from the Northeast, Midwest, or South (Figure
5). The majority of Cfx-RS isolates collected in 2014 were identified in Arizona (eight),
California  (seven),  and  Hawaii  (six);  however,  at  least  three  Cfx-RS  isolates  were
identified in each U.S. region. Since 2004, Cfx-RS prevalence has been higher in isolates
from MSM or MSMW than MSW (Figure 6). In 2014, the percentage of Cfx-RS isolates
was  1.3%  among  MSM,  1.2%  among  MSMW,  and  0.4%  among  MSW  (Figure  6).  In
combination  with  azithromycin,  ceftriaxone  is  recommended  for  gonorrhea  treatment
(20). During 2000–2014, the percentage of Cro-RS (MIC ≥0.125 µg/mL) isolates ranged
from 0.1% to 0.4% (Figure 7). In 2014, the percentage was 0.4% in the Northeast, 0.2%
in  the  West,  and  0.1%  in  the  South  and  Midwest  (Figure  7).  Since  2002,  Cro-RS
prevalence has been higher in isolates from MSM or MSMW than from MSW (Figure 8).
In 2014, the percentage of Cro-RS isolates was 0.4% among MSMW, 0.2% among MSM,
and 0.1% among MSW. Among the seven Cro-RS isolates in 2014, five had MIC = 0.125
µg/mL (three MSW in the South, Midwest, and Northeast and two MSM in the West) and
two  had  MIC  =  0.25  µg/mL  (one  MSM  in  the  Northeast  and  one  MSMW  in  the  West).
GISP  measures  ciprofloxacin  susceptibility  to  monitor  fluoroquinolone-resistant  N.
gonorrhoeae  (QRNG).  During  the  2000s,  prevalence  of  QRNG  strains  increased  in  the
United  States  (Figure  2),  emerging  in  the  western  United  States  (Hawaii  and  then
California), soon after among MSM, and then among MSW. In response, CDC adjusted
treatment  guidelines  and  no  longer  recommended  use  of  fluoroquinolones  in  each
affected location or population (21–23). In 2007, CDC no longer recommended use of
fluoroquinolones for gonorrhea treatment for any patient in the United States (24). The
percentage of QRNG isolates decreased from 14.8% in 2007 to 9.6% in 2009 (Figure 2)
and then increased; by 2014, 19.2% of isolates exhibited QRNG, the highest prevalence
observed in GISP since testing for ciprofloxacin susceptibility began in 1990. In 2014,
QRNG  strains  were  identified  in  27.3%  of  isolates  from  the  West,  21.4%  from  the
Northeast, 14.3% from the South, and 10.2% from the Midwest (Figure 9); QRNG strains
were identified in approximately 30.0% of isolates from MSM and MSMW and 12.7% of
isolates  from  MSW  (Figure  10).  Since  1989,  penicillin  has  not  been  recommended  for
gonorrhea  treatment  because  of  high  prevalence  of  resistance;  penicillin  resistance
remains  common  (25).  In  2014,  a  total  of  826  (16.2%)  isolates  exhibited  penicillin
resistance  alone  or  in  combination  with  other  resistance  phenotypes  (Figure  2).  Of
these isolates, 477 (57.8%) exhibited chromosomal resistance (MIC ≥2.0 µg/mL without
β-lactamase)  and  349  (42.2%)  exhibited  plasmid-based  resistance  (presence  of
β-lactamase).  The  percentage  of  isolates  with  penicillin  resistance  was  high  in  all
regions  (Northeast  [25.6%],  West  [17.4%],  Midwest  [13.3%],  and  Southeast  [13.2%]).
Penicillin  resistance  was  common  in  isolates  from  MSM  (22.1%),  MSMW  (21.9%),  and
MSW  (12.5%).  In  2014,  a  total  of  1,287  (25.3%)  isolates  exhibited  tetracycline
resistance, either alone or in combination with other resistance phenotypes (Figure 2).
The  prevalence  of  tetracycline  resistance  was  high  in  all  regions  (West  [33.5%],
Northeast [25.8%], South [19.6%], and Midwest [17.6%]). Tetracycline resistance was
common in isolates from MSM (38.0%), MSMW (31.5%), and MSW (18.2%). In 2014, a
total of 1,946 (38.2%) of all isolates collected in GISP exhibited resistance (to penicillin,
tetracycline,  or  ciprofloxacin)  or  reduced  susceptibility  (to  cefixime,  ceftriaxone,  or
azithromycin,  for  which  CLSI  has  not  yet  established  resistance  breakpoints)  (16)
(Figure  11).  Resistance  or  reduced  susceptibility  to  one  antibiotic  was  identified  in
20.8% of isolates, to two in 9.6%, to three in 7.2%, to four in 0.5%, and to five in 0.1%.
Among  125  Azi-RS  isolates,  48.8%  were  resistant  to  tetracycline,  22.4%  to  penicillin,
and 8.8% to ciprofloxacin; none exhibited Cfx-RS or Cro-RS. Among 38 Cfx-RS isolates,
92.1% were resistant to ciprofloxacin, 76.3% to tetracycline, and 71.1% to penicillin. All
seven Cro-RS isolates were resistant to penicillin; 85.7% were resistant to tetracycline
and ciprofloxacin. No Cfx-RS or Cro-RS isolates exhibited Azi-RS. Since 2000, no isolates
collected  in  GISP  have  exhibited  spectinomycin  resistance.  U.S.  distribution  of
spectinomycin  was  discontinued  in  2005  (26).  Top  This  is  the  first  report  to  present
comprehensive  surveillance  data  from  GISP  and  summarize  gonococcal  susceptibility
over time, as well as underscore the history and public health implications of emerging
cephalosporin  resistance.  Before  GISP,  monitoring  of  gonococcal  antimicrobial
susceptibility  was  conducted  periodically  through  large-scale  surveys  and  later  was
limited primarily to detection of PPNG, identified by simple and inexpensive assays for
β-lactamase (10,11). However, many public health laboratories lacked the resources to
conduct  susceptibility  testing  other  than  β-lactamase  testing  and  to  detect
chromosomal  resistance;  such  testing  is  more  expensive  and  technically  demanding
(27).  GISP  was  established  in  1986  to  address  those  challenges  and  to  provide  a
scientific  rationale  for  changes  in  gonorrhea  treatment  guidelines.  Data  from  GISP
repeatedly  have  led  to  revisions  to  national  guidelines  for  gonorrhea  treatment,
including the 2015 STD treatment guidelines (20). GISP has allowed CDC to continue to
monitor  gonococcal  antimicrobial  susceptibility  despite  decreasing  use  of  cultures  in
clinical  practice.  Following  the  emergence  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  resistance  to  numerous
antibiotics,  and  with  decreasing  susceptibility  of  the  pathogen  to  cefixime  (an  oral
cephalosporin), the primary gonorrhea treatment option recommended by CDC is dual
therapy  combining  ceftriaxone  (an  injectable  cephalosporin)  and  an  oral  dose  of
azithromycin
 (a
 macrolide
 antibiotic)
 (20).
 Monitoring
 of
 cephalosporin
 and
azithromycin susceptibility is particularly important to ensure the effectiveness of the
recommended treatment option. Data from GISP will remain important for monitoring
effectiveness of potential treatment options and for success of the National Strategy for
Combating  Antibiotic-Resistant  Bacteria  (28).  Dual  therapy  with  ceftriaxone,  an
injectable cephalosporin, and azithromycin, an oral macrolide, is the only recommended
gonorrhea  treatment  in  the  United  States  (20).  The  recent  increase  in  Azi-RS
prevalence,  just  5  years  after  cephalosporin  MICs  began  to  increase  among  isolates
collected  in  GISP,  highlights  the  potential  for  development  of  resistance  to  the  only
currently  recommended  antimicrobial  agents.  The  increase  in  Azi-RS  prevalence  was
greatest  in  the  Midwest  but  occurred  in  all  geographic  regions.  Azi-RS  prevalence
increased among MSM, who traditionally have experienced a disproportionate number
of resistant N. gonorrhoeae infections (23,29,30), but also among MSW. N. gonorrhoeae
Azi-RS  is  associated  with  mutations  in  the  mtrR  coding  region,  conferring
overexpression of an efflux pump, and mutations in at least one of the four (but usually
two  or  greater)  alleles  encoding  the  23S  ribosomal  subunit,  causing  decreased
antimicrobial affinity (31–35). It is unclear whether circulating gonococcal strains in the
United States acquired these mutations through domestic selection pressure or whether
Azi-RS strains were introduced through importation from other countries, as might have
occurred  with  PPNG,  QRNG,  and  Cfx-RS,  and  spread  clonally  (11,36,37).  The
epidemiology of Azi-RS differs from other resistance phenotypes and might suggest a
potential role for domestic selection pressure. Other resistance phenotypes emerged in
Hawaii  and  then  California  (likely  because  of  relative  proximity  to  East  Asia)  before
spreading eastward. In contrast, azithromycin MICs have tended to be higher in isolates
from  the  Midwest  than  from  other  regions  (38);  therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  that  in
2014,  the  Midwest  had  the  greatest  proportion  of  Azi-RS  isolates.  Selection  pressure
might  be  exerted  by  the  high  frequency  with  which  azithromycin  is  prescribed  in  the
United  States  for  nonsexually  transmitted  illnesses,  such  as  respiratory  infections
(39,40).  The  recommended  dual-therapy  regimen  for  gonorrhea  treatment  is  not  a
likely contributor to increases in Azi-RS. Azithromycin has been recommended for use in
gonorrhea treatment (to treat chlamydia co-infection) since 1998 (41) without increases
in  Azi-RS  prevalence.  Recent  studies  have  not  indicated  antagonist  effects  between
ceftriaxone and azithromycin (42,43). However, gonorrhea treatment with azithromycin
monotherapy could conceivably select for Azi-RS; in a recently described case, higher
azithromycin  MIC  was  exhibited  after  unsuccessful  treatment  with  azithromycin
monotherapy (34). During 2000–2012, a small increase in use of azithromycin alone for
gonorrhea  treatment  was  observed  in  STD  clinics  participating  in  GISP.  Data  on
gonorrhea treatment outside of STD clinics are limited. Several countries have reported
isolates  with  Azi-RS  and  increasing  azithromycin  MICs,  which  supports  the  idea  of
importation  of  Azi-RS  strains  into  the  United  States  and  subsequent  clonal  spread
(44–47).  Such  reports  heighten  concerns  about  whether  a  trend  toward  increased
Azi-RS is beginning in the United States, which could compromise successful gonorrhea
treatment. Not only is azithromycin part of currently recommended dual therapy, it is
also  a  component  of  each  of  the  alternative  treatment  regimens  for  gonorrhea  (20).
Azithromycin monotherapy is not recommended for gonorrhea treatment; clinicians are
strongly  encouraged  to  avoid  its  use  to  reduce  potential  for  selection  pressure  and
ensure  treatment  effectiveness.  Concern  is  growing  about  potential  for  cephalosporin
resistance.  Higher  oral  cephalosporin  (e.g.,  cefixime)  MICs  and  cases  of  unsuccessful
treatment  with  oral  cephalosporins  have  been  identified  in  multiple  countries.  Since
2009,  ceftriaxone-resistant  strains  have  been  identified  in  Japan,  Spain,  and  France
(48–50).  In  response  to  these  developments,  CDC  revised  its  gonorrhea  treatment
guidelines  in  2010  to  recommend  1)  dual  therapy  with  a  cephalosporin  (ceftriaxone
[preferred] or cefixime) plus either azithromycin or doxycycline for gonorrhea treatment
and  2)  a  higher  dosage  of  ceftriaxone  (18).  Subsequently,  increasing  cefixime  MICs
were observed in GISP (19). Anticipating that increasing cefixime MICs would result in
declining  effectiveness  of  cefixime  and  that  in  turn,  continued  use  of  cefixime  might
hasten the development of resistance to ceftriaxone, CDC revised its guidelines again in
2012 to no longer recommend cefixime as part of dual therapy; ceftriaxone-based dual
therapy  was  the  only  recommended  therapy  (19).  Subsequent  decreases  in  the
proportion of Cfx-RS isolates suggested an association between changes in treatment
guidelines and circulation of fewer clinical strains with reduced susceptibility. Although
other countries observed similar trends, only some had changed treatment guidance to
ceftriaxone-based  dual  therapy.  Other  factors  (e.g.,  reduced  transmission  of  a  clonal
lineage) might have contributed to decreasing prevalence (35,51–59). On the basis of
historical
 precedent,
 such
 as
 patterns
 observed
 with
 QRNG
 strains,
 recent
cephalosporin  susceptibility  data  from  Australia  and  Europe,  and  2014  GISP  data,
improvement in cefixime susceptibility might be short lived (24,54,60). N. gonorrhoeae
strains in the United States remain highly susceptible to ceftriaxone, perhaps because
additional mutations (beyond those required for Cfx-RS) seem to be required to confer
Cro-RS  (48–50).  Although  not  yet  documented,  it  is  also  conceivable  that  such
mutations  confer  fitness  costs  (i.e.,  acquired  mutations  that  confer  resistance  might
impair the virulence, transmissibility, or infectivity of the bacteria), as the spread of the
ceftriaxone-resistant  strains  appears  to  be  limited  (61,62).  CDC  recommends  that
gonococcal  infections  be  treated  with  ceftriaxone  250  mg  as  a  single  intramuscular
dose and azithromycin 1 g orally (20). The combination regimen is thought to have a
synergistic  effect  that  enhances  killing  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  resistant  to  one  of  the
antimicrobials
 and
 minimizes
 potential
 for
 transmission
 of
 resistant
 strains.
Furthermore, Cfx-RS and Cro-RS isolates are susceptible to azithromycin and vice versa.
If a pathogen harbors reduced susceptibility to one antibiotic, the second antibiotic is
expected to cure the infection. Patients with cephalosporin allergies should be treated
with  azithromycin  2  g  plus  either  gentamicin  or  gemifloxacin  (20).  GISP  is  the  only
source  of  national  and  regional  gonococcal  antimicrobial  susceptibility  data  in  the
United  States.  Since  1986,  GISP  has  provided  data  to  guide  gonorrhea  treatment
recommendations and address the threat of antimicrobial resistance while monitoring
antimicrobial  susceptibility.  Culture-based  methods  are  necessary  for  N.  gonorrhoeae
antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing,  which  exposes  live  organisms  to  varying
concentrations of antimicrobial agents. However, laboratories’ widespread adoption of
molecular-based diagnostic tests that do not yield live organisms, such as NAATs, has
led  to  a  marked  decrease  in  use  of  and  capacity  to  perform  culture  testing  and  N.
gonorrhoeae antimicrobial susceptibility testing in the United States (9). In comparison
to culture, NAATs are more sensitive and specific, can be performed on less invasively
collected  specimens  (e.g.,  urine  and  self-collected  vaginal  swabs),  and  have  far  less
burdensome specimen handling requirements (63). The limited amount of antimicrobial
susceptibility testing conducted outside of GISP also precludes use of electronic health
records as a data source for surveillance of gonococcal antimicrobial susceptibility. The
potential  for  cephalosporin  and  azithromycin  resistance  with  limited  antimicrobial
treatment  options  underscores  the  importance  of  GISP  data  (64).  Beyond  the
recommended  dual-therapy  regimen,  no  other  antibiotics  are  available  to  treat
gonorrhea effectively with a high level of efficacy at all anatomic sites of infection, a
favorable side-effect profile, low cost, and ease of administration. The strengths of GISP
surveillance  include  nonrandom,  systematic  sampling  and  consistent  methodology.
Systematic  sampling  of  consecutive  symptomatic  men  minimizes  selection  bias  and
provides  a  robust  estimate  of  gonococcal  susceptibility  at  each  sentinel  clinic.
Consistent  methodology  minimizes  potential  confounding  by  changes  in  screening  or
testing practices, population samples, or laboratory practice over time, thus allowing for
reliable analyses of antimicrobial susceptibility trends. By design, GISP does not collect
a representative sample of gonococcal strains from men throughout the United States.
Rather,  by  relatively  oversampling  from  the  western  United  States  (where  resistance
tends to emerge), GISP functions as a truly sentinel system and is able to more rapidly
detect  trends.  STD  specialty  care  clinics,  particularly  those  that  participate  in  GISP,
maintain culture capacity and thus are able to provide a sufficient number of isolates
for  surveillance.  Most  gonorrhea  cases  in  the  United  States  are  identified  in  settings
other  than  STD  clinics  (7),  but  gonococcal  infections  usually  are  asymptomatic  and
often are distributed across multiple health care settings. Compared with other health
care  facilities,  STD  clinics  still  tend  to  diagnose  a  disproportionate  number  of
gonococcal  infections  among  men.  Data  from  GISP  repeatedly  have  been  used  to
develop CDC’s STD treatment guidelines for gonorrhea (18–20,23,24,41,65–68). These
guidelines have a direct influence on health care–provider prescribing practices (69,70).
GISP  data  indicate  that  health  care  providers  in  state  and  locally  funded  STD  clinics
tend to adopt changes in treatment guidelines quickly. For example, the percentage of
patients  treated  with  ceftriaxone  250  mg  increased  substantially  following  release  of
2010 STD treatment guidelines. CDC’s guidelines also influence gonorrhea treatment in
non–STD clinic settings, although adoption of new recommendations in these facilities
tends  to  be  slower  (69).  GISP  monitors  N.  gonorrhoeae  antimicrobial  susceptibility
trends  in  the  United  States.  The  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  conducts  global
surveillance  of  gonococcal  antimicrobial  susceptibility  through  the  Gonococcal
Antimicrobial  Surveillance  Programme  (GASP),  which  is  operated  by  regional
coordinating centers in nearly all WHO regions. GASP collaborates with GISP and other
national  surveillance  programs,  such  as  United  Kingdom’s  Gonococcal  Resistance  to
Antimicrobials  Surveillance  System  (GRASP)  and  Australia’s  Gonococcal  Surveillance
Programme  (51–54).  Although  interpretation  of  data  sometimes  is  limited  by
convenience  sampling  designs  and  lack  of  associated  epidemiologic  data  in  some
countries, GASP and other international surveillance programs provide critical data on
global  transmission  of  resistant  strains.  Top  The  findings  provided  in  this  report  are
subject to at least four limitations. First, only men with urethral gonorrhea diagnosed in
participating STD clinics are included, so epidemiologic characteristics of men in GISP
are not expected to reflect those of all persons with gonorrhea diagnosed in the United
States. Second, reported treatment data reflect prescribing practices in specialty STD
clinics and are not expected to reflect gonorrhea treatment practices in private clinical
settings  and  other  non-STD  clinic  health  care  settings,  where  most  gonorrhea  is
diagnosed in the United States (7). Third, although relative oversampling of the western
United States might allow for more rapid identification of emerging resistance trends,
such sampling might contribute to overestimates of national-level point prevalence of
resistance phenotypes. Finally, although clear differences in susceptibility are evident
by sex of sex partner even after stratification by geographic region and adjustment for
other  potential  confounders  (30),  the  magnitude  of  difference  in  prevalence  of
resistance between MSM and MSW might be influenced by differences in proportions of
MSM, MSMW, and MSW in GISP by geographic region. Top One goal of the United States
National
 Strategy
 for
 Combating
 Antibiotic-Resistant
 Bacteria
 is
 to
 maintain
ceftriaxone-resistant  N.  gonorrhoeae  prevalence  at  <2.0%  through  2020  (28).  This
effort  will  require  a  multipronged  approach  and  new  tools  to  prevent  emergence  of
resistant gonorrhea strains. Strengthening gonorrhea control should be the foundation,
possibly with a focus on the western United States and other regions where resistant
strains tend to emerge. Optimal prevention measures include screening sexually active
females  aged  <25  years,  as  well  as  women  aged  >25  years  at  increased  risk  for
infection§ (20); screening sexually active MSM at anatomic sites of possible exposure at
least annually (20); and appropriately treating patients with gonorrhea and their recent
sex partners, including retesting 3 months after treatment. Gonorrhea control options
for patients who cannot link their partners to evaluation and treatment include partner
notification by health department staff or expedited partner therapy. Clinicians should
use the dual-therapy regimen of ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly and azithromycin
1 g orally (20) to treat patients with gonorrhea and stay abreast of changes to CDC’s
treatment  guidelines.  Sexually  active  persons  can  be  encouraged  to  use  condoms
consistently  and  correctly  to  prevent  transmission  of  gonorrhea.  In  2016,  the  U.S.
Congress approved $160 million in additional funding to CDC to implement its role in
the National Strategy for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria. The national strategy
outlines  interventions  to  reduce  the  emergence  and  spread  of  antibiotic-resistant
pathogens,
 which
 include
 N.
 gonorrhoeae
(http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/solutions-initiative/index.html).
 As
 part
 of
 this
initiative, CDC plans to build capacity in up to nine U.S. counties to rapidly detect and
respond  to  antibiotic-resistant  gonococcal  infections.  Rapid  identification  of  resistant
infections could allow local public health authorities to slow transmission through rapid
investigations, contact tracing, and network analyses. New diagnostic tools are needed.
Development of well-validated molecular assays to quickly identify presence or absence
of resistance determinants (absence suggests antimicrobial susceptibility) could guide
more  timely  and  tailored  treatment  and  improve  reach  and  speed  of  surveillance.
Through the Advanced Molecular Detection initiative, CDC is supporting identification of
N. gonorrhoeae resistance determinants, an important first step in the development of
molecular
 assays
(http://www.cdc.gov/amd/project-summaries/treating-gonorrhea-threat.html).
Phenotypic  culture-based  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  will  remain  critical,
however; molecular tests alone will not detect new mutations conferring resistance or
new  resistance  phenotypes.  New  antibiotics  and  new  prevention  tools,  including  a
vaccine,  are  urgent  needs.  Surveillance  is  a  core  public  health  function  that  guides
prevention  and  control  efforts  as  new  tools  or  approaches  are  developed  and
implemented.  Top  Since  its  inception  in  1986,  GISP  has  monitored  N.  gonorrhoeae
antimicrobial  susceptibility.  Data  from  GISP  have  advanced  knowledge  about
gonococcal  resistance,  influenced  policy  and  prevention  decisions,  and  repeatedly
provided  evidence  on  which  to  base  national  treatment  recommendations.  In  2014,
data from GISP demonstrated increases in prevalence of Azi-RS and to a lesser degree,
of  Cfx-RS.  It  is  unclear  whether  these  increases  mark  the  beginning  of  trends,  but
emergence of cephalosporin and azithromycin resistance would complicate gonorrhea
treatment  substantially.  Local  and  state  health  departments  can  use  GISP  data  to
determine  allocation  of  STD  prevention  services  and  resources,  guide  prevention  and
control planning, and inform health care providers. Federal agencies can use GISP data
to  monitor  susceptibility  trends,  identify  novel  resistances,  guide  national  treatment
recommendations,  set  research  and  prevention  priorities,  and  monitor  success  of  the
National  Strategy  for  Combating  Antibiotic-Resistant  Bacteria.  Specimens  collected
through  surveillance  can  be  used  to  guide  development  of  diagnostic  methods,
therapeutic  agents,  and  vaccines.  Continued  surveillance,  appropriate  treatment,
development  of  new  antibiotics,  and  prevention  of  transmission  remain  the  best
strategies to reduce gonorrhea incidence and morbidity. Top Regional laboratories and
participating  sites  contributed  to  this  report.  Baderinwa  Offutt  and  Tamayo  Barnes
(Emory University), Kar Mun Neoh (Johns Hopkins University), Tamara Baldwin and Carol
Rodriguez (Texas), and Paula Dixon (University of Alabama at Birmingham) conducted
antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  for  GISP.  The  following  are  principal  collaborators
and  project  coordinators:  Anthony  Merriweather,  Edward  Khan,  MD,  Tracy  Burkett
(Alabama); Roxanne Ereth, Renuka Khurana, MD, Tom Mickey, Lovina Ogden (Arizona);
Heidi  Aiem,  Heidi  Bauer,  MD,  Karen  Galliher,  Loreto  Negado,  Christopher  Ried,  MD
(California);  Nanette  Benbow,  Roman  Golash,  Irina  Tabidze,  MD  (Chicago,  Illinois);
Michelle  Allen,  Richard  Hedenquist,  Ruby  Lewis-Hardy,  Praful  Bhatti  (Georgia);  Glenn
Wasserman,  MD,  G.  Luke  Hasty,  PhD,  Chris  Whelen,  PhD  (Hawaii);  Andrea  Radford,
Janet  Arno,  MD,  David  Nguyen,  Bonny  Lewis  Van,  PhD  (Indiana);  Ryan  Murphy,  PhD,
Marisol  Mejia,  Nicole  Green,  PhD  (Los  Angeles,  California);  DeAnn  Gruber,  PhD,
Stephanie  Taylor,  MD  (Louisiana);  Katherine  Hsu,  MD,  Donna  Felsenstein,  MD,  Tracy
Stiles  (Massachusetts);  Karen  Krzanowski,  Kristine  Judd-Tuinier,  Barbara  Weberman
(Michigan);  Krissie  Guerard,  Dawn  Ginzl,  Anna  Strain,  PhD  (Minnesota);  David
Bamberger, MD, Ron Griffin, Lesha Dennis, Tiffany Wilkinson (Missouri); Janine Waters,
Cheryl  Champlin,  Lisa  Onischuk  (New  Mexico);  Alison  Muse,  Jackie  Andula,  Shirley
Keenan  (New  York  [Erie  County]);  Susan  Blank,  MD,  Preeti  Pathela,  PhD,  Inessa
Rubinstein  (New  York,  New  York);  Richard  Whitley,  Patricia  Armour  (Nevada);  Laura
Bachmann,  MD,  Ramon  Cook,  Cindy  Toler  (North  Carolina);  Amanda  Dennison,  Jose
Bazan,  DO,  Jamie  Blair,  Neil  Conway,  PhD,  Melissa  Ervin,  Marylou  Zima  (Ohio);  Veda
Latin,  Kim  Toevs,  Sean  Schafer,  MD,  Kathy  Venator,  Chris  Nytko  (Oregon);  Caroline
Johnson,  MD,  Lenore  Asbel,  MD,  Greta  Anschuetz  (Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania);  Tomas
Aragon,  MD,  Susan  Philip,  MD,  Stephanie  Cohen,  MD,  Robert  Kohn,  MPH,  Jonathan
Carlson (San Francisco, California); Felipe Rocha, Lynne Davis, Edward Bannister, PhD
(Texas); Stephen Yamada, MS (Tripler Army Medical Center, Hawaii); and Matt Golden,
MD,  David  Katz,  PhD,  Paul  Swenson,  PhD  (Washington).  Top  Corresponding  author:
Robert  Kirkcaldy,  Division  of  STD  Prevention,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral
Hepatitis,
 STD,
 and
 TB
 Prevention,
 CDC.
 Telephone:
 404-639-8659;
 E-mail:
hlg8@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of  STD  Prevention,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral
Hepatitis,  STD  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  2Rollins  School  of  Public
Health and Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory University
School  of  Medicine,  Emory  University,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  3University  of  Washington,
Seattle,  Washington;  4University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham,  Birmingham,  Alabama;
5Texas  Department  of  State  Health  Services,  Austin,  Texas;  6Beth  Israel  Deaconess
Medical  Center,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Massachusetts;  7Johns  Hopkins
University,  Baltimore,  Maryland  Top  Top  *  Per  CDC’s  2014  STD  laboratory  guidelines,
Gram  stains  of  endocervical  specimens  or  pharyngeal  or  rectal  specimens  are  not
considered
 sufficient
 to
 detect
 gonococcal
 infection
 and
 therefore
 are
 not
recommended.  †  Sex  of  sex  partner  data  collected  in  accordance  with  local  clinic
practice  and  can  include  chart  notation  from  previous  visits,  patient  self-report  of
sexual  orientation,  or  both,  or  sex  of  sex  partner  (from  prior  3,  6,  or  12  months).  §
Those  who  have  a  new  sex  partner,  more  than  one  sex  partner,  a  sex  partner  with
concurrent partners, or a sex partner who has a sexually transmitted infection. Top Top
* Directly funded cities and counties (e.g., Chicago and Los Angeles County) are listed
as  separate  sites.  Top  Abbreviations:  MSM  =  men  who  have  sex  with  men;  MSMW  =
men  who  have  sex  with  men  and  women;  MSW  =  men  who  have  sex  with  women.*
Total  =  5,093.  Total  includes  61  men  for  whom  sex  of  sex  partner  is  unknown;  this
accounts for discrepancies in totals for each characteristic. Top * Oral cephalosporins =
cefdinir, cefixime, cefotaxime, cefoxitin, cefpodoxime, ceftibuten, or ceftizoxime. † Oral
fluoroquinolones  =  ciprofloxacin,  levofloxacin,  or  ofloxacin.  §  Other  antibiotics  =
azithromycin, doxycycline, spectinomycin, clinical trial drugs, other, or none. ¶ In 2010,
CDC  revised  its  gonorrhea  treatment  guidelines  to  recommend  dual  therapy  with  a
cephalosporin  (either  ceftriaxone  [preferred]  or  cefixime)  and  a  second  antimicrobial
(azithromycin or doxycycline) and to increase the recommended dosage of ceftriaxone
to 250 mg. In 2012, CDC again revised its gonorrhea treatment guidelines to no longer
recommend  cefixime  and  to  recommend  only  ceftriaxone-based  dual  therapy  for
gonorrhea  treatment.  Top  *  Fluoroquinolone  resistance  (R)  =  ciprofloxacin  minimum
inhibitory  concentration  (MIC)  =1.0  µg/mL;  penicillin-R  =  MIC  =2.0  µg/mL  or
ß-lactamase  positive;  tetracycline-R  =  MIC  =2.0  µg/mL.  †  Azithromycin  reduced
susceptibility  (RS)  =  MIC  =1.0  µg/mL  (2000–2004);  =2.0  µg/mL  (2005–2014);
cefixime-RS  =  MIC  =0.25  µg/mL.  Cefixime  susceptibility  was  not  tested  in  2007  and
2008. Top * Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) =1.0 µg/mL (2000–2004); MIC =2.0
µg/mL (2005–2014). Top Abbreviations: MSM = men who have sex with men; MSMW =
men who have sex with men and women; MSW = men who have sex with women. *
Minimum  inhibitory  concentration  (MIC)  =1.0  µg/mL  (2000–2004);  MIC  =2.0  µg/mL
(2005–2014).  Top  *  Minimum  inhibitory  concentration  (MIC)  =0.25  µg/mL.  Cefixime
susceptibility  was  not  tested  in  2007  and  2008.  Top  Abbreviations:  MSM  =  men  who
have sex with men; MSMW = men who have sex with men and women; MSW = men
who  have  sex  with  women.  *  Minimum  inhibitory  concentration  (MIC)  =0.25  µg/mL.
Cefixime  susceptibility  was  not  tested  in  2007  and  2008.  Top  *  Minimum  inhibitory
concentration (MIC) =0.125 µg/mL. Top Abbreviations: MSM = men who have sex with
men; MSMW = men who have sex with men and women; MSW = men who have sex
with women. * Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) =0.125 µg/mL. Top * Minimum
inhibitory  concentration  (MIC)  =1.0  µg/mL.  Top  Abbreviations:  MSM  =  men  who  have
sex  with  men;  MSMW  =  men  who  have  sex  with  men  and  women;  MSW  =  men  who
have  sex  with  women.  *  Minimum  inhibitory  concentration  (MIC)  =1.0  µg/mL.  Top
Abbreviations:  Azi-RS  =  reduced  azithromycin  susceptibility;  Cip-R  =  ciprofloxacin
resistance,  Cfx-RS  =  reduced  cefixime  susceptibility;  Cro-RS  =  reduced  ceftriaxone
susceptibility;  Pen-R  =  penicillin  resistance;  Tet-R  =  tetracycline  resistance.  *  N  =
5,093. † Other combinations: Azi-RS (1.1%); Pen-R and Tet-R (2.1%); Pen-R and Cip-R
(1.6%).  Each  =1.0%:  Cfx-RS;  Pen-R  and  Azi-RS;  Tet-R  and  Azi-RS;  Cip-R  and  Cfx-RS;
Pen-R,  Tet-R,  and  Azi-RS;  Pen-R,  Cfx-RS,  and  Cro-RS;  Tet-R,  Cip-R,  and  Azi-RS;  Tet-R,
Cip-R,  and  Cfx-RS;  Pen-R,  Tet-R,  Cip-R,  and  Azi-RS;  Pen-R,  Tet-R,  Cip-R,  and  Cfx-RS;
Pen-R,  Tet-R,  Cip-R,  Cfx-RS,  and  Cro-RS.  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:
Kirkcaldy  RD,  Harvey  A,  Papp  JR,  et  al.   Neisseria  gonorrhoeae  Antimicrobial
Susceptibility  Surveillance  —  The  Gonococcal  Isolate  Surveillance  Project,  27  Sites,
United
 States,
 2014.
 MMWR
 Surveill
 Summ
 2016;65(No.
 SS-7):1–19.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.ss6507a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/ss/ss6507a1.htm
