A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. A medicolegal investigation is conducted
by a coroner’s or medical examiner’s office to determine how someone died. Each state
sets  its  own  standards  for  what  kinds  of  deaths  require  investigation.  These  are  the
laws for New Jersey. Is medical death investigation system centralized, county-based, or
district-based?County-based.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §  52:17B-83.  If  centralized,  in  which
department  or  agency  is  the  system  housed?Not  applicable.  Does  the  state  system
have  a  coroner,  medical  examiner,  or  coroners  and  medical  examiners?Medical
examiner.  The  office  of  county  medical  examiner  is  hereby  created  and  shall  be
maintained in each county, except that several counties may jointly maintain the office
on a cooperative basis. N.J. Stat. Ann. § 52:17B-83. "In practice" notesNone. Is there a
state medical examiner?Yes. N.J. Stat. Ann. § 52:17B-79. If so, what is the state medical
examiner's  role?The  State  Medical  Examiner  shall  have  general  supervision  over  the
administration  of  and  shall  enforce  the  provisions  of  this  act.  He  shall  have  general
supervision  over  all  county  medical  examiners.  He  shall  promulgate  such  rules  and
regulations as he may deem necessary to effectuate the provisions of this act. N.J. Stat.
Ann. § 52:17B-80. It shall be the duty of any county medical examiner to call upon the
State  Medical  Examiner  or  an  assistant  State  medical  examiner,  or  other  person
authorized and designated by the State Medical Examiner, to make an examination or
perform an autopsy whenever he deems it necessary or desirable, and it shall be the
duty of the State Medical Examiner or assistant State medical examiner to perform such
examination, except in such cases as a competent pathologist is so authorized by the
State Medical Examiner to perform such autopsy. N.J. Stat. Ann. § 52:17B-88. In what
department  or  agency  is  the  state  medical  examiner's  office  located?Division  of
Criminal  Justice  in  the  State  Department  of  Law  and  Public  Safety.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §
52:17B-79.  Are  there  deputies?The  county  medical  examiner  of  any  county  may,
subject  to  the  approval  of  the  board  of  chosen  freeholders,  appoint  such  assistant
medical examiners of the county . . . as shall be deemed necessary and required . . .
N.J. Stat. Ann. § 40A:9-47. If the county medical examiner is unable to perform any duty
imposed  upon  him  as  such  medical  examiner,  by  law,  he  may  appoint  a  resident
licensed physician to act for and in his behalf. The physician so appointed shall have all
the  powers  of  the  county  medical  examiner  and  shall  receive  compensation  for  his
services  to  be  paid  by  the  county.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §  40A:9-48.  The  county  medical
examiner may, subject to the approval of the board of chosen freeholders, appoint and
prescribe the duties of such deputy or assistant county medical examiners and other
personnel required for the proper performance of the duties of the office. N.J. Stat. Ann.
§ 52:17B-84. The Attorney General shall . . . appoint such other personnel as he may
consider  necessary  for  the  efficient  performance  of  the  work  of  the  [State  Medical
Examiner office]. He shall prescribe the duties of all such persons thus appointed . . .
N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §  52:17B-79.  If  so,  what  are  the  deputies'  roles?The  county  medical
examiner  of  any  county  may,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  board  of  chosen
freeholders,  appoint  such  assistant  medical  examiners  of  the  county  .  .  .  as  shall  be
deemed  necessary  and  required,  fix  their  compensation  and  prescribe  their  powers,
duties  and  functions.  The  assistant  medical  examiners  of  the  county  shall  have  the
same qualifications as the county medical examiner. The said personnel shall be under
the  direction  and  supervision  of  the  county  medical  examiner.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §
40A:9-47. If the county medical examiner is unable to perform any duty imposed upon
him as such medical examiner, by law, he may appoint a resident licensed physician to
act for and in his behalf. The physician so appointed shall have all the powers of the
county medical examiner and shall receive compensation for his services to be paid by
the county. N.J. Stat. Ann. § 40A:9-48. The county medical examiner may, subject to the
approval of the board of chosen freeholders, appoint and prescribe the duties of such
deputy  or  assistant  county  medical  examiners  and  other  personnel  required  for  the
proper performance of the duties of the office. N.J. Stat. Ann. § 52:17B-84. The Attorney
General shall . . . appoint such other personnel as he may consider necessary for the
efficient  performance  of  the  work  of  the  [State  Medical  Examiner  office].  He  shall
prescribe the duties of all such persons thus appointed . . . N.J. Stat. Ann. § 52:17B-79.
What are the qualifications for deputies?The assistant medical examiners of the county
shall  have  the  same  qualifications  as  the  county  medical  examiner.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §
40A:9-47.  He  shall  be  a  licensed  physician,  a  resident  of  the  county,  of  recognized
ability and good standing in his community, with such training or experience as may be
prescribed  by  standards  promulgated  by  the  State  Medical  Examiner  by  rule  or
regulation.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §  40A:9-46.  The  deputy  and  assistant  county  medical
examiners shall be licensed physicians and shall possess such qualifications as shall be
determined by the county medical examiner after consultation with the State Medical
Examiner. N.J. Stat. Ann.§ 52:17B-84. (a) Any . . . deputy or assistant county medical
examiner . . . shall be a physician fully licensed in the State of New Jersey of recognized
ability  and  good  standing  in  his  or  her  community,  and  shall  have  met  the  following
standards  relating  to  prior  training  and  experience:  1.  Successful  completion  of  a
minimum of 30 hours of basic education in death investigation conducted or sponsored
by  the  Armed  Forces  Institute  of  Pathology,  the  American  Society  of  Clinical
Pathologists, the College of American Pathologists, the National Association of Medical
Examiners, or an institution of higher education or other agency approved by the State
Medical Examiner. . . 2. Successful completion of a basic course conducted by the Office
of the State Medical Examiner on the laws, rules and regulations relating to the New
Jersey  Medical  Examiner  System.  3.  Successful  completion  of  seven  full  days  of
internship  training  at  the  New  Jersey  State  Medical  Examiner  Office  or  equivalent
approved by said office. (b) Any . . . deputy or assistant county medical examiner or
designated forensic pathologist . . . shall enroll in and complete a program of continuing
medical  education  in  the  forensic  sciences  for  a  minimum  of  20  hours  of  American
Medical Association Category I credit, every two years while holding said position. (c)
Any . . . deputy or assistant county medical examiner or designated forensic pathologist
. . . shall enroll in and complete a supplemental program conducted by the Office of the
State Medical Examiner on amendments to the laws, rules, and regulations relating to
the New Jersey Medical Examiner System or for any other necessary training. The State
Medical  Examiner  shall  conduct  such  courses  when  necessary.  (d)  Only  those  .  .  .
deputy  or  assistant  county  medical  examiners  or  forensic  pathologists  authorized  by
the  State  Medical  Examiner  as  competent  to  perform  autopsies  pursuant  to  N.J.S.A.
52:17B-88, shall perform such autopsies. Such person shall be qualified in one of the
following categories: 1. Pathologists who shall have completed a two-year program of
supervised training in anatomical pathology approved by the Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education of the American Medical Association are eligible to conduct
death investigations and to perform postmortem examinations and autopsies under the
direct  guidance  and  supervision  of  a  designated  pathologist  who  has  already  been
qualified to practice in an unsupervised capacity in the New Jersey Medical Examiner
System, pursuant to (d)2 below and under the general supervision of the State Medical
Examiner  as  provided  by  law.  The  reports  prepared  by  this  person  shall  be
countersigned  by  the  designated  pathologist  who  has  supervised  the  autopsy.  2.
Pathologists  who  qualify  as  anatomic  pathologists  as  defined  in  (d)1  above,  and  who
have  at  least  one  year  of  formal  supervised  training  in  a  forensic  pathology  program
approved  by  the  Accreditation  Council  for  Graduate  Medical  Education,  or  two  years
supervised  experience  in  forensic  pathology  in  a  situation  comparable  with  that  of  a
program  accredited  by  the  Accreditation  Council  for  Graduate  Medical  Education  are
eligible to conduct death investigations and to perform postmortem examinations and
autopsies under the general supervision of the State Medical Examiner as provided by
law.  3.  Physicians  of  any  specialty  who,  by  virtue  of  their  experience  in  a  medical
examiner system, are able to produce a portfolio of personal case studies acceptable to
the State Medical Examiner and who, further, are able to demonstrate by interview a
knowledgeable  approach  to  forensic  problems  may  be  declared  eligible  to  conduct
death investigations and to perform postmortem examinations and autopsies under the
general supervision of the State Medical Examiner as provided by law. (e) Nothing in
this  section  is  intended  to  prevent  a  qualified  person  from  serving  both  as  a  county
medical examiner or deputy or assistant county medical examiner and simultaneously
as  a  designated  pathologist  authorized  by  the  State  Medical  Examiner  to  perform
autopsies pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-88. N.J. Admin. Code 13:49-7.1. Is the coroner or
medical  examiner  position  elected?No,  [i]n  every  county  the  board  of  chosen
freeholders shall appoint a county medical examiner or join in the appointment of an
intercounty medical examiner in the manner and for the term provided by law. N.J. Stat.
Ann. § 40A:9-46. If so, how many years is the term of office?Not applicable. What are
the  qualifications  specified  by  law?The  county  medical  examiner  shall  be  a  licensed
physician, of recognized ability and good standing in his community, with such training
or  experience  as  may  be  prescribed  by  standards  promulgated  by  the  State  Medical
Examiner  by  rule  or  regulation.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §  52:17B-83.  He  shall  be  a  licensed
physician,  a  resident  of  the  county,  of  recognized  ability  and  good  standing  in  his
community,  with  such  training  or  experience  as  may  be  prescribed  by  standards
promulgated  by  the  State  Medical  Examiner  by  rule  or  regulation.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §
40A:9-46. State Medical Examiner . . . shall be a duly licensed physician, a graduate of a
regularly  chartered  and  legally  constituted  medical  school  or  college  and  a  qualified
forensic  pathologist.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §  52:17B-79.  (a)  Any  person  appointed  or
reappointed to the position of county medical examiner pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-83,
deputy or assistant county medical examiner pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-84, or forensic
pathologist  authorized  by  the  State  Medical  Examiner  pursuant  to  N.J.S.A.  52:17B-88,
on or after the effective date of this subchapter shall be a physician fully licensed in the
State of New Jersey of recognized ability and good standing in his or her community,
and shall have met the following standards relating to prior training and experience: 1.
Successful  completion  of  a  minimum  of  30  hours  of  basic  education  in  death
investigation conducted or sponsored by the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, the
American  Society  of  Clinical  Pathologists,  the  College  of  American  Pathologists,  the
National Association of Medical Examiners, or an institution of higher education or other
agency approved by the State Medical Examiner. i. In addition, all persons appointed or
reappointed to the position of county medical examiner pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-83
on  or  after  the  effective  date  of  this  subchapter  who  are  to  serve  in  the  capacity  of
"County  Medical  Examiner",  in  addition  to  the  above  educational  requirement,  shall
have completed a minimum of 20 hours of advanced education in death investigation
conducted  or  sponsored  by  the  Armed  Forces  Institute  of  Pathology,  the  American
Society  of  Clinical  Pathologists,  the  College  of  American  Pathologists,  the  National
Association of Medical Examiners, or an institution of higher education or other agency
approved  by  the  State  Medical  Examiner.  2.  Successful  completion  of  a  basic  course
conducted  by  the  Office  of  the  State  Medical  Examiner  on  the  laws,  rules  and
regulations  relating  to  the  New  Jersey  Medical  Examiner  System.  3.  Successful
completion  of  seven  full  days  of  internship  training  at  the  New  Jersey  State  Medical
Examiner Office or equivalent approved by said office. (b) Any person appointed to or
holding  the  position  of  county  medical  examiner,  deputy  or  assistant  county  medical
examiner  or  designated  forensic  pathologist  on  or  after  the  effective  date  of  these
amendments shall enroll in and complete a program of continuing medical education in
the  forensic  sciences  for  a  minimum  of  20  hours  of  American  Medical  Association
Category I credit, every two years while holding said position. (c) Any person appointed
to  or  holding  the  position  of  county  medical  examiner,  deputy  or  assistant  county
medical  examiner  or  designated  forensic  pathologist  on  or  after  the  effective  date  of
this subsection shall enroll in and complete a supplemental program conducted by the
Office of the State Medical Examiner on amendments to the laws, rules and regulations
relating to the New Jersey Medical Examiner System or for any other necessary training.
The State Medical Examiner shall conduct such courses when necessary. (d) Only those
county  medical  examiners,  deputy  or  assistant  county  medical  examiners  or  forensic
pathologists  authorized  by  the  State  Medical  Examiner  as  competent  to  perform
autopsies  pursuant  to  N.J.S.A.  52:17B-88,  shall  perform  such  autopsies.  Such  person
shall  be  qualified  in  one  of  the  following  categories:  1.  Pathologists  who  shall  have
completed a two-year program of supervised training in anatomical pathology approved
by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education of the American Medical
Association  are  eligible  to  conduct  death  investigations  and  to  perform  postmortem
examinations and autopsies under the direct guidance and supervision of a designated
pathologist who has already been qualified to practice in an unsupervised capacity in
the New Jersey Medical Examiner System, pursuant to (d)2 below and under the general
supervision of the State Medical Examiner as provided by law. The reports prepared by
this person shall be countersigned by the designated pathologist who has supervised
the  autopsy.  2.  Pathologists  who  qualify  as  anatomic  pathologists  as  defined  in  (d)1
above,  and  who  have  at  least  one  year  of  formal  supervised  training  in  a  forensic
pathology  program  approved  by  the  Accreditation  Council  for  Graduate  Medical
Education,  or  two  years  supervised  experience  in  forensic  pathology  in  a  situation
comparable with that of a program accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical  Education  are  eligible  to  conduct  death  investigations  and  to  perform
postmortem  examinations  and  autopsies  under  the  general  supervision  of  the  State
Medical Examiner as provided by law. 3. Physicians of any specialty who, by virtue of
their  experience  in  a  medical  examiner  system,  are  able  to  produce  a  portfolio  of
personal case studies acceptable to the State Medical Examiner and who, further, are
able to demonstrate by interview a knowledgeable approach to forensic problems may
be  declared  eligible  to  conduct  death  investigations  and  to  perform  postmortem
examinations  and  autopsies  under  the  general  supervision  of  the  State  Medical
Examiner  as  provided  by  law.  (e)  Nothing  in  this  section  is  intended  to  prevent  a
qualified person from serving both as a county medical examiner or deputy or assistant
county medical examiner and simultaneously as a designated pathologist authorized by
the  State  Medical  Examiner  to  perform  autopsies  pursuant  to  N.J.S.A.  52:17B-88.  N.J.
Admin.  Code  13:49-7.1.  What  types  of  deaths  are  required  to  be  investigated?An
investigation shall be conducted in the manner hereinafter described in the case of all
human  deaths  from  the  following  causes:  a.  Violent  deaths,  whether  apparently
homicidal,  suicidal  or  accidental,  including  but  not  limited  to  death  due  to  thermal,
chemical,  electrical  or  radiation  injury  and  deaths  due  to  criminal  abortion,  whether
apparently self-induced or not; b. Deaths not caused by readily recognizable disease,
disability or infirmity; c. Deaths under suspicious or unusual circumstances; d. Deaths
within  24  hours  after  admission  to  a  hospital  or  institution;  e.  Deaths  of  inmates  of
prisons;  f.  Deaths  of  inmates  of  institutions  maintained  in  whole  or  in  part  at  the
expense  of  the  State  or  county,  where  the  inmate  was  not  hospitalized  therein  for
organic disease; g. Deaths from causes which might constitute a threat to public health;
h. Deaths related to disease resulting from employment or to accident while employed;
and i. Sudden or unexpected deaths of infants and children under 3 years of age and
fetal  deaths  occurring  without  medical  attendance.  N.J.  Stat.  Ann.  §  52:17B-86.  What
types of deaths are required to be autopsied?1. All cases of apparent homicidal deaths;
2. All deaths occurring under suspicious or unusual circumstances; 3. All deaths from
causes which might constitute a threat to public health; 4. All deaths of inmates of jail,
prison, or penitentiary and all prisoners and suspects who were in the process of being
detained,  arrested  or  transported  by  guards,  police  and  law  enforcement  or  court
officers unless the suspected cause of death is a known condition for which the inmate,
prisoner  or  suspect  is  hospitalized  and  being  treated  at  the  time  of  death,  and  the
medical  examiner's  investigation,  review  of  hospital  records,  and  examination  of  the
decedent's  body  permit  him  or  her  to  determine  the  cause  of  death  beyond  a
reasonable doubt without an autopsy, and no other issues of public interest compel his
or her conclusion that an autopsy is necessary; 5. All infants and children suspected of
having been abused or neglected and children suspected of having died from sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS); 6. In all cases wherein the State Medical Examiner, the
Attorney General, any assignment judge of the Superior Court, or the county prosecutor
(of the county wherein the injury occurred or where the decedent expired) requests an
autopsy; 7. In all cases otherwise under the Medical Examiner's jurisdiction where the
decedent has been identified as a potential donor pursuant to P.L. 1969, c.161 (N.J.S.A.
26:6-57  et  seq.),  the  medical  examiner  shall  perform  any  necessary  examination,
autopsy  or  analysis  of  any  organ  or  tissue  in  a  manner  and  within  a  time  period
compatible with preservation of the organ or tissue for the purpose of transplantation.
N.J.  Admin.  Code  13:49-1.1.  [A]utopsies  may  be  performed  when  it  appears  in  the
discretion  of  the  county  medical  examiner  to  be  in  the  public  interest  to  do  so  in  all
cases of human deaths occurring in the following circumstances: 1. All cases of violent
deaths which are apparently suicidal or accidental, including but not limited to deaths
due to thermal, chemical, electrical or radiation injury, except as enumerated in N.J.A.C.
13:49-1.1, Mandatory autopsies; 2. All deaths caused by disease, disability or infirmity
which  are  not  readily  recognizable;  3.  All  deaths  of  inmates  as  defined  in  N.J.S.A.
52:17B-86(f) occurring in institutions maintained in whole or in part at the expense of
the State or county when the inmate was not hospitalized therein for organic disease; 4.
All  deaths  related  to  diseases  resulting  from  employment  or  from  accidents  while
employed; 5. All deaths from motor vehicle collisions to include drivers, occupants, and
pedestrians.  N.J.  Admin.  Code  13:49-1.2.  Does  the  state  require  that  pathologists
perform the autopsies?No. Information available on this website that was not developed
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) does not necessarily represent
any  CDC  policy,  position,  or  endorsement  of  that  information  or  of  its  sources.  The
information contained on this website is not legal advice; if you have questions about a
specific law or its application you should consult your legal counsel. The Public Health
Law Program works to improve the health of the public by developing law-related tools
and providing legal technical assistance to public health practitioners and policy makers
in state, tribal, local, and territorial (STLT) jurisdictions. Languages Language Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/phlp/php/coroner/new-jersey.html
