Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  2024  Q2  (June)  NHSN  Newsletter  [PDF  –  1,011  KB]  2024  Q1
(March)  NHSN  Newsletter  [PDF  –  695  KB]  December  2019  NHSN  Newsletter  [PDF  –  1
MB]
Inside this issue – newly published NHSN surveillance reports, information on the 2020
Patient Safety and Outpatient Procedure Component protocols and related documents,
new  analysis  resource  guides  for  the  OPC,  updates  on  NHSN  Training  for  2020,  and
more! September 2019 NHSN Newsletter [PDF – 1 MB]
Inside this Issue – information on the 2020 PSC and OPC Manual Changes, NHSN 2019
Tool  Kit  and  Guidance  for  External  Validation,  updates  on  the  NHSN  Pilot  of  Federal
Register to Solicit Input on Surveillance Definitions, information on the opportunity to
beta test the NHSN 9.4 release, and more! June 2019 NHSN Members Meeting at APIC
[PDF – 4 MB]
Association  for  Professionals  in  Infection  Control  and  Epidemiology  2019  Annual
Conference.  NHSN  Members  Meeting  topics  include  NHSN  Education  and  Training
updates,  information  on  the  Federal  Register  Notice  pilot,  updates  for  Neonatal  and
Pediatric work, MDRO/CDI, SSI, CDA, AUR, Long-term Care and more. June 2019 NHSN
Newsletter [PDF – 1 MB]
Inside this Issue – updates to the PedVAE calculator, changes to CMS Quality Reporting
Programs:  LTACHs,  IRFs,  and  IRF  units  within  a  hospital,  Outpatient  Procedure
Component (OPC) FAQs, and more! March 2019 NHSN Newsletter [PDF – 500 KB]
Inside  this  Issue  –  updated  FAQS,  updated  guidance  related  to  the  use  of  the  NHSN
Operative Procedure Codes, reminders for the Outpatient Procedure Component (OPC),
and more!    Inside this issue – Preparing for 2015 NHSN reporting including information
on new NHSN manuals and data collection forms, updated HAI surveillance definitions,
CMS reporting requirements, new training resources and more. Inside this issue – Data
for CMS quality reporting programs due soon, new NHSN reporting to fulfill CMS quality
reporting  programs,  HAI  surveillance  changes  for  2015  and  more.  Inside  this  issue  –
Information  on  the  new  Dialysis  Component,  unusual  susceptibility  profiles  alert,
Antimicrobial  Resistance  (AR)  Option,  reporting  for  the  2014-2015  influenza  season,
training updates, planned NHSN HAI surveillance protocol updates for 2015 and more.
Association  for  Professionals  in  Infection  Control  and  Epidemiology  2014  Annual
Conference.  NHSN  topics  include  Enrollment  /SAMS  update,  protocol  changes,
application updates, update on CMS reporting, electronic reporting, training news and
more.  Inside  this  issue  –  Update  on  Medicare  Beneficiary  Number  for  CMS  reporting,
highlight  of  SAMS  migration  process,  information  on  the  new  NHSN  LabID  Event
Calculator, reminder for CMS data submission, analysis tips and more.  Inside this issue
– Update on the 2014 CMS quality reporting rules, reminders about completing annual
surveys,  information  on  2014  protocol  changes,  guidance  on  changing  location
descriptions in NHSN, and more. Inside this issue – Update on NHSN’s proposed use of
CPT
 codes
 for
 SSI
 surveillance,
 information
 about
 2014
 protocol
 changes,
announcements regarding new educational opportunities with NHSN, reminders about
due dates and CMS quality reporting requirements for 2014, and more. Inside this issue
–  Important  information  about  influenza  vaccination  of  healthcare  personnel  and  the
NHSN  Demo  application,  updates  on  NHSN’s  proposed  use  of  CPT  codes  for  SSI
surveillance and NHSN’s VAE protocol, announcements about some upcoming webinars
(topics are the Hospital IQR Program, MRSA/C. difficile reporting, and the Hemovigilance
Module),  and  reminders  about  due  dates  and  requirements  for  CMS  quality  reporting
programs.  Association  for  Professionals  in  Infection  Control  and  Epidemiology  2013
Annual Conference. Topics included Protocol changes, NHSN application enhancements,
update on CMS reporting, training news and more. Inside this Issue – Recent changes
and updates to NHSN, a new 2013 NHSN Patient Safety Protocol Errata, information for
CMS  quality  reporting  programs,  and  NHSN  at  the  annual  APIC  meeting  in  Ft.
Lauderdale,  FL  in  June.   Inside  This  Issue  –  Information  about  the  Outpatient  Dialysis
Center  Practices  Survey  and  NHSN  changes  for  2013,  as  well  as  a  tribute  to  Teresa
Horan as she retires from CDC at the end of this year. Inside This Issue—Information
about  the  new  module  for  reporting  HCP  Influenza  Vaccination,  reminders  about
requirements  for  CMS’s  various  quality  reporting  programs,  and  updates  about  the
Biovigilance  Component  of  NHSN.  Inside  This  Issue—The  Ventilator-Associated  Event
(VAE) Surveillance protocol for adults. Inside This Issue – Upcoming Changes to NHSN in
Release 7.0, Biovigilance Component and more… Inside This Issue – NHSN Announces
Updates  to  the  Hemovigilance  Module,  Reminders  and  Tips  for  Participants  in  CMS’s
Hospital IQR Program and more…  Inside This Issue – Ensuring Your CLABSI Data Get to
CMS,  Conferring  Rights  Functionality,  Medication-associated  Module  is  Relaunched,
Biovigilance Updates and more… Inside This Issue – Denominator Simplification Project
Update, Primary vs. Secondary BSI.  Inside This Issue – CMS Hospital Inpatient Quality
Reporting  Program,  NHSN  Puroses  and  Confidentiality  Assurance  Changes,  NHSN
Application  Updates.  Inside  This  Issue  –  Updated  December  2010.  Your  Guide  to  the
Standardized  Infection  Ratio,  Central  Line-associated  Bloodstream  Infection  (CLABSI)
SIRs,  Surgical  Site  Infection  (SSI)  SIRs,  Samples  of  SIR  Output  and  List  of  SIR  Risk
Factors.  Inside  This  Issue  –  Biovigilance  Component  Updates,  Case  Studies,  Patient
Safety Manual and Document Updates, Spotlight: CDC/DHQP Visits Facilities in Oregon
and  Questions  and  Answers.  Inside  This  Issue  –  ARRA  CDC  Funding,  Healthcare
Personnel  Safety,  Prevent  Infections  in  Hemodialysis,  Hemovigilance,  Questions  and
Answers and What is SAIC? Inside This Issue – Updates to ICD-9-CM, Updated High Risk
Inpatient Influenza Vaccination, NHSN drops CSEP Requirement and Digital Certificate
Renewals Inside This Issue – A Rale is Just a Rale…or is it? Can’t Generate Aggregate
CAUTI Data? Case of the Missing Manual, Questions and Answers and Digital Certificate
Renewals.  Inside  This  Issue  –  NHSN  Members  Meeting,  Corrected  UC-associated  BSI
Rates, Saving Keystrokes When Entering SSI Events, Need to Enroll Another Facility?,
NHSN Releases Version 4.0.2.7, UTI Reminder, Questions and Answers. Inside This Issue
–  NHSN  Helpdesk  Tips,  Changing  Your  Email  Address,  Annual  Facility  Surveys,
Reassignment of Facility Administrator Inside This Issue – Updated Operative Procedure
Codes,  Need  help  with  specific  event  criteria?,  Annual  Facility  Surveys,  New  NHSN
Facility Administrator, Reminders about Digital Certificates and Implant and Transplant
Definitions  Inside  This  Issue  –  New  Version  of  NHSN  Coming  Soon,  NHSN  Contact
Information,  Inactive  Users,  Protocol  Pointers,  Use  ID#  when  requesting  assistance,
SHEA/CDC Epidemiology Course and NHSN Statistics – July 24, 2008. Inside This Issue –
NHSN  Member  Meetings,  NHSN  Publications,  Monthly  Data  Reporting  Requirement,
Setting the “Date Variable” option in analysis, Protocol Pointers and NHSN Statistics –
March  31,  2008.  Inside  This  Issue  –  Central  Line  Insertion  Practices  (CLIP)  measure
coming  soon!  Changing  your  email  address,  Conferring  rights  to  Survey  data  in  a
Group, Protocol Pointers, Attribution of SSIs and Pneumonia and secondary BSI  
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/newsletters/index.html
