Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.      The  National  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey
(NHANES) is a program of studies designed to assess the health and nutritional status
of  adults  and  children  in  the  United  States.  The  survey  is  unique  in  that  it  combines
interviews  and  physical  examinations.  NHANES  is  a  major  program  of  the  National
Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). NCHS is part of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) and has the responsibility for producing vital and health statistics for
the Nation. The NHANES program began in the early 1960s and has been conducted as
a series of surveys focusing on different population groups or health topics. In 1999, the
survey became a continuous program that has a changing focus on a variety of health
and  nutrition  measurements  to  meet  emerging  needs.  The  survey  examines  a
nationally representative sample of about 5,000 persons each year. These persons are
located in counties across the country, 15 of which are visited each year. The NHANES
interview includes demographic, socioeconomic, dietary, and health-related questions.
The
 examination
 component
 consists
 of
 medical,
 dental,
 and
 physiological
measurements,  as  well  as  laboratory  tests  administered  by  highly  trained  medical
personnel. Findings from this survey will be used to determine the prevalence of major
diseases  and  risk  factors  for  diseases.  Information  will  be  used  to  assess  nutritional
status  and  its  association  with  health  promotion  and  disease  prevention.  NHANES
findings  are  also  the  basis  for  national  standards  for  such  measurements  as  height,
weight,  and  blood  pressure.  Data  from  this  survey  will  be  used  in  epidemiological
studies  and  health  sciences  research,  which  help  develop  sound  public  health  policy,
direct and design health programs and services, and expand the health knowledge for
the Nation.       As in past health examination surveys, data will be collected on the
prevalence  of  chronic  conditions  in  the  population.  Estimates  for  previously
undiagnosed conditions, as well as those known to and reported by respondents, are
produced through the survey. Such information is a particular strength of the NHANES
program.  Risk  factors,  those  aspects  of  a  person’s  lifestyle,  constitution,  heredity,  or
environment  that  may  increase  the  chances  of  developing  a  certain  disease  or
condition, will be examined. Smoking, alcohol consumption, sexual practices, drug use,
physical fitness and activity, weight, and dietary intake will be studied. Data on certain
aspects  of  reproductive  health,  such  as  use  of  oral  contraceptives  and  breastfeeding
practices, will also be collected. The diseases, medical conditions, and health indicators
to  be  studied  include:  The  sample  for  the  survey  is  selected  to  represent  the  U.S.
population of all ages. To produce reliable statistics, NHANES over-samples persons 60
and older, African Americans, and Hispanics. Since the United States has experienced
dramatic  growth  in  the  number  of  older  people  during  this  century,  the  aging
population  has  major  implications  for  health  care  needs,  public  policy,  and  research
priorities. NCHS is working with public health agencies to increase the knowledge of the
health  status  of  older  Americans.  NHANES  has  a  primary  role  in  this  endeavor.  All
participants  visit  the  physician.  Dietary  interviews  and  body  measurements  are
included for everyone. All but the very young have a blood sample taken and will have
a  dental  screening.  Depending  upon  the  age  of  the  participant,  the  rest  of  the
examination  includes  tests  and  procedures  to  assess  the  various  aspects  of  health
listed above. In general, the older the individual, the more extensive the examination.  
    Health interviews are conducted in respondents’ homes. Health measurements are
performed in specially-designed and equipped mobile centers, which travel to locations
throughout  the  country.  The  study  team  consists  of  a  physician,  medical  and  health
technicians,  as  well  as  dietary  and  health  interviewers.  Many  of  the  study  staff  are
bilingual  (English/Spanish).  An  advanced  computer  system  using  high-end  servers,
desktop  PCs,  and  wide-area  networking  collect  and  process  all  of  the  NHANES  data,
nearly eliminating the need for paper forms and manual coding operations. This system
allows  interviewers  to  use  notebook  computers  with  electronic  pens.  The  staff  at  the
mobile center can automatically transmit data into data bases through such devices as
digital  scales  and  stadiometers.  Touch-sensitive  computer  screens  let  respondents
enter  their  own  responses  to  certain  sensitive  questions  in  complete  privacy.  Survey
information is available to NCHS staff within 24 hours of collection, which enhances the
capability  of  collecting  quality  data  and  increases  the  speed  with  which  results  are
released  to  the  public.  In  each  location,  local  health  and  government  officials  are
notified of the upcoming survey. Households in the study area receive a letter from the
NCHS  Director  to  introduce  the  survey.  Local  media  may  feature  stories  about  the
survey. NHANES is designed to facilitate and encourage participation. Transportation is
provided to and from the mobile center if necessary. Participants receive compensation
and a report of medical findings is given to each participant. All information collected in
the  survey  is  kept  strictly  confidential.  Privacy  is  protected  by  public  laws.       
Information from NHANES is made available through an extensive series of publications
and  articles  in  scientific  and  technical  journals.  For  data  users  and  researchers
throughout  the  world,  survey  data  are  available  on  the  internet  and  on  easy-to-use
CD-ROMs.  Research  organizations,  universities,  health  care  providers,  and  educators
benefit  from  survey  information.  Primary  data  users  are  federal  agencies  that
collaborated  in  the  design  and  development  of  the  survey.  The  National  Institutes  of
Health, the Food and Drug Administration, and CDC are among the agencies that rely
upon  NHANES  to  provide  data  essential  for  the  implementation  and  evaluation  of
program activities. The U.S. Department of Agriculture and NCHS cooperate in planning
and reporting dietary and nutrition information from the survey. NHANES’ partnership
with  the  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency  allows  continued  study  of  the  many
important  environmental  influences  on  our  health.  NHANES’  record  of  important
accomplishments  is  made  possible  by  the  thousands  of  Americans  who  have
participated.  Because  NHANES  is  now  an  ongoing  program,  the  information  collected
contributes  to  annual  estimates  in  topic  areas  included  in  the  survey.  For  small
population  groups  and  less  prevalent  conditions  and  diseases,  data  must  be
accumulated  over  several  years  to  provide  adequate  estimates.  The  new  continuous
design  also  allows  increased  flexibility  in  survey  content.  Results  of  NHANES  benefit
people  in  the  United  States  in  important  ways.  Facts  about  the  distribution  of  health
problems  and  risk  factors  in  the  population  give  researchers  important  clues  to  the
causes  of  disease.  Information  collected  from  the  current  survey  is  compared  with
information  collected  in  previous  surveys.  This  allows  health  planners  to  detect  the
extent  various  health  problems  and  risk  factors  have  changed  in  the  U.S.  population
over time. By identifying the health care needs of the population, government agencies
and  private  sector  organizations  can  establish  policies  and  plan  research,  education,
and  health  promotion  programs  that  help  improve  present  health  status  and  will
prevent future health problems.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/about_nhanes.htm
