Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.   Disclaimer: Mention of any company name or product does
not constitute endorsement by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
In June 1995, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) updated
and modernized the Federal regulation for certifying air-purifying particulate respirators
[42 CFR Part 84]. The respirators certified under this new regulation are tested under
much more demanding conditions, and they provide increased worker protection. These
new respirators also provide significant cost savings: Estimates indicate that the health
care  industry  alone  will  save  millions  of  dollars  as  a  result  of  this  new  generation  of
practical  and  efficient  respirators.  This  guide  was  designed  to  explain  the  new
regulation  and  to  provide  valuable  information  for  selecting  and  using  the  new
respirators  certified  by  NIOSH.  We  greatly  appreciate  the  assistance  of  respirator
manufacturers  and  others  in  making  this  information  available  to  all  employers  and
respirator program managers. We believe this information will help protect the health
and lives of U.S. workers who wear particulate filter respirators. Linda Rosenstock, M.D.,
M.P.H.
Director, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention This document was initially drafted by Jeff
Bryant  and  Walter  Ruch.  Technical  review  and  assistance  were  provided  by  Roland
Berry  Ann,  Nancy  Bollinger,  Donald  Campbell,  Bryan  Hardin,  Linda  Martin,  Richard
Metzler, Ernest Moyer, Robert Mullan, and Laurence Reed. We thank Judy Hudnall and
Dick  Carlson  for  art  work  and  cover  design,  Anne  Hamilton  for  editing,  and  Diane
Manning for preparation of the manuscript and the camera-ready copy. NIOSH thanks
the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA), particularly Anna-Marie DiPasquale,
John  Meagher,  and  Tom  Nelson,  for  providing  the  facilities  and  organizing  the  joint
AIHA/NIOSH technical workshop (July 1995). Thanks to all the workshop participants and
many  reviewers  who  helped  in  completing  this  document.  This  summary  presents  a
brief overview of what the respirator user needs to know about the new categories of
particulate  respirators  certified  by  the  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and
Health  (NIOSH).  NIOSH  has  developed  a  new  set  of  regulations  in  42  CFR*  84  (also
referred  to  as  “Part  84”)  for  testing  and  certifying  nonpowered,  air-purifying,
particulate-filter  respirators.  The  new  Part  84  respirators  have  passed  a  more
demanding  certification  test  than  the  old  respirators  (e.g.,  dust  and  mist  [DM],  dust,
fume  and  mist  [DFM],  spray  paint,  pesticide,  etc.)  certified  under  30  CFR  11  (also
referred  to  as  “Part  11”).  Changes  in  the  new  regulations  involve  only  nonpowered,
air-purifying,  particulate-filter  respirators.  Certification  requirements  for  all  other
classes  of  respirators  (e.g.,  chemical  cartridges,  self-contained  breathing  apparatus
[SCBA], airlines, gas masks without a particulate filter, powered air-purifying respirators
[PAPRs]  equipped  with  high-efficiency  particulate  air  [HEPA]  filters,  etc.)  have  been
transferred to Part 84 without change. Until further notice, the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) is allowing the continued use of Part 11 particulate-filter
respirators.  Under  Part  84,  NIOSH  is  allowing  manufacturers  to  continue  selling  and
shipping Part 11 particulate filters as NIOSH-certified until July 10, 1998. The new Part
84 regulation provides for nine classes of filters (three levels of filter efficiency,† each
with three categories of resistance to filter efficiency degradation‡). The three levels of
filter efficiency are 95%, 99%, and 99.97%. The three categories of resistance to filter
efficiency degradation are labeled N, R, and P. The class of filter will be clearly marked
on the filter, filter package, or respirator box. For example, a filter marked N95 would
mean an N-series filter that is at least 95% efficient. Chemical cartridges that include
particulate  filter  elements  will  carry  a  similar  marking  that  pertains  only  to  the
particulate  filter  element.  The  new  classes  of  nonpowered  particulate  respirators
require new decision logic for selection of the proper respirator. The selection process
for  using  the  new  particulate  classification  is  discussed  fully  in  Section  II  (Detailed
Guidelines  for  Use)  and  outlined  as  follows:  Note:  To  help  you  remember  the  filter
series, use the following guide:  *Code of Federal Regulations. See CFR in references. 
†Filter  efficiency  is  the  stated  percentage  of  particles  removed  from  the  air.   ‡Filter
efficiency degradation is defined as a lowering of filter efficiency or a reduction in the
ability of the filter to remove particles as a result of workplace exposure. The purpose of
this user’s guide is (1) to familiarize respirator users with the new Part 84 certification
regulations for particulate respirators, and (2) to provide guidance for the selection and
use of the new particulate respirators. The new regulation became effective on July 10,
1995, and replaces the old Part 11 regulation under which NIOSH and the Mine Safety
and  Health  Administration  (MSHA)  jointly  certified  respirators  before  that  date.  These
guidelines  are  written  for  those  responsible  for  establishing  and  administering  an
acceptable respiratory protection program. These individuals should be knowledgeable
about the basic elements of a respiratory protection program as required in the OSHA
respiratory protection standard [29 CFR 1910.134] and as recommended in the NIOSH
Guide  to  Industrial  Respiratory  Protection  [NIOSH  1987],  the  American  National
Standard for Respiratory Protection (ANSI Z88.2-1992) [ANSI 1992], and the American
Industrial Hygiene Association Respiratory Protection Manual [AIHA 1993]. The old Part
11 respirator certification regulation [30 CFR 11] was promulgated in 1972. Some of the
particulate filter certification tests dated from Bureau of Mines procedures during the
1930s and were never significantly updated. New research, testing, and manufacturing
technology have made the particulate filter certification procedures in Part 11 outdated.
Only  certifications  of  nonpowered,  air-purifying,  particulate-filter  respirators  are
affected by this change from Part 11 to Part 84. Powered, air-purifying, particulate-filter
respirators will be addressed in a future revision to Part 84. The remaining portions of
Part 11 are incorporated into Part 84 without change. This limited revision provides for
certification tests using a worst-case penetrating aerosol (i.e., an aerosol that produces
maximum filter penetration) so that the new certified filters can be used against any
size  of  particulate  in  the  workplace.  Other  respirator  testing  and  certification
procedures will be addressed through a series of future changes to Part 84. On July 10,
1995, 30 CFR 11 was replaced by 42 CFR 84 as an active regulation. As of that date,
NIOSH no longer accepts applications for new approvals or for extension of approvals
under  Part  11  regulations.  All  nonpowered,  air-purifying,  particulate-filter  respirators
approved under Part 84 must meet the new performance standard. However, the new
regulation  permits  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  nonpowered  particulate  respirators
certified  under  Part  11  until  July  10,  1998.  This  3-year  period  will  provide  time  for
manufacturers to have new respirators approved and manufactured to meet demand.
OSHA, MSHA, and other regulatory agencies have the authority to set a use deadline for
30 CFR 11 filters purchased before July 10, 1998. A new sequence of approval numbers
(TC-84A-xxxx) is used for nonpowered particulate respirators certified under Part 84. All
other respirator types will continue to use the sequence of approval numbers previously
used for Part 11 because the requirements for these other types have not changed. For
example, the number series TC-13F-xxxx indicates an SCBA that is certified under the
provisions of either the old Part 11 or the new Part 84. Similarly, PAPRs for particulates
that  are  certified  under  the  new  Part  84  will  continue  to  be  numbered  with  the
sequence  TC-21C-xxxx  (as  they  were  numbered  under  Part  11)  because  the
certification requirements have not yet changed. Appendix A shows examples of the old
Part  11  and  the  new  Part  84  certification  labels.  All  particulate  respirators  approved
under Part 84 will have a certification label bearing the NIOSH and the Department of
Health and Human Services (DHHS) emblems, whereas those approved under Part 11
have the emblems of NIOSH and MSHA. This allows the user to distinguish particulate
respirators  certified  before  July  10,  1995,  under  Part  11  from  particulate  respirators
certified after that date under Part 84. The revised testing requirements for particulate
filters  are  much  more  demanding  than  the  old  Part  11  tests,  and  they  provide  much
better  evidence  of  the  filter’s  ability  to  remove  airborne  particles.  The  new
requirements  are  consistent  with  20  years  of  advances  in  respiratory  protection
technology. The Part 84 certification regulation provides for nine classes of filters (three
levels  of  filter  efficiency,  with  three  categories  of  resistance  to  filter  efficiency
degradation). The three levels of filter efficiency are 95%, 99%, and 99.97%. The three
categories of resistance to filter efficiency degradation are labeled N (Not resistant to
oil),  R  (Resistant  to  oil),  and  P  (oil  Proof)  (see  Table  1).  These  new  certification
categories apply only to nonpowered, air-purifying, particulate-filter respirators. PAPRs
for  particulates  will  be  approved  only  with  high-efficiency  filters.  PAPRs  will  not  be
approved  with  DM  or  DFM  filters  under  Part  84.  This  rule  also  eliminates  the
combination  categories  of  paint  spray  and  pesticide  respirator  approvals;  however,
other combination respirators (e.g., particulates and acid gases or organic vapors) will
be  certified  under  Part  84.   *NIOSH  will  be  conducting  and  encouraging  other
researchers to conduct studies to assure that these service time recommendations are
adequate.  If  research  indicates  the  need,  additional  service  time  limitations  may  be
recommended by NIOSH for specific workplace conditions.  †NaCl = sodium chloride. 
‡Limited by considerations of hygiene, damage, and breathing resistance.  §High (200
mg) filter loading in the certification test is intended to address the potential for filter
efficiency degradation by solid or water-based (i.e., non-oil) aerosols in the workplace.
Accordingly,  there  is  no  recommended  service  time  limit  in  most  workplace  settings.
However, in dirty workplaces (high aerosol concentrations), service time should only be
extended  beyond  8  hours  of  use  (continuous  or  intermittent)  by  performing  an
evaluation  in  specific  workplace  settings  that:  a)  demonstrates  extended  use  will  not
degrade the filter efficiency below the certified efficiency level, or (b) demonstrates the
total  mass  loading  of  the  filter  is  less  than  200  mg  (100  mg  per  filter  for  dual-filter
respirators).   **DOP  oil  =  dioctyl  phthalate.   ††No  specific  service  time  limit  when  oil
aerosols are not present. In the presence of oil aerosols, service time may be extended
beyond 8 hours of use (continuous or intermittent) by (a) demonstrating that extended
use  will  not  degrade  the  filter  efficiency  below  the  certified  efficiency  level,  or  (b)
demonstrating that the total mass loading of the filter is less than 200 mg (100 mg per
filter  for  dual-filter  respirators).   ‡‡The  P100  filter  must  be  color-coded  magenta.  The
Part  84  Subpart  KK  HEPA  filter  on  a  PAPR  will  also  be  magenta,  but  the  label  will  be
different  from  the  P100  filter,  and  the  two  filters  cannot  be  interchanged.  NIOSH
established the new test criteria to simulate worst-case respirator use and very severe
test  conditions.  These  filters  can  be  used  without  particle  size  analysis  or  filter
penetration testing in the workplace. R- or P-series filters should be selected if there are
oil  (e.g.,  lubricants,  cutting  fluids,  glycerine)  or  non-oil  aerosols  in  the  workplace.
N-series filters should be used only for non-oil (i.e., solid and water-based) aerosols. 
Note:  To  help  you  remember  the  filter  series,  use  the  following  guide:  The  filter
certification  test  is  called  worst-case  (i.e.,  it  produces  maximum  filter  penetration)
because the test conditions are the most severe that are likely to be encountered in a
work  environment.  These  conditions  are:  The  degradation  categories  (N-,  R-,  and
P-series) will be determined by using either sodium chloride (NaCl) or dioctyl phthalate
(DOP)  as  the  test  aerosol.  NaCl  is  only  slightly  degrading  to  filter  efficiency,  whereas
DOP  is  very  degrading.  Respirators  tested  with  NaCl  (i.e.,  N-series  filters)  are  not
resistant to efficiency degradation by oils and should be used only in workplaces free of
oil  aerosols.  Filters  passing  DOP  oil  tests  (i.e.,  R-  and  P-series  filters)  are  resistant  to
efficiency degradation and can be used for protection against any aerosols (including
oil-based particulates) in the workplace. The service life of all three categories of filters
efficiency degradation (i.e., N-, R-, and P-series) is limited by considerations of hygiene,
damage,  and  breathing  resistance.  All  filters  should  be  replaced  whenever  they  are
damaged,  soiled,  or  causing  noticeably  increased  breathing  resistance  (e.g.,  causing
discomfort to the wearer). R- or P-series filters can be used for protection against oil or
non-oil aerosols. N-series filters should be used only for non-oil aerosols. Use and reuse
of the P-series filters would be subject only to considerations of hygiene, damage, and
increased  breathing  resistance.  Generally,  the use and  reuse of N-series filters would
also  be  subject  only  to  considerations  of  hygiene,  damage,  and  increased  breathing
resistance.  However,  for  dirty  workplaces  that  could  result  in  high  filter  loading  (i.e.,
200  mg),  service  time  for  N-series  filters  should  be  extended  beyond  8  hours  of  use
(continuous or intermittent) by performing an evaluation in specific workplace settings
that:  (a)  demonstrates  extended  use  will  not  degrade  the  filter  efficiency  below  the
efficiency level specified in Part 84, or (b) demonstrates the total mass loading of the
filter(s) is less than 200 mg. The R-series filters should be used only for a single shift (or
for 8 hours of continuous or intermittent use) when oil is present. However, service time
for the R-series filters can be extended using the same two methods described above
for  N-series  filters.  These  determinations  would  need  to  be  repeated  whenever
conditions change or modifications are made to processes that could change the type
of  particulate  generated  in  the  user’s  facility.  To  select  the  correct  respirator  for
protection against particulates, the following conditions must be known: Multiplying the
occupational exposure limit by the APF for a respirator gives the maximum workplace
concentration  in  which  that  respirator  can  be  used.  For  example,  if  the  commonly
accepted APF for a half-mask respirator is 10 and the PEL is 5 mg/m3, then 50 mg/m3 is
the  highest  workplace  concentration  in  which  a  half-mask  respirator  can  be  used
against that contaminant. If the workplace concentration is greater than 50 mg/m3, a
more  protective  respirator  (with  a  higher  APF)  should  be  used.  In  no  case  should  an
air-purifying  respirator  be  used  in  IDLH  concentrations.  Appendix  B  presents  a
simplified  guideline  that  can  be  used  to  identify  an  appropriate  Part  84  particulate
respirator  when  a  properly  selected  Part  11  respirator  is  already  in  use.  Appendix  C
presents  a  flow  chart  that  can  be  used  to  select  the  appropriate  Part  84  particulate
filters.  Appendix  D  presents  some  substance-specific  examples  of  Part  84  respirator
selection.  Appendix  E  answers  questions  commonly  asked  about  Part  84  respirators.
Note Concerning Part 11 Particulate Filters Because research shows that particles sized
2 micrometers or smaller can penetrate some DM and DFM filters, these Part 11 filters
should be used only when the mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) is known to
be  greater  than  2  micrometers  [NIOSH  1995].  If  this  diameter  is  less  than  2
micrometers or is unknown, a Part 11 HEPA filter or any Part 84 filter should be used.
Note on Respirator Fit OSHA requires that all respirators be properly fit-tested using a
quantitative  or  qualitative  fit  test  when  initially  assigned  to  a  user  and  periodically
thereafter.  In  addition  to  fit-testing,  your  respirator  manufacturer  has  recommended
fit-checking procedures that should be followed by the user each time the respirator is
worn.  The  only  respirators  certified  by  NIOSH  under  Part  11  that  meet  CDC  filtration
efficiency  performance  criteria  for  protection  against  tuberculosis  (TB)  are  those  with
HEPA filters. All nine classes of nonpowered, air-purifying, particulate-filter respirators
certified under Part 84 meet or exceed the CDC filtration efficiency performance criteria
[CDC 1994]. Several of the Part 84 particulate-filter respirators will be less expensive
and  more  comfortable  than  Part  11  HEPA-filter  respirators,  and  they  are  likely  to  be
more  readily  accepted  by  health  care  facilities  and  workers.  Health  care  delivery
settings are generally free of oil aerosols that would be degrading to filter efficiency.
Therefore,  N-,  R-,  or  P-series  respirators  are  appropriate  for  protection  against  TB  in
health  care  settings  and  other  workplaces  in  which  oil  aerosols  are  absent;  these
respirators  are  subject  to  replacement  as  necessary  by  considerations  of  hygiene,
damage,  and  breathing  resistance.  Current  OSHA  policy  permits  the  use  of  a  Part  11
HEPA  filter  or  any  Part  84  particulate  filter  for  protection  against  TB  [Miles  1995].
Pending  completion  of  a  final  TB  standard,  respiratory  protection  against  TB  will  be
regulated by OSHA under the current unrevised respirator standard [29 CFR 1910.134]
and compliance policy directives. Additional information about respiratory protection for
exposure to TB is found in Guidelines for Preventing the Transmission of Mycobacterium
Tuberculosis  in  Health-Care  Facilities  [CDC  1994]  and  in  Protect  Yourself  Against
Tuberculosis–A  Guide  for  Health  Care  Workers,  [NIOSH  1996].   §The  APF  (assigned
protection factor) is the minimum anticipated level of protection provided by each type
of respirator worn in accordance with an adequate respiratory protection program. For
example,  an  APF  of  10  means  that  the  respirator  should  reduce  the  airborne
concentration  of  a  particulate  by  a  factor  of  10  (or  to  10%  of  the  workplace
concentration). OSHA currently sets APFs in some substance-specific standards. OSHA
is  now  conducting  rulemaking  [29  CFR  1910.134]  that  will  set  uniform  APFs  for  all
respirator types. Appendix A: Part 11 and Part 84 Labels for Various Filters Appendix B:
Substitution of Part 84 Respirators for Part 11 Respirators Already In Use Appendix C:
Flow  Chart  for  Selecting  Part  84  Particulate  Filters  Appendix  D:  Examples  of  Part  84
Respirator Selection Appendix E: Commonly Asked Questions and Answers About Part
84 Respirators AIHA [1993]. Respiratory protection: a manual and guideline. Fairfax, VA:
American Industrial Hygiene Association. ANSI [1992]. American national standard for
respiratory  protection.  New  York,  NY:  American  National  Standards  Institute,  ANSI
Z88.2-1992. CDC [1994]. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis  in  health-care  facilities,  1994.  MMWR  43(RR-13).  CFR.  Code  of  Federal
regulations.  Washington,  DC:  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  Office  of  the  Federal
Register. Miles JB Jr. [1995]. Memorandum of September 6, 1995, from John B. Miles, Jr.,
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration,  to  Regional  Administrators,  National
Office Directorates, and Area Directors, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
U.S.  Department  of  Labor.  NIOSH  [1987].  NIOSH  guide  to  industrial  respiratory
protection.  Cincinnati,  OH:  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Public
Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication No. 87-116. NIOSH [1994]. NIOSH pocket guide
to chemical hazards. Cincinnati, OH: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Public  Health  Service,  Centers  for  Disease  Control,  National  Institute  for  Occupational
Safety  and  Health,  DHHS  (NIOSH)  Publication  No.  94-116.  NIOSH  [1995].  NIOSH
testimony  on  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration’s  proposed  rule  on
respiratory protection, June 8, 1995, OSHA Docket No. H-049. NIOSH policy statements.
Cincinnati, OH: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,
Centers  for  Disease  Control,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health.
NIOSH  [1996].  Protect  yourself  against  tuberculosis–a  guide  for  health  care  workers.
Cincinnati, OH: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,
Centers  for  Disease  Control,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health,
DHHS (NIOSH) Publication No. 96-102. This notice is the first update of the NIOSH Guide
to  the  Selection  and  Use  of  Particulate  Respirators  Certified  under  42  CFR  part  84
(NIOSH  No.  96-101)  published  in  January  1996.  It  modifies  the  NIOSH  service  time
recommendations  for  P-series  particulate  respirators.  The  Guide  provided  that,  “Use
and  reuse  of  the  P-series  filters  would  be  subject  only  to  considerations  of  hygiene,
damage, and increased breathing resistance.” The Guide also stated that “NIOSH will
be  conducting  and  encouraging  other  researchers  to  conduct  studies  to  assure  that
these  service  time  recommendations  are  adequate.  If  research  indicates  the  need,
additional  service  time  limitations  may  be  recommended  by  NIOSH  for  specific
workplace  conditions.”  Recent  NIOSH  laboratory  studies  indicate  the  efficiency  of
P-series filters may be significantly reduced with long term use in the presence of oil
aerosols. Such long term oil exposure has resulted in the reduction in efficiency of P100
filters  to  efficiencies  much  less  than  that  required  of  P95  filters.  In  some  workplace
situations,  this  reduction  in  filter  efficiency  may  not  always  be  accompanied  by  an
increase in breathing resistance that would signal the user to replace the filter, or filter
element. This reduction in filter efficiency varies significantly from model to model and
NIOSH can not make a single filter change recommendation that is appropriate for all
models.  Therefore,  NIOSH  has  requested  each  manufacturer  of  P-series  filters  to
establish  service  time  recommendations  as  part  of  their  user  instructions.  NIOSH
expects  that  manufacturers  of  P-series  filters  will  provide  such  recommendations  as
part of their customer support programs. These NIOSH recommendations are interim in
that a full understanding of the degrading effects of workplace contaminants on filter
efficiency is not yet available to NIOSH. In addition to continuing to study the degrading
effects  of  workplace  aerosols  on  all  types  of  filters  certified  under  42  CFR  part  84,
NIOSH  is  also  investigating  the  possible  degrading  effects  of  workplace  gases  and
vapors  on  those  filters.  Respirator  users  are  also  reminded  that  the  provisions  of  the
new  42  CFR  part  84  require  respirators  to  be  far  more  resistant  to  filter  degradation
than did the provisions of 30 CFR part 11. That is only one of the reasons why NIOSH
encourages  users  to  discontinue  the  use  of  particulate  respirators  certified  under  30
CFR part 11 and switch to the new particulate respirators certified under 42 CFR part
84. Users are also reminded that NIOSH has a long standing recommendation that all
30 CFR part 11 particulate filters be replaced at least daily (once each work shift). This
User  Notice  does  not  change  the  NIOSH  service  time  recommendations  made  in  the
Guide  for  N-  and  R-  series  respirators.  The  current  NIOSH  service-time-limit
recommendations for nonpowered particulate filter respirators are that filter elements
should be replaced at the following frequencies: All filters. The service life of all filters is
limited  by  considerations  of  hygiene,  damage,  and  breathing  resistance.  All  filters
should  be  replaced  whenever  they  are  damaged,  soiled,  or  causing  noticeably
increased  breathing  resistance.  N-series  filters  generally  should  be  used  and  reused
subject only to considerations of hygiene, damage, and increased breathing resistance.
However,  for  dirty  workplaces  that  could  result  in  high  filter  loading  (i.e.,  200  mg),
service  time  for  N-series  filters  should  only  be  extended  beyond  8  hours  of  use
(continuous or intermittent) by performing an evaluation in specific workplace settings
that demonstrates: (a) that extended use will not degrade the filter efficiency below the
efficiency level specified in Part 84, or (b) that the total mass loading of the filter(s) is
less  than  200  mg.  These  determinations  would  need  to  be  repeated  whenever
conditions change or modifications are made to processes that could change the type
of particulate generated in the user’s facility. R-series filters should be used only for a
single  shift  (or  for  8  hours  of  continuous  or  intermittent  use)  when  oil  is  present.
However,  service  time  for  the  R-series  filters  can  be  extended  using  the  same  two
methods described above for N-series filters. These determinations would need to be
repeated  whenever  conditions  change  or  modifications  are  made  to  processes  that
could  change  the  type  of  particulate  generated  in  the  user’s  facility.  P-series  filters
should be used and reused in accordance with the manufacturer’s time-use limitation
recommendations  when  oil  aerosols  are  present.  P-series  filters  should  be  used  and
reused  subject  only  to  considerations  of  hygiene,  damage,  and  increased  breathing
resistance if oil aerosols are not present. 30 CFR part 11 filters should be replaced at
least  daily  or  more  often  if  breathing  resistance  becomes  excessive  or  if  the  filter
suffers physical damage (tears, holes, etc.) Filter elements designed to be cleaned and
reused  should  be  cleaned  at  least  daily  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer’s
instructions. Between uses, filters should be packaged to reduce exposure to conditions
which cause filter degradation, such as high humidity.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/96-101/default.html
