Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. NIOSH CA 2018-1005R1.0
November  2018  NIOSH  published  this  notice  to  clarify  the  October  2,  2006  NIOSH
“Letter  to  all  Manufacturers”  titled:  NIOSH  Policy  for  Respirator  Sealing  Surfaces  and
Facial  Hair.  This  revised  notice  clarifies  the  NIOSH  definition  of  respirator  sealing
surfaces, including the primary seal, and facial stubble. This revised notice supersedes
the  October  2,  2006  letter  and  the  August  2018  version  of  NIOSH  CA  2018-1005.
Specific  to  the  evaluations  completed  as  part  of  the  NIOSH  Respirator  Approval
Program,  and  testing  to  assess  the  fit  characteristics  of  all  respirator  designs,  NIOSH
test subjects are required to be clean- shaven in order to participate on the test panel
selected.  The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  Respiratory
Protection Standard 29 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 1910.134 paragraph (g)(1)(i)
states,  “The  employer  shall  not  permit  respirators  with  tight-fitting  facepieces  to  be
worn by employees who have: (A) Facial hair that comes between the sealing surface of
the facepiece and the face or that interferes with valve function; or (B) Any condition
that interferes with the face-to-facepiece seal or valve function.” The OSHA requirement
is interpreted as: When a respirator is required, an employer is prohibited from allowing
respirators with tight-fitting facepieces to be worn by employees who have “facial hair
that comes between the sealing surface of the facepiece and the face, or that interferes
with  valve  function.  Facial  hair  is  allowed,  as  long  as  it  does  not  protrude  under  the
respirator  seal,  or  extend  far  enough  to  interfere  with  the  device’s  valve  function.”
Specific  to  the  required  individual  workplace  fit  test,  NIOSH  continues  to  support  the
OSHA regulations. In this case, regarding the employee’s facial hair, 29 Code of Federal
Regulations  (CFR)  Part  1910  Appendix  A,  Part  I,  (A)(9)  states,  “The  test  shall  not  be
conducted  if  there  is  any  hair  growth  between  the  skin  and  the  facepiece  sealing
surface, such as stubble beard growth, beard, mustache or sideburns which cross the
respirator  sealing  surface.  Any  type  of  apparel  which  interferes  with  a  satisfactory  fit
shall be altered or removed.” 42 C.F.R. Part 84, Respiratory Protective Devices
Subpart H, Self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA)
Subpart G, Gas masks
Subpart J, Supplied-air respirators (SAR)
Subpart K, Non-powered air-purifying particulate respirators (APR)
Subpart L, Chemical cartridge respirators (APR)
Subpart  KK,  Powered  air-purifying  particulate  respirators  (PAPR)  OSHA  and  ANSI
Z88.10-2010  prohibit  fit  testing  when  facial  hair  is  at  the  sealing  surface  of  the
respirator. OSHA’s Fit Testing Procedures, 29 CFR 1910.134 Appendix A, Part I, (A)(9),
states “The test shall not be conducted if there is any hair growth between the skin and
the  facepiece  sealing  surface,  such  as  stubble  beard  growth,  beard,  mustache  or
sideburns  which  cross  the  respirator  sealing  surface.  Any  type  of  apparel  which
interferes with a satisfactory fit shall be altered or removed.” Facial hair that lies along
the  sealing  area  of  the  respirator,  such  as  beards,  sideburns,  moustaches,  or  even  a
few days growth of stubble1, should not be permitted on employees who are required
to  wear  respirators  that  rely  on  tight  facepiece  fit  to  achieve  maximum  protection.
Facial  hair  between  the  wearer’s  skin  and  the  sealing  surfaces  of  the  respirator  will
prevent a good seal. A respirator that permits negative air pressure inside the facepiece
during inhalation may allow leakage and, in the case of positive pressure devices, will
either  reduce  service  time  or  waste  breathing  air.  A  worker  should  not  enter  a
contaminated  work  area  when  conditions  prevent  a  good  seal  of  the  respirator
facepiece to the face. [NIOSH, 1987, “NIOSH Guide to Industrial Respiratory Protection”]
An up-to-date clarification of this NIOSH position is as follows: Facial hair that lies along
the sealing area of the respirator, such as beards, sideburns, moustaches, or even more
than one day or 24 hours of growth of stubble, should not be permitted on employees
who are required to wear respirators that rely on tight facepiece fit. Facial hair either
growing in or protruding into the area of the primary sealing surfaces2 of the respirator
will  prevent  a  good  seal.  Any  degradation  to  the  respirator  seal  has  the  potential  to
decrease  respiratory  protection  to  the  wearer.  Respirators  that  normally  support  a
negative pressure in the facepiece will have an increased potential to allow leakage of
contaminated  air  into  the  facepiece.  Respirators  designed  to  maintain  a  positive
facepiece pressure will suffer from reduced service time along with wasting breathing
air during use. A worker should not enter a contaminated work area when conditions
prevent a good seal of the respirator facepiece to the face. This interpretation applies
to  all  primary  seals  of  tight-fitting  full  and  half-facepiece  respirators,  as  well  as
tight-fitting  respirator  designs  that  rely  on  a  neck  dam  seal.  Nose  cups  present  in
tight-fitting  full  facepieces  that  do  not  perform  primary  sealing  functions  are  not
considered  part  of  the  primary  seal.  Facial  hair  in  this  area  should  not  interfere  with
respiratory  protection  of  the  facepiece.  In  these  cases,  facial  hair  is  permitted.
However, wearers must be trained to ensure facial hair does not grow in size or length
and  subsequently  protrude  under  the  primary  sealing  surface  of  the  respirator.  If  a
respirator covering includes a hood design and is the primary seal around the neck of
the wearer, facial hair, such as a full beard, cannot be present in the area of the seal.
Additionally, if a hood design includes a primary seal within the hood, by including a
component  covering  the  mouth,  nose  and  chin  of  the  wearer  (similar  to  a  typical
half-mask), facial hair cannot be present in the area of the seal of this component. In
the event that the respirator design incorporates any one of these sealing mechanisms,
facial hair must be prevented from interfering with the sealing surface and the function
of the respirator during use. This interpretation does not apply to loose-fitting hood or
helmet  respirator  designs  such  as  those  used  on  Powered  Air-Purifying  Respirators,
Supplied-Air  Respirators  and  Constant-Flow  Escape  type  Self-Contained  Breathing
Apparatus  that  utilize  only  capes  or  shrouds  for  primary  seals.  With  these  type
respirators,  careful  consideration  must  be  given  in  using  these  loose-fitting  face
coverings  to  assure  that  they  do  not  have  a  neck  dam,  a  face  seal  or  an  integrated,
tight-fitting  half-mask.  These  respirators,  utilizing  only  capes  or  shrouds  as  primary
seals, may then be selected and used by workers with facial hair. Escape-only types of
air-purifying respirators are not required by OSHA to be fit tested, but special care must
be  exercised  when  they  are  being  carried  for  potential  use.  For  all  tight-fitting,
escape-only respirators, precautions must be taken to assure that the seal needed for
effective use will not be affected by facial hair or body hair in the event the respirator is
needed for escape from a toxic atmosphere. Mouth-bit type escape-only respirators are
inherently  unaffected  by  facial  hair,  face  size,  or  neck  size  and  their  use  and  fitting
characteristics are not dependent on these features. 1 A few days growth of stubble is
any facial hair growth that is older than 24 hours [ANSI 2010, OSHA 2012].
2 The primary seal and primary sealing surface are that part of the respirator that touch
the  wearer’s  facial  areas  (near  the  nose  and  mouth  for  half-mask  respirators  and
including around the eyes for full-facepiece respirators) that provide a gas or dust-tight
seal  in  order  to  protect  the  user  from  the  outside  contaminant(s).  Approval  of
Respiratory Protective Devices, 42 C.F.R, Part 84
NIOSH Policy for Respirator Sealing Surfaces and Facial Hair, October 2, 2006
OSHA Respiratory Protection Standard 29 CFR 1910.134
OSHA  Standard  Interpretations,  Facial  Hair  Under  Seal  of  Tight-fitting  Respirator,
September 14, 2012
OSHA 1910.134 Appendix A, Fit Testing Procedures (Mandatory)
OSHA Instruction, effective June 26, 2014
ANSI/AIHA/ASSE-Z88.10 Respirator Fit Testing Methods 2010 Edition
NIOSH Guide to Industrial Respiratory Protection, p119
NIOSH Science Blog, To Beard or not to Beard? NIOSH Respirator Approval Program’s
updated  position  regarding  facial  hair  and  the  selection  and  use  of  respiratory
protective devices. Revised – Supersedes the August 2018 version and the October 2,
2006 Letter to All Respirator Manufacturers [PDF – 192 KB]
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/resources/pressrel/letters/conformityinterp/CA-2018-1005-R1.html
