 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. In 1994, the most recent year for
which published data are available, an estimated 4.7 million dog bites occurred in the
United States, and approximately 799,700 persons required medical care 
(1). Of an estimated 333,700 patients treated for 
dog  bites  in  emergency  departments  (EDs)  in  1994  (2),  approximately  6,000  (1.8%)
were hospitalized 
(3).  To  estimate  the  number  of  nonfatal  dog  bite--related  injuries  treated  in  U.S.
hospital  EDs,  CDC  analyzed  data  from  the  National  Electronic  Injury  Surveillance
System-All  Injury  Program  (NEISS-AIP).  This  report  summarizes  the  results  of  the
analysis, which 
indicate that in 2001, an estimated 368,245 persons were treated in U.S. hospital EDs
for nonfatal dog bite--related injuries. 
Injury rates were highest among children aged 5--9 years. To reduce the number of dog
bite--related injuries, adults and children should be educated about bite prevention, and
persons with canine pets should practice responsible pet ownership (Box).  NEISS-AIP is
operated  by  the  U.S.  Consumer  Product  Safety  Commission  and  collects  data  about
initial visits for all 
types and causes of injuries treated in U.S. EDs 
(4). NEISS-AIP data are drawn from a nationally representative subsample of 
66 out of 100 NEISS hospitals, which were selected as a stratified probability sample of
hospitals with a minimum of six beds 
and  a  24-hour  ED  in  the  United  States  and  its  territories.  NEISS-AIP  provides  data  on
approximately 500,000 injury- 
and consumer product--related ED cases each year.
 The analysis included every nonfatal injury treated in a NEISS-AIP hospital ED in 2001
for which "dog bite" was listed 
as  the  external  cause  of  injury.  Because  deaths  are  not  captured  completely  by
NEISS-AIP, patients who were dead on arrival 
or died in EDs were excluded. Each case was assigned 
a sample weight based on the inverse probability of selection; these 
weights  were  added  to  provide  national  estimates  of  dog  bite--related  injuries.
Estimates were based on weighted data for 
6,106 patients with dog bite--related injuries treated at NEISS-AIP hospital EDs during
2001. Confidence intervals (CIs) 
were calculated by using a direct variance estimation procedure that accounted for the
sample  weights  and  complex  sample  design.  Rates  were  calculated  by  using  U.S.
Census Bureau population estimates for 2001 
(5).
 In 2001, an estimated 368,245 persons were treated for dog bite--related injuries (rate:
129.3 per 100,000 
population)  (Table).  The  injury  rate  was  highest  for  children  aged  5--9  years  and
decreased  with  increasing  age.  Approximately  154,625  (42.0%)  dog  bites  occurred
among children aged 
<14 years; the rate was significantly higher for boys (293.2 per 
100,000 population) than for girls (216.7) (p = 0.037) (Figure 1). For persons aged 
>15 years, the difference between the rate for 
males (102.9) and females (88.0) was not statistically significant. The number of cases
increased slightly during 
April--September,  with  a  peak  in  July  (11.1%).  For  injured  persons  of  all  ages,
approximately  16,526  (4.5%)  dog  bite  injuries  were  work-related  (e.g.,  occurred  to
persons  who  were  delivering  mail,  packages,  or  food;  working  at  an  animal  clinic  or
shelter; or doing home repair work or installations). For persons aged 
>16 years, approximately 16,476 (7.9%) dog bite injuries were work-related.
 Injuries  occurred  most  commonly  to  the  arm/hand  (45.3%),  leg/foot  (25.8%),  and
head/neck (22.8%). The 
majority (64.9%) of injuries among children aged 
<4 years were to the head/neck region; this percentage decreased significantly 
with  age  (p<0.01)  (Figure  2).  Injuries  to  the  extremities  increased  with  age  (p<0.01)
and accounted for 86.2% of injuries treated in EDs for persons aged >15 years. Injury
diagnoses  were  described  frequently  as  "dog  bite"  (26.4%);  other  diagnoses  included
puncture (40.2%), laceration (24.7%), 
contusion/abrasion/hematoma (6.0%), cellulitis/infection (1.5%), 
amputation/avulsion/crush  (0.8%),  and  fracture/dislocation  (0.4%).  Overall,  98.2%  of
patients were treated and released from the ED.  Narrative comments in the medical
records note common circumstances in which children and adults incurred dog 
bite--related injuries. Examples among children included a girl aged 18 months who was
attacked by the family dog in the 
backyard  and  sustained  an  open  depressed  skull  fracture,  mandible  fractures,  and
avulsion of an ear and part of a cheek; a boy aged 4 years who was bitten on the lip by
a dog that was guarding her pups; and a girl aged 3 years who was bitten on the face 
when trying to take food away from the family dog. Examples among adults included a
man aged 34 years who sustained 
an  avulsion  laceration  to  his  left  thumb  while  trying  to  break  up  a  fight  between  his
dogs; a woman aged 27 years who 
sustained multiple puncture wounds to her forearm, thumb, and chest while trying to
help her dog, which had been hit by a car; and 
a woman aged 75 years who was bitten while she was trying to prevent her dog from
attacking an Emergency 
Medical Technician who was attempting to transport her from home by ambulance.
 Reported by: J Gilchrist, MD, Div of Unintentional Injury Prevention; K Gotsch, MPH, JL
Annest, PhD, G Ryan, PhD, Office of Statistics 
and Programming, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, CDC.
Editorial Note:
  In 2001, an estimated 68 million canines were kept as pets in the United States 
(6).  This  report  is  the  first  that  uses  data  from  an  ongoing  surveillance  system  to
provide national estimates of the number of dog bite--related injuries treated in EDs. In
2001, an estimated 368,245 persons were treated for dog bites in EDs; this finding is
consistent with 
a  previous  estimate  of  334,000  persons  treated  annually  for  dog  bites  in  EDs  during
1992--1994 
(2).  Of  the  estimated  368,245  persons  treated  for  dog  bites  in  EDs,  an  estimated
154,625 (42%) were aged 
<14 years. Higher rates of dog bites for 
children aged <14 years also are consistent with previous reports 
(1,7). Narrative comments from medical records describing dog bite events underscore
the importance of prevention messages. 
 Because  children  have  higher  rates  of  dog  bites,  prevention  programs  often  are
targeted to this group. Although boys 
aged  <14  years  have  higher  rates  than  girls  the  same  age,  all  children  need  to  be
taught  how  to  respond  to  dogs.  A  randomized  controlled  trial  of  a  school-based
intervention in Australia that taught children how to behave around and interact with
dogs documented a substantial decrease in children's approach to and interaction with
a strange dog 
(8).  CDC  is  funding  an  evaluation  of  a  similar  school-based  education  program  in
Georgia aimed at increasing children's understanding of how 
to behave around and interact with dogs.
 In  addition  to  educating  children  properly,  prevention  efforts  should  encourage
responsible dog ownership, 
including training, socializing, and neutering family pets. Previous research has 
indicated that the majority (80%) of dog bites 
incurred by persons aged <18 years are inflicted by a family dog (30%) or a neighbor's
dog (50%) 
(9).  During  1997--1998,  a  total  of  75%  of  fatal  dog  bites  were  inflicted  on  family
members or guests on the family's property 
(10). In 2001, an estimated 16,476 (8%) dog bites to persons aged 
>16 years were work-related, including some that 
occurred while persons were visiting homes as part of their work activities. 
 Additional  strategies  to  encourage  responsible  pet  ownership  and  reduce  dog  bites
include regulatory measures 
(e.g., licensing, neutering, and registration programs and programs to control 
unrestrained animals) and legislation (7). "Dangerous" dog laws focus on dogs of any
breed  that  have  exhibited  harmful  behavior  (e.g.,  unprovoked  attacks  on  persons  or
animals) and place primary responsibility for a dog's behavior on the owner. Because a
dog's tendency to bite depends 
on  other  factors  in  addition  to  genetics  (e.g.,  medical  and  behavioral  health,  early
experience, socialization and training, 
and victim behavior), such laws might be more effective than breed-specific legislation 
(7). These prevention strategies require further 
evaluation.
 The findings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First, only nonfatal
injuries treated in hospital EDs 
were  included,  and  injuries  treated  in  health-care  facilities  outside  of  an  ED  (e.g.,  a
physician's  office  or  an  urgent  care  center)  or  those  for  which  no  care  was  received
were not 
included. Previous estimates indicate that 17% of dog bite--related injuries 
are treated in medical facilities, of which 38% are seen in hospital EDs 
(1). Second, injury diagnoses were not specified for 
26% of cases. Third, limited data are available on the circumstances of the event or the
dog involved. Fourth, NEISS-AIP 
is designed to provide national estimates and does not provide state or local estimates. 
Finally, although the extent of human exposure to dogs might vary by age, sex, season,
or other factors, these data are not available; as a result, the analysis did not account
for exposure.
 Prevention  programs  should  educate  both  children  and  adults  about  bite  prevention
and responsible pet 
ownership. Additional information about preventing dog bites is available at 
      http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/duip/dogbites.htm.
 Acknowledgments
 This report is based on data contributed by T Schroeder, MS, 
C Downs, A McDonald, MA, and other staff of the Div of Hazard 
and Injury Data Systems, U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. P Holmgreen, MS,
Office of Statistics and Programming, 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, CDC.
References
 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 7/3/2003 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 7/3/2003
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5226a1.htm
