Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / December 8, 2023 / 72(49);1333–1334 Ihor Kuzin,
MD1;  Oleksandr  Matskov,  MD2;  Roman  Bondar,  MD,  PhD3;  Rostyslav  Lapin,  MD4;
Tetiana Vovk, MD5; Andrea Howard, MD6,7; Arkadii Vodianyk, MD8; Robert Skov, MD9;
Sarah Legare, MPH10; Marianna Azarskova, MD, PhD11; Teeb Al-Samarrai, MD12; Ezra
Barzilay, MD11; Charles Vitek, MD13 (View author affiliations) Views equals page views
plus PDF downloads Worldwide, bacterial antimicrobial resistance is estimated to cause
more  deaths  than  HIV  or  malaria  and  is  recognized  as  a  leading  global  public  health
threat (1). In Ukraine, the confluence of high prewar rates of antimicrobial resistance,
an increase in the prevalence of traumatic wounds, and the war-related strain on health
care  facilities  is  leading  to  increased  detection  of  multidrug-resistant  organisms  with
spread  into  Europe  (2,3).  Evidence  of  increased  rates  of  antimicrobial  resistance  in
other  conflict  settings  such  as  Iraq  (4),  and  the  long-term  consequences  for  civilian,
military,  and  other  populations,  argue  that  the  spread  of  antimicrobial  resistance  in
Ukraine  is  an  urgent  crisis  that  must  be  addressed,  even  during  an  ongoing  war.  In
mid-2022, a collaboration was established between CDC, the Center for Public Health of
Ukraine (UPHC), local clinical and public health authorities, and international partners,
including  the  World  Health  Organization  regional  office  for  Europe,  ICAP  at  Columbia
University, and the European Society for Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.
The  purpose  of  this  collaboration  was  to  improve  laboratory  detection,  clinical
treatment,  and  infection  control  response  for  antimicrobial  resistance  in  the  Ternopil,
Khmelnytskyi,  and  Vinnytsia  regions  supported  by  U.S.  Ukraine  supplemental
appropriations  emergency  funding.*  Top  In  August  2022,  UPHC  and  regional
collaborators  conducted  infection  prevention  and  control  and  antimicrobial  resistance
laboratory  capacity  assessments  in  the  three  regional  public  health  facilities  and  the
three  regional  hospitals  in  the  Ternopil,  Khmelnytskyi,  and  Vinnytsia  regions.  This
activity  was  reviewed  by  CDC,  deemed  not  research,  and  was  conducted  consistent
with  applicable  federal  law  and  CDC  policy.†  The  infection  prevention  and  control
assessments  identified  inadequacies  in  surveillance  of  health  care–associated
infections,  implementation  of  infection  prevention  and  control  measures  such  as
recommended hand hygiene, and monitoring, evaluation, and feedback to the hospital
staff members.§,¶ The laboratory assessments identified multiple challenges, especially
inadequate  quantities  of  automated  microbiology  equipment,  and  suboptimal
laboratory  quality  and  information  management  systems,  biosafety  practices,  and
staffing, as well as inconsistent availability of essential antibiotic susceptibility testing
consumables. UPHC also conducted health care–associated infections and antimicrobial
resistance
 point
 prevalence
 surveys
 at
 three
 regional
 hospitals
 during
November–December  2022.  Among  353  patients  on  surveyed  wards,  50  (14%)  had
health  care–associated  infections.**  High  rates  of  antimicrobial  resistance  were
identified among isolates from patients with health care–associated infections, with 30
of 50 (60%) patients having an infection with a carbapenem-resistant organism. Among
20 Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates, all were resistant to third-generation cephalosporins,
and among the 19 Klebsiella isolates tested, all were also carbapenem-resistant. These
rates  are  substantially  higher  than  those  reported  from  a  2016–2017  European
Union–wide  point  prevalence  survey,  which  included  more  than  300,000  acute  care
hospital  patients  and  100,000  long-term  care  facility  residents;  among  these
respondents, the study found a health care–associated infection rate of 5.5%. Among
the subset of infections caused by the Enterobacteriaceae family of bacteria (including
Klebsiella),  6.2%  of  isolates  were  resistant  to  carbapenem  (5).  Top  Urgent  capacity
building to prevent, detect, and respond to antimicrobial resistance is needed to save
lives within Ukraine and limit international spread. UPHC and partners are collaborating
to  improve  laboratory  detection  of  antimicrobial  resistance,  antimicrobial  prescribing,
and  infection  prevention  and  control,  starting  in  the  Ternopil,  Khmelnytskyi,  and
Vinnytsia regions. UPHC is prioritizing interventions to strengthen infection prevention
and  control  and  the  laboratory-clinical  interface  via  multidisciplinary  hospital  teams,
establishing  routine  health  care–associated  infections  and  antimicrobial  resistance
surveillance,  utilizing  guidelines  and  locally  collected  data  to  inform  clinical  care,
upgrading  laboratory  equipment  and  workflows,  increasing  availability  and  use  of
hand-hygiene  disinfectants,  and  providing  technical  training  for  staff  members.  UPHC
has issued clinical guidance on indications for bacteriology testing, including to military
hospitals. Partners are supporting training curricula that include clinical and laboratory
twinning††  between  international  experts  on  antimicrobial  resistance  and  Ukrainian
clinicians and laboratorians. In addition, partners are conducting workshops for regional
and  hospital  staff  members  to  develop  and  use  clinical  and  laboratory  standard
operating  procedures  to  strengthen  infection  prevention  and  control  practices  and
clinical  management  of  infected  patients.  Lastly,  partners  are  working  to  provide
additional  laboratory  supplies  to  meet  the  increased  wartime  demands,  to  capacitate
laboratories  to  test  for  bacterial  susceptibility  to  newer-generation  antibiotics,  and  to
improve reliable hospital access to these antibiotics. To address the alarming increase
of antimicrobial resistance in Ukraine, UPHC with assistance from international partners,
is developing locally led and implemented measures to address antimicrobial resistance
and  will  need  ongoing  support  to  scale  them  nationally.  In  addition,  development  of
national action plans and context-specific policies and strategies are needed to improve
infection  prevention  and  control  and  monitor  antibiotic  use  and  antimicrobial
resistance.  Top  Richard  B.  Brooks.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Ezra  Barzilay,
bwk9@cdc.gov. Top 1Ministry of Health of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine; 2Public Health Center
of the Ministry  of Health  of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine; 3Clinical Center of Anesthesiology
and Intensive Care, Vinnytsia M.I. Pirogov Regional Clinical Hospital, Vinnytsia, Ukraine;
4Ternopil  Regional  Clinical  Hospital,  Ternopil,  Ukraine;  5Khmelnytskyi  City  Hospital,
Khmelnytskyi,  Ukraine;  6ICAP  at  Columbia  University,  New  York,  New  York;
7Department  of  Epidemiology,  Columbia  University  Mailman  School  of  Public  Health,
New York, New York; 8Ukraine Country Office, World Health Organization, Kyiv, Ukraine;
9European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Basel, Switzerland;
10Division  of  Global  Health  Protection,  CDC  Georgia;  11Division  of  Global  HIV  &
Tuberculosis,  Global  Health  Center,  Office  of  the  Director,  CDC  Ukraine;  12Division  of
Global  Health  Protection,  Global  Health  Center,  CDC;  13Office  of  the  Director,  Global
Health  Center,  CDC  Georgia.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the
International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential
conflicts of interest. Robert Skov reports support from the European Society of Clinical
Microbiology  and  Infectious  Diseases.  No  other  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were
disclosed.  Top  *  The  U.S.  State  Department’s  Office  of  the  Coordinator  of  U.S.
Assistance to Europe and Eurasia transferred to CDC via an interagency agreement. †
45  C.F.R.  part  46.102(l)(2),  21  C.F.R.  part  56;  42  U.S.C.  Sect.  241(d);  5  U.S.C.  Sect.
552a;
 44
 U.S.C.
 Sect.
 3501
 et
 seq.
 §
https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/intl-activities/laarc.html
 ¶
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-HIS-SDS-2018.9
 **
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/point-prevalence-survey-healthcare-a
ssociated-infections-and-antimicrobial-use-4  ††  An  approach  to  strengthening  national
public  health  laboratory  systems  by  pairing  laboratories  from  different  countries  and
working  to  build  bidirectional  peer-mentoring  relationships  among  them.  Top  Top
Suggested citation for this article: Kuzin I, Matskov O, Bondar R, et al. Notes from the
Field:  Responding  to  the  Wartime  Spread  of  Antimicrobial-Resistant  Organisms  —
Ukraine,
 2022.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2023;72:1333–1334.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7249a5. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7249a5.htm
