  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. In October 2010, a child at The
Children's  Hospital  (TCH)  in  Aurora,  Colorado,  with  newly  diagnosed  leukemia
developed  clinical  sepsis  24  hours  after  insertion  of  an  implanted  vascular  access
device.  The  child  also  developed  extensive  cellulitis  at  the  insertion  site,  requiring
surgical  debridement,  intensive  care,  antibiotics,  prolonged  wound  management,  and
outpatient treatment. Cultures of the child's blood and tissue specimens grew Bacillus
cereus. An investigation found neither breach of infection control procedures nor any
violations  of  sterile  surgical  technique.   In  November  2010,  an  afebrile  infant  with
congenital  heart  disease  was  admitted  to  TCH  for  respiratory  distress  and  developed
fever and became clinically septic 4 days after an internal jugular line was placed. Four
blood cultures from the infant grew B. cereus. The line was removed, and the infant had
an  extended  hospital  stay  for  treatment  with  intravenous  antibiotics  before  being
discharged.   The  subsequent  TCH  investigation  into  the  two  cases  focused  on  the
following three single-use, disposable items used in the treatment of both patients: 1)
sterile syringes prefilled with sterile saline solution, 2) sterile applicators packaged with
a 2% chlorhexidine gluconate/70% alcohol solution for skin preparation, and 3) pledgets
packaged  with  70%  isopropyl  alcohol  (alcohol  prep  pads  [APPs]).  The  APPs  were  not
labeled as either sterile or nonsterile on the outside of the individual APP packages or
the  box  the  APPs  were  contained  in.  Bacterial  cultures  of  samples  from  three  saline
syringes and the liquid and pads from nine packages of chlorhexidine gluconate/alcohol
skin  preparation  applicators  were  negative.  The  internal  alcohol  pads  from  60  APPs,
obtained from various locations around TCH, also were cultured. Hospital investigators
found that 40 of 60 pads, representing eight of 10 different manufacturing lots, yielded
B. cereus or Bacillus spp. All of the pads were supplied by a single manufacturer. TCH
contacted  the  Colorado  Department  of  Public  Health  and  Environment,  which  notified
CDC and the Food and Drug Administration and performed confirmatory testing of TCH
laboratory  findings.  Twenty-nine  B.  cereus  isolates,  21  from  cultured  APPs  and  eight
from  TCH  patients  with  positive  cultures  during  May--November  2010,  were
characterized by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Wide diversity was observed among
the isolates, and no patient isolates matched APP isolates. Given this diversity and the
time lapse between positive patient specimens and subsequent APP sampling, the lack
of a match between the two groups was not considered to rule out APPs as the source
of the B. cereus isolated from patients. APPs are supplied both as sterile and nonsterile
products.  Sterile  products  are  clearly  labeled  as  such  and  should  not  be  mistaken
and/or interchanged for nonsterile products. B. cereus group and Bacillus species are
resistant to killing by alcohol (1) and have caused health-care--associated outbreaks of
invasive  disease  (2,3).  Pseudoinfections  caused  by  B.  cereus--contaminated  products
also have been reported (4). Health-care facilities, health-care providers, and users of
APPs  should  know  whether  the  APPs  in  clinical  use  are  sterile  or  nonsterile  and  be
aware  of  the  risk  for  iatrogenic  infection  if  nonsterile  APPs  are  used.  Manufacturers
should know the importance of clearly labeling their products as sterile or nonsterile to
avoid misuse by health-care facilities and health-care providers.  Based on the findings
in this investigation, on November 19, TCH halted any use of nonsterile APPs and began
using  sterile  APPs  exclusively  from  another  manufacturer.  In  January  2011,  the
manufacturer voluntarily recalled all of its alcohol wipe products because of potential
contamination (5).  SA Dolan, MS, E Dowell, C Littlehorn, MP Glode, MD, JK Todd, MD,
The  Children's  Hospital,  Univ  of  Colorado  School  of  Medicine,  Aurora,  Colorado;  W
Bamberg,  MD,  MK  Cichon,  Colorado  Dept  of  Public  Health  and  Environment.  Use  of
trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6011a5.htm
