Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  May  13,  2016  /  65(18);481–482  Shannon  A.
Novosad,  MD1,2;  Amber  M.  Vasquez,  MD1,2;  Atmaram  Nambiar,  MD3;  Matthew  J.
Arduino, DrPH2; Erick Christensen, MPH4; Heather Moulton-Meissner, PhD2; M. Shannon
Keckler, PhD2,5; Jeffrey Miller, MD6; Joseph F. Perz, DrPH2; Shawn R. Lockhart, PhD7;
Tom Chiller, MD7; Carolyn Gould, MD2; Lynne Sehulster, PhD2; Mary E. Brandt, PhD7; J.
Todd  Weber,  MD2;  Alison  Laufer  Halpin,  PhD2;  Rajal  K.  Mody,  MD7  (View  author
affiliations) Views equals page views plus PDF downloads On September 17, 2015, the
Pennsylvania  Department  of  Health  (PADOH)  notified  CDC  of  a  cluster  of  three
potentially  health  care–associated  mucormycete  infections  that  occurred  among  solid
organ transplant recipients during a 12-month period at hospital A. On September 18,
hospital  B  reported  that  it  had  identified  an  additional  transplant  recipient  with
mucormycosis.  Hospitals  A  and  B  are  part  of  the  same  health  care  system  and  are
connected by a pedestrian bridge. PADOH requested CDC’s assistance with an on-site
investigation, which started on September 22, to identify possible sources of infection
and prevent additional infections. Mucormycosis is a severe, often fatal infection caused
by a group of angioinvasive molds. Outbreaks of health care–associated mucormycosis
have  been  identified,  most  commonly  in  persons  with  marked  immunosuppression,
such  as  bone  marrow  and  solid  organ  transplant  recipients  (1,2).  Sources  of  these
outbreaks  are  difficult  to  determine  given  that  mucormycetes  are  ubiquitous
environmental  organisms.  Past  outbreaks  have  been  associated  with  contaminated
medical  supplies  and  hospital  construction  projects  (3,4).  Performing  an  Infection
Control Risk Assessment (ICRA) before and during construction or renovation projects is
an  important  measure  that  can  reduce  the  risk  for  health  care–associated
mucormycosis  (4,5).  An  ICRA  is  a  multidisciplinary  approach  used  to  mitigate
environmental  sources  of  microbes  and  to  prevent  infectious  hazards  through  use  of
built environment design, ventilation and infrastructure support, and control measures
implemented during construction or renovation (6). A probable health care–associated
case  of  mucormycosis  was  defined  as  identification  of  a  mucormycete  by  culture  or
molecular  testing  in  a  diagnostic  specimen  from  a  person  who  had  a  history  of  solid
organ  transplantation,  and  admission  to  hospital  A  or  B  during  May  2014–September
2015  for  ≥14  days,  within  the  30  days  before  diagnosis.  The  period  for  cases  was
expanded  beyond  the  12-month  period  of  infections  to  account  for  exposure  time
during  hospitalization.  Suspected  cases  were  similarly  defined  as  identification  of  a
mucormycete  in  a  diagnostic  specimen  by  histopathology  only  or  association  with  a
hospital stay of 7–13 days before diagnosis. No infections were considered confirmed
health care–associated cases because of uncertainties regarding the incubation period
of mucormycosis (3). The initial three cases were classified as probable and the fourth
case as suspected. All four patients underwent solid organ transplantation during the
same
 admission
 as
 their
 mucormycosis
 diagnosis
 and
 were
 receiving
immunosuppressive medications as well as voriconazole for antifungal prophylaxis. The
three  probable  cases  were  in  patients  who  were  primary  heart  (two  cases)  and  lung
transplant  (one  case)  recipients  who  underwent  transplantation  31–93  days  before
mucormycosis  diagnosis.  The  suspected  case  occurred  in  a  patient  who  had  been
admitted for a second liver transplant and was taking immunosuppressive medications
at  home;  mucormycosis  was  diagnosed  in  this  patient  13  days  after  admission,
although  signs  compatible  with  invasive  fungal  infection  started  earlier  in  the
admission.  At  least  two  different  mucormycete  species  were  isolated  from  the  four
patients. Three of the four patients had died before the arrival of the PADOH/CDC team.
The  three  patients  with  probable  health  care–associated  mucormycosis  all  received
care in the same room (room A) of the 20-bed cardiothoracic intensive care unit (CTICU)
in  hospital  A  for  14–58  days  between  their  transplantations  and  mucormycosis
diagnoses. Room A was the only negative-pressure isolation room in the CTICU and was
adjacent to a door leading to a carpeted hallway and family room. Frequent use of this
door  by  personnel  and  visitors  might  have  disturbed  airflow,  allowing  dust  and  mold
spores,  if  present,  to  enter  the  room.  None  of  the  patients  had  a  clinical  indication
requiring
 negative-pressure
 isolation.
 The
 patient
 with
 suspected
 health
care–associated  mucormycosis  did  not  spend  any  time  in  room  A  of  the  CTICU  or  a
negative-pressure  room.  Before  the  PADOH/CDC  on-site  investigation  had  begun,
hospital  A  had  closed  and  deconstructed  the  CTICU  for  renovation.  A  mucormycete
genetically unrelated to the patient isolates was recovered from one air sample from
room  A  that  hospital  A  obtained  before  the  renovation  work  began.  Multiple
construction and demolition projects were occurring at or near hospitals A and B during
the  period  when  this  cluster  occurred.  However,  the  hospital  system  reported
performing ICRAs for these projects. No common construction-related exposure shared
by  the  four  patients  was  identified.  Although  voriconazole  is  a  commonly  used
antifungal  prophylactic  agent  among  transplant  recipients  in  the  United  States,  it  is
ineffective  against  mucormycetes  (3).  Before  the  PADOH/CDC  investigation,  the
hospital  system  changed  the  antifungal  prophylactic  agent  used  for  transplant
recipients to isavuconazole, a mucormycete-active prophylactic agent. Hospitals A and
B are no longer using negative-pressure rooms to house solid organ transplant patients
who  are  without  a  clinical  indication.  Caring  for  immunosuppressed  patients  in
negative-pressure  environments  has  been  previously  identified  as  a  risk  factor  for
invasive mold infections, possibly related to the potential to concentrate dust and mold
spores in these rooms (7).  Negative-pressure rooms are recommended for isolation of
patients  with  a  suspected  or  confirmed  airborne  infectious  disease;  this  investigation
highlights
 how
 unnecessary
 placement
 of
 immunocompromised
 patients
 in
negative-pressure rooms could result in net harm and therefore should be avoided. Top
Corresponding  author:  Shannon  A.  Novosad,  Snovosad@cdc.gov,  404-639-4353.  Top
1Epidemic  Intelligence  Service,  CDC;  2Division  of  Healthcare  Quality  Promotion,
National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  3Pennsylvania
Department of Health; 4University of Utah School of Medicine; 5Laboratory Leadership
Service,  CDC;  6CDC  Career  Epidemiology  Field  Officer  assigned  to  Pennsylvania
Department  of  Health;  7Division  of  Foodborne,  Waterborne,  and  Environmental
Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC. Top Top
Suggested citation for this article: Novosad SA, Vasquez AM, Nambiar A, et al.  Notes
from the Field. Probable Mucormycosis Among Adult Solid Organ Transplant Recipients
at an Acute Care Hospital — Pennsylvania, 2014–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2016;65:481–482. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6518a5. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6518a5.htm
