ORIGINAL RESEARCH — Volume 13 — December 22, 2016 Suggested citation for
this  article:  Onufrak  SJ,  Zaganjor  H,  Moore  LV,  Carlson  S,  Kimmons  J,  Galuska  D.
Nutrition Standards for Food Service Guidelines for Foods Served or Sold in Municipal
Government
 Buildings
 or
 Worksites,
 United
 States,
 2014.
 Prev
 Chronic
 Dis
2016;13:160364.  DOI:  http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd13.160364external  icon.  PEER
REVIEWED Introduction The Institute of Medicine and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention  have  recommended  that  government  agencies  use  nutrition  standards  for
foods  and  beverages  sold  and  provided  at  their  facilities.  In  this  study,  we  examine
written  nutrition  standards  for  foods  sold  or  served  in  local  government  buildings  or
worksites among US municipalities. Methods We used data from a 2014 national survey
of  1,945  municipal  governments  serving  populations  of  1,000  or  more  to  assess  the
presence  of  written  nutrition  standards,  the  food  groups  or  nutrients  addressed  by
standards,  and  the  populations  served  by  facilities  where  standards  are  applied.  The
prevalence  of  standards  was  estimated  by  municipality  population  size,  rural–urban
status,  census  region,  poverty  prevalence,  education  level,  and  racial/ethnic
composition.  Results  Overall,  3.2%  of  US  municipalities  reported  nutrition  standards
with greater prevalence observed among large municipalities (12.8% of municipalities
with  ≥50,000  people  vs  2.2%  of  municipalities  with  <2,500  people,  P  <  .001).
Prevalence  differed  by  region,  and  standards  were  most  common  in  the  West  (6.6%)
and least common in the Midwest (2.0%, P = .003).The most common nutrition topics
addressed in standards were offering low-calorie beverages, fruits and vegetables, and
free drinking water. Most standards applied to facilities serving government employees
(67%)  or  the  general  public  (66%),  with  fewer  serving  institutionalized  populations
(23%).  Conclusion  Few  municipal  governments  reported  having  written  nutrition
standards  for  foods  and  beverages  sold  in  their  facilities  in  2014.  Implementing
nutrition  standards  for  foods  sold  or  served  by  local  governments  is  a  strategy  for
increasing  access  to  healthier  foods  and  beverages  among  municipal  employees  and
local  residents.  Top  Food  service  guidelines  (FSGs)  delineate  food  and  nutrition
standards  for  the  sale  or  provision  of  foods  and  beverages  in  food  venues  such  as
cafeterias and vending machines and may specify approaches such as pricing healthier
foods  lower  than  less  healthy  foods  (1).  FSG  nutrition  standards  are  effective  at
increasing  the  availability  and  purchasing  of  healthier  foods  while  decreasing  the
purchasing of less healthful foods (2). The Institute of Medicine and Centers for Disease
Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)  have  recommended  that  government  agencies  use
nutrition standards for foods and beverages that they sell or provide (3–5). More than
10  million  people  in  the  United  States  are  employed  by  local  governments  (6),  so
enactment  of  FSGs  among  municipalities  can  improve  food  environments  in
government  facilities  serving  employees,  local  residents,  and  institutionalized  people.
Although information on some nutrition standards for local governments are available
(7),  their  prevalence  among  US  municipalities,  populations  affected,  and  nutritional
characteristics  of  the  standards  are  not  known.  This  information  would  be  useful  for
tracking  local  government  efforts  to  improve  the  availability  of  healthier  foods  over
time. However, capturing this information is difficult, because there are approximately
19,500  incorporated  places  in  the  United  States  (8),  and  municipal  policies  are  not
systematically  captured  by  legal  databases.  To  fill  information  gaps  on  local  health
policies,  the  CDC  Division  of  Nutrition,  Physical  Activity,  and  Obesity  conducted  the
National  Survey  of  Community-Based  Policy  and  Environmental  Supports  for  Healthy
Eating and Active Living (CBS HEAL) to query municipal officials about the presence of
local  health  policies  and  practices.  In  this  study,  we  use  data  from  CBS  HEAL  to
determine  the  national  prevalence  among  US  municipalities  of  written  nutrition
standards,  prevalence  differences  according  to  municipality  characteristics,  and  the
nutrition characteristics and populations covered by the standards. Top The CBS HEAL
survey of 4,484 municipalities from all 50 states was conducted from May 2014 through
September  2014  and  had  a  response  rate  of  45%  (n  =  2,029).  The  sample  pool  of
potential  respondents  was  based  on  the  2007  Census  of  Governments,  which  lists
municipalities and townships by state and provided the most recent data available at
the  time  of  sampling  (9).  In  states  where  there  was  geographic  overlap  between
municipal  and  town  or  township  levels  of  government,  towns  and  townships  were
removed  to  avoid  double  counting  of  populations  covered  by  both  layers  of
government.  To  create  a  nationally  representative  sample  of  municipalities,  sampling
was stratified by region, urban status, and population size, and the observations were
weighted  to  account  for  unequal  probabilities  of  selection  and  varying  rates  of
nonresponse.  Municipalities  with  populations  smaller  than  1,000  were  excluded  from
the  sample  pool  on  the  basis  of  a  previous  pilot  study  that  showed  that  very  small
communities were not likely to have policies and practices that support healthy eating
and  active  living.  The  primary  survey  respondent  was  the  city  or  town  manager,
planner, or person with similar responsibilities. Respondents were encouraged to ask for
assistance  if  needed  from  other  municipal  officials  such  as  representatives  from  tax
office  or  procurement  departments,  parks  and  recreation  departments,  or  human
resources. Respondents completed the survey through a secure website and were also
given the option of completing a paper version of the survey. Respondents were asked
“Does your local government have written nutrition standards for foods sold or served
in local government buildings or worksites, including meals, á la carte items, or vending
machines?  Examples  of  nutrition  standards  include  provisions  for  reduced  sodium
content  or  for  inclusion  of  fresh  fruit  and  vegetable  selections.  Do  not  include  public
school  district  or  school-level  policies  in  your  response.”  Respondents  who  answered
yes were asked if the standards included the following nutritional elements, which are
consistent  with  the  Health  and  Sustainability  Guidelines  for  Federal  Concessions  and
Vending  Operations  (10):  vegetables  and  fruits,  whole-grain  options,  low-fat  dairy,
low-sodium items, only offering foods with no trans fat, labeling foods with calories per
serving,  lower-calorie  beverage  choices,  or  free  drinking  water.  Respondents  who
reported having standards were also asked if standards applied to government facilities
that  serve  foods  and  beverages  to  each  of  the  following  groups:  local  government
employees, the general public, or institutionalized people (for example, prisons, centers
for  the  disabled).  Because  pricing  incentives  to  encourage  healthier  food  sales  are
encouraged  in  the  Health  and  Sustainability  Guidelines  for  Federal  Concessions  and
Vending  Operations  (10),  all  respondents  were  asked  “Does  your  local  government
have pricing incentives to promote the purchase of healthier foods and beverages sold
in local government buildings, including cafeterias or vending machines? An example of
this is intentionally pricing more healthful items to be less expensive. Do not include
public school district or school-level policies in your response.” Other variables used in
this  analysis  included  municipal  population  size,  rural–urban  status,  region,  median
educational  attainment,  poverty  prevalence,  and  percentage  of  residents  who  were
non-Hispanic  white.  The  population  size  of  each  municipality  was  determined  with
information  from  the  US  Census  Bureau  2007  Census  of  Governments  (9).  For  the
present analysis, we classified population size into 3 categories: 1,000 to 2,499, 2,500
to 49,999, and 50,000 or more. Municipalities were classified as urban if more than 50%
of  residents  resided  in  urban  areas  according  to  the  2010  US  Census  Urban  Area  to
Place  Relationship  File  (11).  Region  was  classified  according  to  4  primary  census
regions:  Northeast,  Midwest,  South,  and  West  (12).  Poverty  prevalence  was  derived
from 2009–2013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates (13) and dichotomized
as  either  less  than  20%  or  20%  or  more  on  the  basis  of  the  established  definition  of
persistent  poverty  of  the  US  Department  of  Agriculture  (14).  Median  educational
attainment  (classified  as  ≥some  college  or  ≤high  school  diploma)  and  racial/ethnic
composition  of  each  municipality  were  obtained  from  American  Community  Survey
2009–2013  5-year  estimates  (13).  The  racial/ethnic  composition  of  each  municipality
was classified as more than 90% non-Hispanic white, more than 50% but less than or
equal to 90% non-Hispanic white, or 50% or less non-Hispanic white to correspond with
municipalities  with  low  percentages  of  racial/ethnic  minority  residents,  municipalities
with  mixed  populations,  or  municipalities  where  minority  racial/ethnic  groups
constituted  the  majority  of  residents.  For  these  analyses,  84  municipalities  were
excluded because of a missing response (n = 4) or a response of “don’t know” (n = 80)
to  the  nutrition  standards  survey  question.  Prevalence  among  US  municipalities  of
having  nutrition  standards  and  healthier  food  pricing  incentives  and  associated  95%
confidence  intervals  (CIs)  were  calculated  overall  and,  for  nutrition  standards,  by
population  size,  rural–urban  status,  region,  poverty  prevalence,  median  educational
attainment,  and  racial/ethnic  composition.  Because  few  municipalities  reported
healthier food pricing incentives, it was not possible to examine differences according
to  municipal  characteristics  for  this  variable.  Differences  in  prevalence  of  nutrition
standards  according  to  municipal  characteristics  were  assessed  using  χ2  tests  with
significance level set at P < .05. We also assessed independent associations between
the presence of nutrition standards and municipal characteristics by using multivariable
logistic regression. The model included nutrition standards as the dependent variable
and population size, rural–urban status, census region, educational attainment, poverty
prevalence,  and  race/ethnicity  as  independent  variables.  Among  municipalities  with
standards,  we  also  calculated  the  frequency  of  each  nutrient  or  food  category
addressed  in  the  standards  and  the  frequency  that  the  standards  applied  to
government  employees,  the  general  public,  and  institutionalized  people.  All  data
analyses were weighted and conducted using SAS version 9.3 (SAS Institute, Inc). Top
Among  municipalities  in  the  United  States  in  2014,  3.2%  had  nutrition  standards  for
foods served or sold in municipal government buildings or worksites ( Table). Less than
1%  (0.5%;  95%  CI,  0.2%–0.9%)  had  pricing  incentives  to  promote  the  purchase  of
healthier foods and beverages. Prevalence of nutrition standards differed significantly
by  population  size  and  were  more  common  among  municipalities  with  populations  of
50,000 or more (12.8%) compared with municipalities with fewer than 2,500 (2.2%) or
2,500 to 49,999 (2.7%). After multivariable adjustment, municipalities with populations
of  50,000  or  more  had  approximately  3  times  greater  odds  of  having  nutrition
standards  compared  with  those  with  2,500  to  50,000  (P  <  .001).  Prevalence  of
standards  differed  by  census  region  (P  =  .003)  with  standards  most  common  among
municipalities  in  the  West  (6.6%)  and  least  common  among  municipalities  in  the
Midwest  (2.0%),  but  this  difference  did  not  remain  significant  in  the  multivariable
model. Standards were more common among municipalities where non-Hispanic whites
composed 50% or less of the population (9.2%) versus municipalities where more than
90% of the population was non-Hispanic white (1.5%) or 51% to 89% was non-Hispanic
white  (2.9%),  and  this  difference  remained  significant  after  adjustment  (odds  ratio  =
5.6 for ≤50% non-Hispanic white compared with >90% non-Hispanic white). Prevalence
of standards did not differ according to rural–urban status, educational attainment, or
poverty prevalence. Among municipalities that reported having nutrition standards (n =
63), 79% (95% CI, 69%–89%) reported they addressed providing fruits and vegetables,
76% (95% CI: 66%–87%) reported that they addressed providing low calorie beverages,
and  71%  (95%  CI:  61%–83%)  reported  that  they  addressed  providing  free  drinking
water  (Figure  1).  Providing  whole  grains  (67%;  95%  CI,  55%–78%),  low  sodium  foods
(62%;  95%  CI,  49%–74%),  and  low-fat  dairy  products  (60%;  95%  CI,  47%–72%)  were
also  reported  to  be  addressed  among  the  majority  of  municipalities  that  reported
having  nutrition  standards.  Calorie  labeling  (32%;  95%  CI,  21%–44%)  and  limiting
trans-fats (35%; 95% CI: 22%–45%) were reported less frequently.  Figure 1. Foods and
nutrients
 addressed
 in
 municipal
 nutrition
 standards
 among
 United
 States
municipalities  that  reported  having  them  in  2014  (n  =  63).  National  Survey  of
Community-Based  Policy  and  Environmental  Supports  for  Healthy  Eating  and  Active
Living. [A tabular description of this figure is also available.] Among municipalities with
nutrition standards, 67% (95% CI, 55%–78%) of municipalities reported that standards
applied to facilities serving government employees, 67% (95% CI, 54%–78%) reported
that they applied to facilities serving the general public, and 49% (95% CI: 36%–61%)
reported that standards applied to both employees and the general public. Only 21%
(95%  CI:  11%–32%)  of  municipalities  with  standards  reported  that  they  applied  to
facilities  serving  institutionalized  persons  (Figure  2).   Figure  2.  Reported  populations
served by facilities in US municipalities that reported having written nutrition standards
in  2014  (n  =  63).  National  Survey  of  Community-Based  Policy  and  Environmental
Supports for Healthy Eating and Active Living. [A tabular description of this figure is also
available.]  Top  In  2014,  only  3%  of  US  municipalities  reported  having  FSG  standards
and less than 1% reported having pricing incentives for healthier foods. The prevalence
of written nutrition standards was significantly greater among large municipalities and
among  municipalities  where  most  residents  were  races/ethnicities  other  than
non-Hispanic  white.  To  our  knowledge,  this  is  the  first  nationally  representative
assessment  of  nutrition  standards  and  healthy-food  pricing  incentives  among
municipalities in the US and provides a baseline for tracking municipal progress toward
ensuring healthier foods are available to employees and residents. Most Americans do
not consume a diet that aligns with dietary guidance, and efforts are needed to make
doing so easier for Americans (15). Enactment of FSGs at the local level is one strategy
for doing this. In the health impact pyramid model described by CDC Director Thomas
Frieden,  changing  the  context  of  people’s  surroundings  to  make  default  decisions
healthier  ranks  second  in  potential  public  health  impact  only  to  improving
socioeconomic  factors  such  as  poverty  and  education  (16).  Examples  of  municipal
policies to make default decisions healthier that have improved human health include
fluoridation  of  drinking  water,  smoke-free  workplaces,  and  community  design  to
improve  physical  activity  (16).  Similarly,  another  strategy  for  nutrition  standards  for
FSGs is to make default decisions healthier for government employees and members of
the  public  who  are  served  by  or  purchase  food  from  governments.  Until  recently,
government  nutrition  standards  have  largely  focused  on  child  care  and  school
standards regarding the healthfulness of school meals and competitive foods (17) and
on US military nutrition standards to maintain a healthy weight among personnel, but
policies  to  enact  nutrition  standards  in  other  government  settings  are  more  recent.
Evaluation  of  FSG  nutrition  standards  for  government  facilities  is  ongoing;  however,
early  evidence  has  suggested  nutrition  standard  policies  have  resulted  in  changes  to
the food environment such as increased availability of healthier foods and beverages
(18,19).  Although  evaluation  of  sales  and  dietary  intake  changes  in  response  to
nutrition standards enactment in government facilities in the United States is limited,
changes  to  cafeteria  and  vending  are  associated  with  increasing  purchases  and
consumption  of  healthier  foods  in  schools,  hospitals,  and  other  settings  (20–23).
Although  the use of  pricing  incentives  is  rare among  municipalities  at  this  time,  they
have been used successfully to increase the sales of healthier food and drink selections
in  worksites,  parks,  and  other  venues  (24).  The  prevalence  of  nutrition  standards
among US municipal governments may be low, because the idea is new and because
recommendations  for  municipalities  to  enact  nutrition  standards  are  recent.  For
example, in 2009 CDC recommended that “communities should increase availability of
healthier food and beverage choices in public service venues” as a strategy for obesity
prevention in the report, Common Community Measures for Obesity Prevention (5). In
2009  the  Institute  of  Medicine  recommended  that  governments  enact  nutrition
standards, especially  for facilities serving  the public, in  the report, Local Government
Actions  to  Prevent  Childhood  Obesity  (4).  Establishment  of  broad  FSG  nutrition
standards in the federal government began in 2011 when the Health and Sustainability
Guidelines  for  Federal  Concessions  and  Vending  Operations  were  released  and
continues, as they are integrated into concessions and vending operations across the
federal  government  (10,25).  Nutrition  standards  are  also  recent  at  the  state
government  level,  with  the  earliest  example  being  vending  standards  enacted  in
California in 2007 (7). Some of the earliest examples of local nutrition standards are Los
Angeles  County’s  2006  Vending  Machine  Nutrition  Policy  and  New  York  City’s  2008
Standards for Meals/Snacks Purchased (26). Los Angeles County’s policy set standards
for  foods  and  beverages  sold  in  vending  machines  in  all  county  facilities  and  offices
(26).  New  York  City’s  policy  set  standards  for  foods  purchased  and  served  by  city
agencies, foods and beverages sold in vending machines, foods served at meetings and
events,  and  foods  sold  in  commissaries  in  city  correctional  facilities  (26).  As  more
examples  of  FSG  nutrition  standards  at  different  levels  of  government  are  publicized
and disseminated to local public health and government officials along with evaluations
of their impact, the prevalence among municipal governments may increase. Our study
showed  no  differences  by  rural–urban  status,  educational  attainment,  or  poverty
prevalence,  but  large  municipalities  had  a  greater  prevalence  of  nutrition  standards.
There are several reasons that could explain this finding. First, the standards may be
facilitated by a greater demand for healthier foods among larger populations as well as
better  access  to  food  distributors  who  provide  healthier  items.  Second,  enacting
nutrition standards may take priority in larger cities with larger government structures,
more  venues  to  sell  foods,  and  more  programs  to  provide  foods  to  the  public  or  to
institutionalized  people.  For  example,  nutrition  standards  in  New  York  City  cover
approximately 260 million meals and snacks served by the city at more than 3,000 sites
each  year  (27).  Third,  government  structures  of  larger  municipalities  have  more
specialized departments that address a greater breadth of issues such as public health
and may be more likely to take part in novel health promotion efforts. As an example,
the  Big  Cities  Chronic  Disease  Community  of  Practice  represents  health  officials  from
the 50 largest cities and metropolitan regions in the United States and listed improving
healthy nutrition standards and guidelines as a priority in 2015 (28). We also found that
the  presence  of  nutrition  standards  was  more  likely  among  municipalities  where
non-Hispanic whites represented 50% or less of the residents. Although it is difficult to
speculate the reasons for this, cities with large minority populations may have greater
motivation to address obesity and chronic diseases through nutritional policies, because
these  conditions  represent  a  greater  burden  among  many  minorities  (29).  Previous
research also suggests that Hispanics and non-Hispanic blacks may be more likely than
non-Hispanic whites to support policy measures to increase the availability of healthier
foods such as programs to help small food stores stock fresh fruits and vegetables and
creation of community gardens (30). Thus, municipal governments with large minority
populations  may  be  motivated  to  enact  FSG  nutrition  standards  because  of  a  high
burden  of  chronic  diseases  as  along  with  increased  resident  support  for  nutritional
policy  measures  to  address  these  conditions.  Although  our  study  is  the  first
examination  of  local  government  nutrition  standards  at  a  national  level,  it  has
limitations.  First,  although  we  aimed  to  create  a  nationally  representative  sample  by
using  a  stratified  sample  design  and  applied  sample  weights  to  correct  for  selection
probability  and  nonresponse,  our  low  response  rate  may  have  affected  the
representativeness.  Specifically,  although  nonrespondents  did  not  differ  significantly
from respondents by population size or urban–rural status, response rates were lower
among  municipalities  in  the  Northeast  and  higher  among  municipalities  in  the  West.
Second,  we  did  not  survey  county  governments,  which  may  provide  a  large  share  of
government  services  in  places  where  there  are  few  or  no  government  subdivisions
below  the  county  level.  However,  approximately  62%  of  the  US  population  lived  in
incorporated  places  (municipalities)  in  2013  (7).  Third,  we  did  not  ask  respondents  if
foods or beverages were served or offered for sale in government facilities. Therefore,
some of the municipalities that reported not having nutrition standards may not serve
or sell any foods or beverages and would have little reason to enact standards. Fourth,
we  did  not  ask  about  the  specific  government  departments  or  facilities  where  the
standards  applied  or  whether  they  covered  cafeterias,  vending  machines,  or  other
venues. Thus, we are unable to estimate the reach of reported nutrition standards or to
better describe the settings where standards are applied. Fifth, we relied on respondent
report and did not consult written policy sources to verify the existence of any policies,
and we could not examine implementation level. In summary, our national survey found
that  nutrition  standards  were  rare  for  foods  sold  or  served  in  municipal  government
facilities  in  2014  but  were  present  for  approximately  1  in  8  municipalities  with
populations  of  50,000  or  more.  Given  the  10  million  people  employed  by  municipal
governments  in  the  United  States  and  the  large  number  of  public  citizens  served  by
these  governments  (6),  the  potential  impact  of  nutrition  standards  among  municipal
governments  is  large.  Future  work  should  continue  to  monitor  the  enactment  of
nutrition  standards  among  municipal  governments  and  evaluate  their  effect  on  sales
and consumption of healthier foods and beverages. Top The research described in this
article received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or
nonprofit sectors. The findings and conclusions of this report are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the official position of the CDC. None of the authors
have  conflicts  of  interest  to  declare.  Top  Corresponding  Author:  Stephen  J.  Onufrak,
PhD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity,
and  Obesity,  Obesity  Prevention  and  Control  Branch,  4770  Buford  Highway  NE,  Mail
Stop F-77, Atlanta, GA 30341. Telephone: 770-488-5551. Email: seo5@cdc.gov. Author
Affiliations: 1Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical
Activity and Obesity; Atlanta, GA 30341. Top Top Abbreviations: —, not applicable; CI,
confidence  interval.  a  Calculated  by  using  χ2  test.  b  Adjusted  for  population  size,
rural–urban  status,  census  region,  educational  attainment,  poverty  prevalence,  and
race/ethnicity.  c  Total  number  of  survey  respondents  was  2,029;  for  this  study,  84
municipalities  were  excluded  because  of  missing  or  “don’t  know”  responses  to  the
survey  question  regarding  whether  their  municipality  has  written  nutrition  standards.
Top The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily
reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public
Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated
institutions.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0364.htm
