A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Most mothers who work around chemicals can safely breastfeed their babies.  Mothers
should try to reduce or eliminate their exposure to occupational toxicants as much as
possible while breastfeeding. Employers should provide mothers with information and
training  on  their  potential  occupational  exposures.  Some  breastfeeding  mothers  may
encounter  chemicals  through  their  work.  The  benefits  of  breastfeeding  outweigh  the
potential risk of exposure to common toxicants through breast milk for most infants. 
Employers should work with mothers to reduce their exposure to occupational toxicants
as  much  as  possible.  Employers  should  provide  all  workers,  including  breastfeeding
mothers,  with  information  about  the  chemicals  they  use.  Employers  should  train
employees  about  safe  work  practices.  For  more  information  see  the  Occupational
Safety  and  Health  Administration's  (OSHA)  Hazard  Communication  Standard.  Many
chemotherapy drugs used to treat cancer are cytotoxic (damages or kills cells) at very
low doses. Some antineoplastic (chemotherapy) drugs are carcinogens (cause cancer)
with  no  known  safe  level  of  exposure.  It  is  best  to  reduce  or  eliminate  exposure  as
much  as  possible.   For  more  information  on  working  with  chemotherapy  drugs,  see
antineoplastic  (chemotherapy)  drugs.   For  breastfeeding  mothers  exposed  to
chemotherapy  drugs  at  work,  learn  more  about  reducing  occupational  exposure.
Perchloroethylene (PCE) is the most used solvent in dry cleaning facilities. PCE is also
known  as  PERC,  perchlor,  and  tetrachloroethene.  Studies  show  that  PCE  can  enter
breast milk if a mother is exposed. Greater amounts can be found in the breast milk of
women exposed to higher amounts of PCE over longer periods. Few studies have looked
at  the  effects  of  PCE  on  nursing  infants.  However,  there  are  reports  on  neurological
responses and perc exposure in children.  For mothers working in a dry cleaning facility,
OSHA has information on reducing your exposure to PCE. Working near diagnostic x-ray
sources does not affect breast milk. Receiving an x-ray also does not affect breast milk.
However,  workers  who  handle  radioactive  materials,  such  as  radioisotopes  in  health
care and laboratories or radioactive waste, must take precautions to reduce exposure.
See  ionizing  radiation.  Workers  can  also  speak  with  their  workplace  radiation  safety
officer  or  the  state's  department  of  radiation  protection  if  they  have  concerns.
Laboratory work in either clinical or research laboratories can potentially expose staff to
a  wide  range  of  chemicals  and  agents.  These  include  solvents,  formaldehyde,  and
infectious  agents.   Some  chemicals  used  in  laboratories  can  enter  breast  milk.
Breastfeeding  mothers  who  work  with  chemicals  should  talk  to  their  health  care
provider and employer about how to reduce exposure as much as possible. Lab workers
should:  Not  all  gloves  or  other  types  of  PPE  provide  adequate  protection  for  all
chemicals.  It  is  important  to  match  the  type  of  PPE  to  the  type  of  chemical.  If
appropriate, local exhaust ventilation, such as fume hoods, exhaust ducts, and exhaust
fans should be in place. Nail, hair, and beauty salon employees are potentially exposed
to  many  different  chemicals.  These  include  acrylates  (epoxies  or  resins),  solvents,
formaldehyde,  and  biocides  as  dust  or  vapors.  Some  chemicals  commonly  used  in
salons  can  enter  breast  milk.  Additionally,  breastfeeding  mothers  who  work  in  these
settings can carry these chemicals home on their skin, clothes, and shoes.  There are
ways  to  reduce  or  eliminate  exposure  to  these  chemicals  at  work.  Learn  more  about
working  in  nail  salons  and  how  to  prevent  take-home  exposures.  Veterinary  workers
may be exposed to several potentially hazardous chemicals and agents. Examples are
antineoplastic  drugs,  antiviral  drugs,  anesthetic  gases,  disinfectants,  and  pesticides,
such as those used for flea and mite treatments.  Additionally, veterinary workers are at
risk  of  contracting  zoonotic  infections  or  infections  acquired  from  animals.  These
hazards should be evaluated individually to determine breastfeeding safety.  There are
ways to reduce or eliminate exposure to these chemicals and other workplace hazards.
Learn  more  about  veterinary  safety  and  health.  Employers  should  conduct  a
workplace-specific hazard assessment to determine potential workplace exposures and
the  types  of  controls  needed  to  reduce  those  exposures.  Controlling  exposures  to
occupational  hazards  is  the  fundamental  method  of  protecting  workers.  PPE  is  one
workplace control. PPE is equipment worn to reduce exposure to hazardous chemicals
and other workplace hazards. Types of PPE include: The specific chemicals and other
hazards  being  used  determine  the  type  of  PPE  needed.  PPE  must  also  be  worn  and
maintained  correctly,  or  it  might  provide  little  or  no  protection.  PPE  may  reduce
exposure  to  chemicals  but  does  not  eliminate  it  completely.  Breastfeeding  mothers
should  talk  to  their  employers  about  the  types  of  PPE  recommended  for  their  work.
Learn  more  at  Personal  Protective  Equipment—Reproductive  Health.  Health  care
providers  and  public  health  practitioners  will  find  information  about  breastfeeding  in
special  circumstances.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding-special-circumstances/hcp/exposures/occupational.html
