Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Industrial  hygiene  studies  were  conducted  at  eleven  wood
treating plants and two manufacturing operations as part of an industrywide evaluation
of worker exposure to wood preservative chemicals. The purpose of these field studies
was to evaluate airborne exposure levels and characterize existing work practices and
other  methods  of  exposure  control.  The  wood  preservative  industry  is  comprised  of
over  1,000  plants  in  the  United  States  with  the  majority  employing  less  than  ten
workers  in  wood  treatment  processing.  Approximately  500  plants  are  members  of
industrial trade associations: American Wood Preservers Institute (AWPI) and American
Wood-Preservers’ Association (AWPA), and others. It is estimated that about ten major
plants produce 50% of the total treated wood in the United States. The report presents
the  findings  from  preliminary  walk-through  and  in-depth  industrial  hygiene  studies  of
the  various  wood  preservative  processes.  In  general,  employee  exposures  to
preservative chemicals during wood treatment were well below the current applicable
occupational standards. Short-term peak exposures occur during critical tasks, such as
cylinder  opening  and  unloading,  when  filling  non-pressure  tanks  with  hot  PCP  oil
solutions  and  during  inspection  and  sampling  of  treated  wood.  The  exposure  levels
measured were all well below current guidelines for significant health risk. The personal
sampling data generated from the comprehensive study is basically in agreement with
exposure  findings  of  past  surveys  conducted  by  the  wood  treatment  industry  and
Health  Hazard  Evaluations  done  by  NIOSH.  The  study  emphasizes  the  need  for
improved  work  practices  to  further  minimize  worker  exposure  and  contact  with
recognized  toxic  chemicals  during  emergency  spills,  non-routine  situations  or  critical
process tasks. Recommendations are given for personal protective equipment, modified
work  practices,  and  medical  surveillance  programs.  Industrial  Hygiene  Surveys  of
Occupational Exposures to Wood Preservative Chemicals [PDF – 6 MB]
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/83-106/default.html
