  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Neisseria  meningitidis  is  a
leading  cause  of  bacterial  meningitis  and  sepsis  (1).  The  case-fatality  rate  for
meningococcal disease is 10%--14%; survivors can experience brain damage, hearing
loss,  limb  loss,  and  learning  disabilities  (1).  On  December  11,  2009,  the  California
Department of Public Health (CDPH) initiated an investigation of two secondary cases of
meningococcal  disease  in  a  police  officer  and  a  respiratory  therapist  following
occupational  contact  with  an  unconscious  adult.  This  report  describes  the  events
surrounding occupational transmission of N. meningitidis and recommends measures to
control  and  prevent  secondary  transmission  of  N.  meningitidis.  Breaches  in  infection
control, notification delays, and lack of worker exposure assessment and postexposure
chemoprophylaxis  (PEP)  likely  contributed  to  secondary  cases.  Employers  should
provide adequate infection-control training to staff members, PEP to exposed workers,
and  report  notifiable  diseases  promptly.   On  December  3,  2009,  the  index  patient,  a
man  aged  36  years,  was  found  unconscious  at  home  by  four  police  officers  who  had
been asked by the patient's family to check on his welfare. The patient was supine on
his bed, and his airway was partially obstructed by vomitus. Vomitus and feces were on
the  patient's  body  and  clothing.  While  positioned  near  the  patient's  head,  one  of  the
police officers (PO1) turned the patient to the patient's side and adjusted the patient's
head to aid breathing. Immediately afterward, PO1 left the patient's room, reentering
only to check on the patient from a distance. After firefighters and paramedics arrived,
PO1 left the scene. Firefighters measured the patient's blood pressure and heart rate,
and  paramedics  placed  an  intravenous  line,  performed  airway  suctioning,  placed  an
oropharyngeal airway, administered oxygen, and transported the patient by ambulance
to hospital A at approximately 7:00 p.m. on December 3.  In the emergency department
(ED) of hospital A, the patient's airway was suctioned, and an endotracheal tube was
placed.  Blood  was  drawn  for  culture  in  the  ED  and  the  patient  was  treated  with
ceftriaxone.  The  patient  was  transferred  to  the  intensive-care  unit  (ICU),  and  the
treating  provider  considered  meningococcal  disease,  2009  pandemic  influenza  A
(H1N1),  and  community-acquired  pneumonia  as  possible  causes  of  his  illness.  In  the
ICU, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was collected for gram stain and culture and the patient
was  treated  with  piperacillin  and  tazobactam,  levofloxacin,  ceftriaxone,  and
vancomycin.  On December 4, gram-negative diplococci were identified in the patient's
CSF  at  9:30  a.m.  and  in  his  blood  at  3:30  p.m.  On  December  6,  N.  meningitidis  was
isolated from blood and on December 7, N. meningitidis also was isolated from CSF. On
December  7,  hospital  A  reported  this  case  of  laboratory-confirmed  meningococcal
disease  (2)  to  its  local  health  authority,  3  days  after  a  presumptive  diagnosis  of
meningococcal meningitis was made and 1 day after the diagnosis was confirmed by
blood culture. The index patient was hospitalized for 20 days and then discharged to a
rehabilitation  facility  on  December  23.  On  December  5,  PO1,  a  man  aged  30  years,
experienced onset of sore throat and nausea that progressed to muscle pain with fever
and vomiting. On December 9, he was examined by his primary-care physician. While
at the physician's office, PO1 received a phone call from a colleague who informed him
of the index patient's diagnosis of meningococcal disease. The primary-care physician
advised PO1 to go directly to the ED, and he was admitted to hospital B the same day.
PO1 had blood and CSF collected for gram stain and culture and was treated empirically
with  ceftriaxone  and  vancomycin.  On  December  10,  gram-negative  diplococci  were
detected in blood from PO1, and hospital B reported the case of meningococcal disease
to its local health authority and the local health authority of PO1's employer. The next
day,  blood  and  CSF  from  PO1  were  culture  positive  for  N.  meningitidis.  PO1  was
hospitalized  for  5  days,  and  then  discharged  to  his  home  on  December  14.  On
December 8, a respiratory therapist (RT1), a man aged 47 years who had been present
during airway suctioning and assisted with endotracheal tube placement in the ED at
hospital A, began experiencing weakness, chills, and fatigue. On December 10, RT1 was
transported  by  ambulance  from  his  home  to  hospital  C.  RT1  was  empirically  treated
with  ceftriaxone,  vancomycin,  and  meropenem  and  had  blood  and  CSF  collected  for
gram  stain  and  culture  in  the  ED.  On  December  11,  gram-negative  diplococci  were
detected  in  blood  and  CSF  from  RT1.  The  next  day,  blood  and  CSF  from  RT1  were
culture positive for N. meningitidis, and hospital C notified its local health authority. RT1
was  hospitalized  for  11  days  and  then  discharged  to  his  home  on  December  21.  On
December  11,  CDPH  was  notified  of  the  three  cases  by  the  local  health  authority  to
which  hospital  B  (and  later  hospital  C)  reported,  and  CDPH  initiated  an  investigation.
Because CDPH determined that contact tracing and postexposure follow-up of workers
already  had  been  initiated  by  the  local  health  authorities  and  all  employers,  the
objectives of the ensuing investigation were limited to characterizing the occupational
exposure,  identifying  lapses  in  infection  control,  and  confirming  that  appropriate
employee  health  follow-up  was  conducted.  CDPH  also  made  recommendations  on
prevention  and  control  measures.  CDPH  interviewed  hospital  A  infection-control  and
employee  health  personnel  and  workers  involved  in  the  patient's  care  before  his
transfer  to  the  ICU,  including  PO1  and  RT1.  Employers  provided  CDPH  with  a  list  of
workers  who  participated  in  the  emergency  response.  Workers  were  identified  from
employer  logs  and  from  documentation  submitted  by  the  ambulance  service  that
describes  the  patient's  prehospital  care.  Employers'  records  of  their  workers'
postexposure  assessment  (n  =  22),  local  health  authority  records,  and  the  medical
records  of  the  patients  were  reviewed.  Potentially  exposed  workers  were  defined  as
those persons reported being ≤3 feet from the patient while providing care, based on
CDC guidelines (3). Additional information on personal protective equipment (PPE) use
was  collected  during  interviews  and  record  reviews.  N.  meningitidis  isolates  from
patients  were  typed  by  using  multilocus  sequence  typing  at  CDPH  and  submitted  to
CDC  for  pulsed-field  gel  electrophoresis  (4,5).  A  total  of  23  workers,  including  four
police  officers,  three  firefighters,  two  paramedics,  and  14  health-care  workers,  were
involved in the index patient's care. Among the 23 workers, 10 were reported to have
been  ≤3  feet  from  the  patient  (Table)  while  providing  care.  Among  these,  PO1  wore
only  gloves,  two  firefighters  and  two  paramedics  donned  N95  respirators,  and  one  of
five hospital health-care workers wore a surgical mask. Lack of PPE availability in the
field  and  lack  of  knowledge  regarding  where  respirators  and  surgical  masks  were
located  in  the  ED  were  cited  as  two  reasons  why  appropriate  PPE  was  not  worn  by
health-care workers. In total, 16 workers were offered PEP by their employers 4--8 days
postexposure.  For  the  seven  workers  not  offered  PEP,  two  were  already  taking
antibiotics for other medical reasons, two had no patient exposure, one was seen by his
private physician and was not offered PEP, and two (PO1 and RT1) were not offered PEP
by  their  employers.   The  index  patient  and  both  secondary  patients  had
culture-confirmed  N.  meningitidis  serogroup  C,  ST-11  clonal  complex;  isolates  were
indistinguishable  by  pulsed-field  gel  electrophoresis.  Neither  secondary  patient  used
N95 respirators or surgical masks; both did use gloves. PO1 reported no direct contact
with respiratory secretions. However, PO1 reported that he heard hacking or gurgling
sounds when he turned the index patient, but he could not remember feeling droplets
on  his  skin  or  face.  RT1  assisted  with  intubation  and  airway  suctioning  of  the  index
patient. In both cases, unprotected exposure to respiratory aerosols or secretions might
have resulted in transmission of N. meningitidis.  B Materna, PhD, K Harriman, PhD, J
Rosenberg, MD, D Shusterman, MD, G Windham, PhD, J Atwell, California Dept of Public
Health. S Beckman, MPH, CDC/CSTE Applied Epidemiology Fellow; E Mortensen, MD, J
Zipprich,  PhD,  EIS  officers,  CDC.  Occupationally  acquired  meningococcal  disease
outside of the laboratory is rarely reported (6--8), perhaps in part because of rapid use
of  PEP.  Transmission  of  N.  meningitidis  to  health-care  personnel  has  occurred  after
unprotected  exposure  to  infected  patients  during  endotracheal  intubation,  airway
suctioning,  and  oxygen  administration  (6--8),  but  more  than  one  occupationally
acquired infection from the same index patient has not been reported. Findings from
this investigation indicate that breaches in infection control and delays in notification to
the local health authority, worker exposure assessment, and PEP administration likely
contributed  to  secondary  cases  of  meningococcal  disease.  To  decrease  the  risk  for
infectious  disease  transmission  to  health-care  personnel,  the  Healthcare  Infection
Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee  recommends  use  of  empiric  infection-control
precautions  based  on  the  patient's  apparent  clinical  syndrome  when  the  diagnosis  is
unknown and recommends use of droplet precautions (surgical masks) for contact with
patients with suspected or confirmed meningococcal disease (3). The California Division
of  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  aerosol-transmissible  diseases  (Cal/OSHA  ATD)
standard*  requires  droplet  precautions  for  contact  with  patients  with  suspected  or
confirmed  meningococcal  disease  and  until  November  2010  required  N95  respirators
for  contact  with  suspected  or  confirmed  2009  pandemic  influenza  A  (H1N1)  patients.
Given  that  the  index  patient's  differential  diagnosis  included  H1N1  infection,  N95
respirators should have been used; however, among the 10 workers who had been ≤3
feet to the index patient, only four used a respirator. No health-care workers at hospital
A  wore  respirators,  and  only  one  wore  a  surgical  mask.    Meningococcal  disease  is  a
nationally
 notifiable
 disease
 (2).
 California
 requires
 health-care
 providers
 to
immediately report by telephone suspected cases of meningococcal disease to the local
health  authority.†  Hospitals  A  and  C  were  late  in  reporting  suspected  cases  to  their
respective local health authorities. Additionally, under the Cal/OSHA ATD standard and
the  federal  reauthorization  of  the  Ryan  White  Act,§  hospital  A  was  required  to  notify
other  employers  of  potentially  exposed  nonhospital  employees,  such  as  paramedics,
fire  fighters,  and  police.  Had  hospital  A  adhered  to  these  reporting  and  notification
requirements, postexposure follow-up of nonhospital employees might have been more
timely. Hospital A also did not conduct an exposure assessment of its own employees
until  8  days  postexposure,  after  notification  of  RT1's  hospitalization.  PEP  should  be
initiated  as  soon  as  possible,  ideally  <24  hours  after  index  patient  identification  (1).
However, all 16 workers were offered prophylaxis ≥4 days postexposure and ≥3 days
after  the  index  patient  was  suspected  to  have  meningococcal  disease.  Neither
secondary  patient  was  offered  PEP.  CDC's  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices  (ACIP)  recommends  PEP  for  close  contacts  of  patients  with  meningococcal
disease.  ACIP  defines  close  contacts  for  PEP  as  1)  household  members,  2)  child-care
center personnel, and 3) persons directly exposed to the patient's oral secretions (e.g.,
by  kissing,  mouth-to-mouth  resuscitation,  endotracheal  intubation,  or  endotracheal
tube management) (1). Although the majority of workers were offered PEP, albeit late,
whether PEP would have been recommended for PO1 is unclear and would depend on
how strictly the evaluating clinician interpreted the ACIP recommendations. Other types
of exposures not defined specifically in the ACIP recommendations might warrant PEP
based on the clinician's judgment. However, because PO1 was experiencing symptoms
as  early  as  December  5,  timely  notification  and  assessment  could  have  resulted  in
earlier  diagnosis  and  treatment.  Health-care  facilities  should  review  their  local  health
authority reporting procedures to ensure timely reporting of notifiable diseases, such as
N.  meningitidis,  and  employers  should  provide  infection-control  training  and  PPE  to
potentially  exposed  workers.  Employers  also  should  conduct  timely  and  thorough
investigations  to  identify  and  evaluate  workers  potentially  exposed  to  a  patient
suspected to have meningococcal disease.  * Aerosol Transmissible Diseases Standard,
Title
 8
 C.C.R.
 Sect.
 5199
 (2009),
 April
 15,
 2010.
 Available
 at
http://www.dir.ca.gov/title8/5199.html.  †  Reportable  Disease  and  Conditions,  Title  17
C.C.R.
 Sect.
 2500,
 April
 15,
 2010.
 Available
 at
http://www.cdph.ca.gov/programs/documents/provider_reportable_diseases+conditions.
pdf.  § Ryan White HIV/AIDS Treatment Extension Act, S. 1793, 111 Cong. (2009), April
15, 2010. Available at http://www.govtrack.us/congress/bill.xpd?bill=s111-1793. What is
already known on this topic?  Occupational transmission of meningococcal disease has
been reported, rarely, after unprotected exposure to infected patients. In California, a
suspect  case  of  meningococcal  disease,  defined  as  the  detection  of  gram-negative
diplococci from a normally sterile site, is reportable immediately, by telephone to the
local  health  authority.   What  is  added  by  this  report?   A  multiemployer  emergency
response to a patient with meningococcal disease resulted in two secondary cases that
might  have  been  prevented  if  infection  control  recommendations,  postexposure
chemoprophylaxis  (PEP),  and  notification  requirements  had  been  implemented  in  a
timely  manner.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?   Health-care
facilities should review infection control and occupational health recommendations and
disease reporting requirements; clinicians should carefully evaluate worker exposures
to  determine  whether  PEP  is  indicated.   TABLE.  Exposure  and  prophylaxis
characteristics  of  workers  who  were  reported  to  be  ≤3  feet  from  index  patient  with
Neisseria  meningitidis  while  providing  care*  ---  California,  2009  Employer  Occupation
Exposure  to  patient  Type  of  mask/respirator  worn  Days  from  exposure  to  notification
Prophylaxis  offered  City  Police  officer†  Turned  patient,  near  head  None  6§  No¶
Firefighter  Took  vital  signs,  assisted  with  patient  transfer  to  ambulance,  rode  with
patient in ambulance, administered oxygen N95 respirator 6 Yes Firefighter Took vital
signs,  assisted  with  patient  transfer  to  ambulance  N95  respirator  5  No**  Private
company  Paramedic  Placed  intravenous  line,  suctioned  patient,  placed  oropharyngeal
airway,  administered  oxygen,  rode  with  patient  in  ambulance  N95  respirator  4  Yes
Paramedic  Performed  full  physical  examination  N95  respirator  4  Yes  Hospital  A
Respiratory  therapist††  Assisted  with  intubation,  present  for  suctioning  None  Not
notified  No¶  Physician  Suctioned  patient,  performed  intubation  None  8  Yes  Nurse
Checked  pupils,  pulse  None  8  Yes  Respiratory  therapist§§  Set  up  intubation  tray,
retrieved ventilator Surgical mask (with face shield) 8 Yes Nurse Injected intravenous
medication  None 8 Yes  * Excludes persons who did not recall patient contact or for
whom  reliable  data  on  patient  contact  was  not  available.  †  Confirmed  with
meningococcal  disease  (PO1).  §  Notified  by  coworker.  ¶  Not  assessed.   **  Exposure
assessment  was  conducted  by  worker's  private  physician.  ††  Confirmed  with
meningococcal  disease  (RT1).  §§  Not  interviewed;  information  based  on  chart  review
and  other  employee  interviews.  Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for
identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5945a2.htm
