Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)  is
working closely with international partners to respond to the coronavirus disease-2019
(COVID-19)  pandemic.  CDC  provides  technical  assistance  to  help  other  countries
increase  their  ability  to  prevent,  detect,  and  respond  to  health  threats,  including
COVID-19.  This  document  is  provided  by  CDC  and  is  intended  for  use  in  non-U.S.
healthcare  settings.  As  of  June  30,  2021   This  document  outlines  strategies  to
implement  infection  prevention  and  control  (IPC)  guidance  in  non-U.S.  outpatient
facilities  in  areas  of  widespread  community  transmission  of  severe  acute  respiratory
syndrome  coronavirus  2  (SARS-CoV-2),  the  virus  that  causes  the  coronavirus
disease-2019  (COVID-19).  Clinics  and  other  facilities  that  provide  outpatient  services
play an important role in a healthcare system’s response to COVID-19 and are critical to
provide  continued  essential  health  services.  This  information  complements  available
IPC  guidance  for  COVID-19  from  the  World  Health  Organization  (WHO).  These
operational considerations are intended for use by health workers, including managers
and  IPC  teams  at  outpatient  facilities  in  non-U.S.  healthcare  settings.  Outpatient
facilities  can  include:  The  purpose  of  IPC  in  outpatient  facilities  during  the  COVID-19
pandemic is to: IPC activities in outpatient facilities should be planned, carried out, and
supervised by designated health workers with IPC experience (i.e., IPC team or an IPC
focal point). In accordance with WHO guidance on core components of IPC programs,
district  and  national  IPC  management  should  support  facility  IPC  focal  points.  For
example,  district-  or  national-level  IPC  management  can  help  ensure  availability  of
supplies to support good IPC practices, support education and training of the healthcare
workforce,  and  provide  feedback  on  outcomes.  This  role  for  district  or  national  IPC
programs is especially relevant during the COVID-19 pandemic. In settings with limited
or  no  IPC  infrastructure,  establishing  minimum  requirements  for  national-  and
facility-level measures to protect patients and health workers is critical. There are four
operational  steps  to  consider  when  planning  outpatient  service  continuation  in  the
context of COVID-19: Patients with suspected COVID-19 will likely present to outpatient
facilities.  Optimizing  facility  preparedness  to  receive  patients  with  COVID-19
symptoms can help limit the exposure risk for other patients and health workers. When
community  transmission  of  SARS-CoV-2  is  suspected,  facility  leadership  and  the  IPC
focal  point  should  review  IPC  guidance  and  operational  considerations  for  healthcare
facilities  and  follow  national  IPC  guidance  to  prepare  facilities  to  safely  triage  and
manage  patients  with  COVID-19  symptoms.  Consider  the  following  measures:
Infrastructure and healthcare workforce for IPC Despite facility prevention measures to
reduce the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, patients with possible COVID-19 will still be
seen. Preparing facilities to receive patients with COVID-19 symptoms can help limit the
risk of exposure to patients and staff. Facility leadership and the IPC focal point should
review  WHO’s  guidance,  Infection  prevention  and  control  during  health  care  when
coronavirus  disease  (‎COVID-19)‎  is  suspected  or  confirmed,  and  follow  national  IPC
guidance  to  begin  preparing  facilities  to  safely  triage  and  manage  patients  with
respiratory illness, including COVID-19. Modifying outpatient operations is important to
reduce crowding and to prevent the mixing of infectious with noninfectious patients at
facilities, and prevent transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Coordinating with local public health
authorities  can  expand  strategies  available  to  an  individual  facility  (e.g.,  identifying
alternate  care  sites  for  essential  health  services).  Additionally,  in  communities  with
widespread  community  transmission  of  COVID-19,  implementing  source  control  for
patients,  visitors,  and  health  workers  at  facilities  through  universal  use  of  masks  can
also  reduce  transmission  of  SARS-CoV-2.  While  nonmedical  masks  are  recommended
for  the  general  population,  medical  masks  per  WHO  recommendations  should  be
prioritized for health workers or vulnerable populations, including people aged 60 years
or  over,  those  with  underlying  conditions,  such  as  cardiovascular  disease,  diabetes,
chronic
 lung
 disease,
 cancer,
 cerebrovascular
 disease,
 or
 people
 with
immunosuppression. Strategies to reduce risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in outpatient
facilities by modifying service delivery are described below. Modifications to outpatient
operations  for  essential  health  services   Modifications  to  outpatient  operations  for
non-essential  health  services  during  COVID-19  Modifications  to  outpatient  operations
for  patients  who  are  acutely  ill  or  have  symptoms  consistent  with  COVID-19  To
minimize  the  risk  of  SARS-CoV-2  transmission  at  outpatient  facilities,  the  use  of
alternate  care  sites  or  non-facility-based  models  of  healthcare  delivery  may  be
considered  to  separate  patients  in  need  of  essential  health  services  from  patients
seeking care for acute illness. Alternate care sites include community-based locations,
such as unoccupied schools or stadiums, that might be temporarily out of use due to
local  mitigation  measures.  Such  sites  offer  the  benefit  of  space  to  allow  appropriate
physical distancing of health workers and patients. However, since these sites are not
primarily intended for the delivery of healthcare, their structure might not be suitable
for  outpatient  services  that  require  physical  exams  and  are  best  used  to  deliver
single-purpose care (e.g., drug pick-ups, immunizations, or well-child visits). Similarly,
non-facility-based care, which includes outreach services to people’s homes or mobile
services,  help  minimize  crowding  at  healthcare  facilities  while  maintaining  essential
health  services.  IPC  is  always  needed  wherever  healthcare  is  delivered,  including
alternate  care  sites  and  non-facility-based  care.  At  a  minimum,  health  workers
delivering care in these settings require education and training in good IPC practices,
including  standard  and  transmission-based  precautions.  Patients  and  health  workers
should maintain physical separation of at least 1 meter from others at all times based
on  WHO  recommendations,  which  differ  from  CDC  recommendation  of  ≥6  feet  (≥1.8
meters).  Additional  IPC  considerations  for  specific  situations  are  below:  [1]If  they  are
not  near  aerosol-generating  procedures,  WHO  recommends  that  health  workers
providing direct care to COVID-19 patients should wear a medical mask (in addition to
other PPE that are part of droplet and contact precautions). Health workers involved in
aerosol-generating procedures require N95s, not medical masks.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/non-us-settings/outpatient.html
