Revisions  to  the  OSHA  Respiratory  Protection  Standard  (29  CFR  1910.134)  became
effective on April 8, 1998.  Incorporated within the preamble of this ruling were changes
to  OSHA  regulations  for  several  chemicals  or  substances,  which  are  listed  as
subheadings in blue text throughout this appendix.  These subheadings, which are also
the titles of the affected standards within 29 CFR 1910 and 29 CFR 1926, are followed
by the standard number(s) in parentheses and the OSHA respirator requirements.  Fit
testing is required by OSHA for all tight-fitting air-purifying respirators.   Please consult
29 CFR 1910.134 for the full content of the changes that apply.  For all of the chemicals
listed  in  this  appendix,  any  respirators  that  are   permitted  at  higher  environmental
concentrations  can  be  used  at  lower  concentrations.  Employees  engaged  in  handling
operations involving the carcinogens listed below must be provided with, and required
to  wear  and  use,  a  half-mask  filter-type  respirator  for  dusts,  mists,  and  fumes.   A
respirator affording higher levels of protection than this respirator may be substituted.
(2) Supplied-air respirator with half-mask facepiece. (2) Supplied-air respirator with full
facepiece;  or  (3)  Self-contained  breathing  apparatus  with  full  facepiece.  (2)
Self-contained  breathing  apparatus  with  full  facepiece  in  positive-pressure  mode.  (2)
Any  self-contained  breathing  apparatus.  (2)  Any  half-mask  supplied  air  respirator.  (2)
Any  full-facepiece  supplied-air  respirator;  or  (3)  Any  full-facepiece  self-contained
breathing
 apparatus.
 (2)
 Half-mask
 supplied-air
 respirators
 operated
 in
positive-pressure mode. * A high-efficiency filter means a filter that is at least 99.97%
efficient  against  mono-disperesed  particles  of  0.3  µm  (micrometers)  in  diameter  or
higher.  (2)  Any  half-mask*  supplied-air  respirator.  (2)  Any  full-facepiece  supplied-air
respirator;  or  (3)  Any  full-facepiece  self-contained  breathing  apparatus.  *  Half-mask
respirators  shall  not  be  used  for  protection  against  arsenic  trichloride,  as  it  is  rapidly
absorbed  through  the  skin.  **  A  high-efficiency  filter  means  a  filter  that  is  at  least
99.97%  efficient  against  mono-disperesed  particles  of  0.3  µm  (micrometers)  in
diameter  or  higher.  *  A  high-efficiency  filter  means  a  filter  that  is  at  least  99.97%
efficient  against  mono-dispersed  particles  of  0.3  µm  (micrometers)  in  diameter  or
higher.  (2)  Full-facepiece  gas  mask  with  chin-style  canisters*.  (2)  Full-facepiece
positive-pressure supplied-air respirator with auxiliary self-contained air supply. (2) Any
self-contained  breathing  apparatus  with  full  facepiece.  (2)  Any  powered  air-purifying
respirator equipped with approved butadiene or organic vapor cartridges or canisters. 
Cartridges  or  canisters  shall  be  replaced  every  [1]  hour;  or  (3)  Continuous-flow
supplied-air  respirator  equipped  with  a  hood  or  helmet.  (2)  Powered  air-purifying
respirator  (PAPR)  equipped  with  a  tight-fitting  facepiece  and  approved  butadiene  or
organic  vapor  cartridges.   PAPR  cartridges  shall  be  replaced  every  [1]  hour.  (2)  Any
supplied-air
 respirator
 equipped
 with
 a
 full
 facepiece
 and
 operated
 in
 a
pressure-demand  or  other  positive-pressure  mode  in  combination  with  an  auxiliary
self-contained  breathing  apparatus  operated  in  a  pressure-demand  or  other
positive-pressure mode. (2) Any air-purifying full-facepiece respirator equipped with a
front- or back-mounted butadiene or organic vapor canister. (2) Supplied-air respirator
with  a  loose-fitting  hood  or  helmet  facepiece  operated  in  continuous-flow  mode.  (2)
Powered  air-purifying  respirator  with  a  tight-fitting  half-mask  equipped  with  a
high-efficiency  filter*;  or  (3)  Supplied-air  respirator  with  a  tight-fitting  half-mask
operated  in  continuous-flow  mode.  (2)  Supplied-air  respirator  with  a  tight-fitting  full
facepiece  operated  in  continuous-flow  mode.  (2)  Supplied-air  respirator  with  a  full
facepiece operated in pressure-demand or other positive-pressure mode and equipped
with  an  auxiliary  escape-type  self-contained  breathing  apparatus  operated  in
pressure-demand  mode.  Note:  Quantitative  fit  testing  is  required  for  all  tight-fitting
air-purifying respirators where airborne concentration of cadmium exceeds 10 times the
TWA PEL (10 X 5 µg/m3 = 50 µg/m3).  A full-facepiece respirator is required when eye
irritation  is  expected.  *  A  high-efficiency  filter  means  a  filter  that  is  at  least  99.97%
efficient  against  mono-dispersed  particles  of  0.3  µm  (micrometers)  in  diameter  or
higher.  (2)  Any  particulate  filter  respirator  or  combination  chemical  cartridge  and
particulate  filter  respirator  for  coke  oven  emissions.  (2)  Powered  air-purifying
particulate  filter  respirator  for  dust  and  mist;  or  (3)  Powered  air-purifying  particulate
filter  respirator  or  combination  chemical  cartridge  and  particulate  filter  respirator  for
coke  oven  emissions.  *  A  disposable  respirator  means  the  filter  element  is  an
inseparable part of the respirator. ** A high-efficiency filter means a filter that is at least
99.97% efficient against mono-dispersed particles of 0.3 µm (micrometers) in diameter
or higher. Notes: Self-contained breathing apparatus are not required but are permitted
respirators.  Supplied-air  respirators  are  not  required  but  are  permitted  under  the
following  conditions:  Cotton  dust  concentration  not  greater  than  10X  the  PEL:  Any
supplied air respirator;  not greater than 100X the PEL: Any supplied-air respirator with
full  facepiece,  helmet,  or  hood;  greater  than  100X  the  PEL:  Supplied-air  respirator
operated in positive-pressure mode. (2) any self-contained breathing apparatus. (2) any
self-contained  breathing  apparatus  with  full  facepiece.  (2)  Self-contained  breathing
apparatus  with  full  facepiece  operated  in  pressure-demand  or  other  positive-pressure
mode.  (2)  Continuous-flow  supplied-air  respirator  (positive-pressure)  equipped  with
hood,  helmet,  or  suit.  (2)  Positive-pressure  full-facepiece  supplied-air  respirator
equipped  with  an  auxiliary  positive-pressure  self-contained  breathing  apparatus.  (2)
Type C supplied-air respirator, demand type or continuous flow type, with full facepiece,
hood,  or  helmet.  (2)  Combination  supplied-air,  full-facepiece  positive-pressure
respirator  with  auxiliary  self-contained  air  supply.  (2)  Full-face  mask  respirator  with
chin-style or front- or back-mounted type industrial size canister specifically approved
for protection against formaldehyde. (2) Half-mask* supplied-air respirator operated in
positive-pressure  mode.  (2)  Half-mask*  supplied-air  respirator  operated  in  demand
(negative  pressure)  mode.  (2)  Hood  or  helmet  supplied-air  respirator  operated  in  a
continuous-flow  mode  (e.g.,  Type  CE  abrasive  blasting  respirators  operated  in  a
continuous-flow
 mode).
 (2)
 Tight-fitting
 powered
 air-purifying
 respirator
 with
high-efficiency  filters**;  (3)  Full-facepiece  supplied-air  respirator  operated  in  demand
mode;  (4)  Half-mask*  or  full-facepiece  supplied-air  respirator  operated  in  a
continuous-flow  mode;  or  (5)  Full-facepiece  self-contained  breathing  apparatus
operated in demand mode. * Full facepiece is required if the lead aerosols cause eye or
skin irritation at the use concentrations. ** A high-efficiency filter means a filter that is
at least 99.97% efficient against mono-dispersed particles of 0.3 µm (micrometers) in
diameter  or  higher.  (2)  Full-facepiece  self-contained  breathing  apparatus  operated  in
negative-pressure  (demand)  mode.  (2)  Pressure-demand  supplied-air  respirator,
full-facepiece; or (3) Positive-pressure full-facepiece self-contained breathing apparatus.
(2)
 Full-facepiece
 pressure-demand
 supplied-air
 respirator
 with
 an
 auxiliary
self-contained air supply. (2) Gas mask with organic vapor canister. (2) Full-facepiece
positive-pressure  demand  supplied-air  respirator  with  auxiliary  self-contained  air
supply. (2) Any positive-pressure or continuous-flow self-contained breathing apparatus
with  full  facepiece  or  hood.  *  A  high-efficiency  filter  means  a  filter  that  is  at  least
99.97% efficient against mono-dispersed particles of 0.3 µm (micrometers) in diameter
or  higher.  **  Combination  High-Efficiency/Organic  Vapor  Cartridges  shall  be  used
whenever Methylenedianiline is in liquid form or a process requiring heat is used. (2)
Type C supplied-air respirator, demand type, with half facepiece; or (3) Any chemical
cartridge respirator with an organic vapor cartridge which provides a service life of at
least 1 hour for concentrations of vinyl chloride up to 10 ppm. (2) Gas mask with front-
or  back-mounted  canister  which  provides  a  service  life  of  at  least  4  hours  for
concentrations of vinyl chloride up to 25 ppm. (2) Open-circuit self-contained breathing
apparatus  with  full  facepiece,  in  demand  mode;  or  (3)  Type  C  supplied-air  respirator,
demand  type,  with  full  facepiece.  (2)  Combination  type  continuous-flow  supplied-air
respirator with full or half facepiece and auxiliary self-contained air supply.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/nengapdxe.html
