Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Laboratory at 291 Peachtree Street, Atlanta, Georgia, 1945.
Aimee  Wilcox  &  Laboratory  Director,  Dr.  Seward  Miller.  On  July  1,  1946  the
Communicable Disease Center (CDC) opened its doors and occupied one floor of a small
building  in  Atlanta.  Its  primary  mission  was  simple  yet  highly  challenging:  prevent
malaria from spreading across the nation. Armed with a budget of only $10 million and
fewer  than  400  employees,  the  agency’s  early  challenges  included  obtaining  enough
trucks,  sprayers,  and  shovels  necessary  to  wage  war  on  mosquitoes.  As  the
organization took root deep in the South, once known as the heart of the malaria zone,
CDC Founder Dr. Joseph Mountin continued to advocate for public health issues and to
push for CDC to extend its responsibilities to other communicable diseases. He was a
visionary public health leader with high hopes for this small and, at that time, relatively
insignificant branch of the Public Health Service. In 1947, CDC made a token payment
of  $10  to  Emory  University  for  15  acres  of  land  on  Clifton  Road  in  Atlanta  that  now
serves  as  CDC  headquarters.  The  new  institution  expanded  its  focus  to  include  all
communicable diseases and to provide practical help to state health departments when
requested. Although medical epidemiologists were scarce in those early years, disease
surveillance became the cornerstone of CDC’s mission of service to the states and over
time  changed  the  practice  of  public  health.  There  have  been  many  significant
accomplishments  since  CDC’s  humble  beginnings.  The  following  highlights  some  of
CDC’s  important  achievements  for  improving  public  health  worldwide.  Today,  CDC  is
one  of  the  major  operating  components  of  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services and is recognized as the nation’s premiere health promotion, prevention, and
preparedness  agency.  A  look  at  CDC's  significant  contributions  to  public  health,  from
1946  to  now.  A  collection  of  historic  materials  reflect  the  art,  history,  and  science  of
CDC. The story behind CDC museum's collection of historic objects. Past Directors and
Administrators of the nation’s lead public health agency.     To receive email updates
about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/museum/history/our-story.html
