 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Histoplasmosis  is  a  fungal
disease caused by infection with 
Histoplasma capsulatum. Histoplasmosis, which can be 
acquired  from  soil  contaminated  with  bird  or  bat  droppings,  occurs  worldwide  and  is
one of the most common pulmonary 
and systemic mycoses in the United States 
(1). However, among international travelers returning from areas in 
which  histoplasmosis  is  endemic,  histoplasmosis  is  rare,  accounting  for  <0.5%  of  all
diseases diagnosed in this group 
(1,2).  During  February--March  2008,  the  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia  departments  of
health investigated a cluster of respiratory illness 
among three mission groups that had traveled separately to El Salvador to renovate a
church. This report summarizes the results of 
the investigation. Of 33 travelers in the three mission groups for whom information was
available, 20 (61%) met the 
case  definition  for  histoplasmosis.  Persons  who  reported  sweeping  and  cleaning
outdoors (relative risk [RR] = 2.1, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] = 1.3--3.6), digging (RR = 2.6, CI = 1.1--6.1), or working in a
bird or bat roosting area (RR = 1.8, CI = 
1.3--2.4)  had  a  greater  risk  for  illness.  The  findings  emphasize  the  need  for  travelers
and persons involved in construction 
activities  to  use  personal  protective  equipment  and  decrease  dust-generation  when
working in areas where histoplasmosis is 
endemic.  Clinicians  should  consider  histoplasmosis  as  a  possible  cause  of  acute
respiratory or influenza-like illness in travelers 
returning from areas in which histoplasmosis is endemic.
 On  February  13,  2008,  the  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Health  (PADOH)  notified  the
Virginia Department of 
Health (VDH) of a cluster of nine persons with respiratory illness. The nine persons were
among 11 members of a 
Pennsylvania-based  mission  group  who  had  been  renovating  a  church  in  Nueva  San
Salvador, El Salvador, during January 20--27, 2008. 
Two other mission groups, one from Virginia (16 members) and one from Pennsylvania
(eight members), had traveled separately 
to assist with renovations of the same church during January 3--10, 2008 and February
2--10, 2008, respectively. After 
arrival,  mission  members  immediately  began  renovation  activities  at  the  church.
Renovation projects varied among the mission 
groups  and  included  cleaning  of  indoor  and  outdoor  renovation  sites,  electrical  and
plumbing installation, construction of 
additional  rooms,  roof  replacement,  and  septic  tank  excavation.  Mission  members
remained in El Salvador for the entire trip, but 
also visited local markets and churches and took a 1-day trip to either a beach or lake.
 The initial report from PADOH indicated that all nine persons from the initial cluster,
upon returning from El 
Salvador, had presented to their health-care providers with respiratory symptoms. One
of these persons was diagnosed with 
suspected  histoplasmosis  based  on  physical  exam  and  a  chest  radiograph.  To  search
for additional cases of illness among the 
mission groups, PADOH and VDH contacted the trip organizers and leaders.
 A case of histoplasmosis was defined as 1) a laboratory-confirmed 
H. capsulatum infection or 2) self-reported fever and 
two  additional  symptoms  (i.e.,  headache,  cough,  chest  pain,  or  difficulty  breathing)
beginning at least 24 hours after arrival in El 
Salvador,  in  any  mission  group  member  who  traveled  to  El  Salvador  during  January
3--February 10, 2008. Laboratory-confirmation 
was defined as either a urine or serum 
Histoplasma antigen enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test result of 
>0.6 ng/mL.
 All participants from each mission group were administered a standard questionnaire
through their church pastors 
or through telephone interviews. Information collected included demographics, illness,
underlying health conditions, 
protective  measures  used,  and  potential  exposures.  Medical  records  of  hospitalized
patients also were reviewed, and a retrospective 
cohort study of the mission members was conducted.
 Statistical  differences  between  proportions  were  assessed  using  chi-square  and
Fisher's exact tests of significance, 
when  appropriate.  Mean  ages  were  compared  using  a  t-test.  Relative  risk  and  95%
confidence interval estimates were 
calculated using Poisson regression analysis with robust variance.
 Information was collected from 33 (94%) of the 35 mission group participants. Twenty
persons (12 males and 
eight females) met the case definition for histoplasmosis, for an overall attack rate of
61%. The 20 cases included histoplasmosis 
in five (36%) of 14 persons from the Virginia mission group, nine (82%) of 11 persons
from the first Pennsylvania 
mission  group,  and  six  (75%)  of  eight  persons  from  the  second  Pennsylvania  mission
group (Figure). Seven (35%) of the 20 ill 
persons met the case definition through laboratory-confirmed histoplasmosis based on
urine specimens tested by EIA. The other 
13 (65%) ill persons met the case definition through the symptom criteria, but eight of
these 13 persons had urine specimens 
that tested negative by EIA. No participants had paired serologic antibody test results
available. Median time from symptom 
onset to specimen collection date was 6 days (range: 1--28 days).
 Incubation periods could not be calculated because exact dates of exposure were not
available; however, the median 
number of days between arriving in El Salvador and onset of symptoms was 12 (range:
3--25 days). Primary symptoms 
reported among the 20 ill persons meeting the case definition included fatigue (100%),
fever or chills (95%), and headache 
(95%) (Table 1). Nineteen (95%) of the 20 ill persons visited a health-care provider, and
six (30%) required hospitalization for 
their  illness;  all  subsequently  recovered.  Because  the  clinical  manifestation  of
histoplasmosis partly depends on the 
underlying health and immune status of the host, mission members were asked about
their underlying medical conditions. Three 
ill persons reported a history of cancer, none reported a history of chronic lung disease,
and none were current smokers.
 Differences in age (p=0.13), sex (p=0.44), and membership in mission group (p=0.06)
were not statistically 
significant. Digging (RR = 2.6), sweeping or cleaning outdoors (RR = 2.1), and septic
tank excavation (RR = 1.7) were associated 
with increased risk for illness (Table 2). For those persons who reported two or three
high-risk exposures, defined as 
digging,  sweeping  indoors,  or  sweeping  outdoors,  the  relative  risk  for  illness  was
elevated (RR = 2.6), compared with those 
who reported no such high-risk exposures. In addition, those persons who worked in an
area where bird or bat excrement 
was observed or where birds or bats were roosting had a higher attack rate than those
who did not work in such areas. Sample 
size was not sufficient to stratify the analysis by mission group. None of the participants
reported wearing a mask as 
personal protective equipment while working at the church site.
 Reported by: KA Warren, MPH, A Weltman, MD, Pennsylvania Dept of Health. C Hanks,
T LaFountain, MSED, E Lowery, MPH, 
D Woolard, PhD, C Armstrong, MD, Virginia Dept of Health. AS Patel, PhD, KM Kurkjian,
DVM, EIS officers, CDC.
Editorial Note:
  H. 
capsulatum, the fungal causative agent of histoplasmosis, is endemic in the midwestern
and central 
United  States,  Mexico,  Central  and  South  America,  parts  of  eastern  and  southern
Europe, parts of Africa, eastern Asia, and 
Australia (1). The fungus grows in the soil and its growth is thought to be enhanced by
bird and bat excrement. Disruption of soil 
that  contains  bird  or  bat  excrement  is  the  primary  means  of  aerosolization  of  and
exposure to spores. Several reports 
have  documented  occupationally  acquired  outbreaks  specifically  associated  with
construction or renovation activities 
(4,5).  However,  persons  not  directly  involved  in  the  soil-disruption  process,  including
travelers in the area, also are at increased 
risk because airborne spores can travel hundreds of feet 
(6). A histoplasmosis outbreak involving approximately 250 
college  students  visiting  a  resort  hotel  in  Mexico  was  associated  with  ongoing
construction at the hotel 
(6).
 This  is  the  first  report  of  an  outbreak  of  histoplasmosis  among  volunteer  workers
performing construction activities 
abroad. Evidence gathered during this investigation is consistent with previous research
and revealed that performing 
outdoor activities, particularly those that cause soil disruption and spore aerosolization,
increased the risk for acquiring 
histoplasmosis.  Specifically,  the  two  activities  with  the  highest  relative  risk  for  illness
were digging and sweeping outdoors.
 Histoplasmosis  infections  typically  are  asymptomatic  or  cause  mild  symptoms  from
which persons recover 
without antifungal or other treatment; persons with more severe forms of the infection
(i.e., acute pulmonary, chronic pulmonary, 
and  progressive  disseminated  histoplasmosis)  are  recommended  for  treatment  with
antifungal agents, such as amphotericin B 
(7). In this outbreak, the high overall attack rate among an otherwise healthy cohort,
along with illness severe enough to 
require  health-care  services  (including  hospitalization),  suggests  substantial  exposure
to fungal spores during the renovation 
activities. In addition, working in an environment harboring bird or bat excrement likely
increased the risk for acquiring histoplasmosis.
 Ultimately, the cause of this outbreak might be that the volunteers were not aware of
the risk for histoplasmosis 
and  therefore  took  no  precautions,  such  as  using  personal  protective  equipment  or
taking care to decrease dust generation 
when  working  in  this  area  of  endemic  disease.  Although  persons  living  or  working  in
areas of endemic histoplasmosis might 
have  previous  health  education  and  training  about  the  risk  and  prevention  of  this
disease, volunteers who travel to and work 
in these areas are likely to have limited, if any, training on disease risk and prevention.
 Multiple laboratory tests, including culture, histopathology, serology, and EIA antigen
tests, can be used to 
diagnose histoplasmosis. The sensitivity and specificity of these tests depend on factors
that include the patient's clinical syndrome, 
type and timing of specimen collection, fungal burden, and the host's immune status 
(8). In general, testing of convalescent 
serum  samples  offers  the  highest  sensitivity  for  subacute  and  chronic  pulmonary
disease, and antigen testing (i.e., a 
quantitative, second-generation EIA), appears to be one of the most sensitive tests for
acute pulmonary histoplasmosis 
(8). However, the EIA antigen test is less sensitive in milder infections when the fungal
burden is lower 
(8,9).  In  this  outbreak,  five  of  seven  patients  with  a  positive  urine  EIA  test  required
hospitalization.
 The  findings  in  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  three  limitations.  First,  information
about exposures and illness 
were  ascertained  via  self-report,  which  might  be  associated  with  recall  bias  and
subsequent exposure and disease 
misclassification.  Second,  misclassification  of  disease  status  is  possible,  given  the
negative antigen test results and given that infection with 
other  respiratory  pathogens  (e.g.,  influenza  virus)  could  not  be  ruled  out  for  all  ill
persons. Finally, the majority of 
diagnostic specimens were tested by 
Histoplasma  EIA  only.  Because  EIA  test  sensitivity  increases  with  increasing  illness
severity 
(8,9),  specimens  collected  from  persons  with  less  severe  disease  might  have  tested
falsely negative.
 Persons in areas of endemic histoplasmosis who perform certain jobs or activities, such
as construction and farming, are 
at risk for acquiring histoplasmosis (10). Travel clinics and organizers of group travel to
areas of endemic histoplasmosis 
should  be  informed  about  the  risk  for  histoplasmosis  among  travelers  with  potential
exposure to 
H.  capsulatum.  Clinicians  should  consider  a  diagnosis  of  histoplasmosis  when
evaluating a patient who has acute febrile respiratory illness and has traveled to 
an  area  in  which  histoplasmosis  is  endemic.  Clinicians  also  should  inquire  about  the
patient's activities in the area of 
endemic disease. If histoplasmosis is suspected, consultation with laboratory experts is
recommended to ensure the proper 
collection and referral of blood and urine specimens. Depending on the patient's clinical
presentation, antigen testing for 
Histoplasma,  convalescent  serologic  testing  to  detect  antibodies,  or  culture  might  be
performed to diagnose histoplasmosis. Travelers to 
areas of endemic histoplasmosis who visit caves or areas with high concentrations of
bird or bat excrement, or who perform 
dust-generating  activities,  should  consider  using  personal  protective  equipment  (e.g.,
respirators) and dust-suppression 
strategies (e.g., keeping surfaces wet) to reduce their potential exposure to 
H. capsulatum.
 Acknowledgments
 The  findings  in  this  report  are  based,  in  part,  on  contributions  by  LJ  Wheat,  MD,
MiraVista Diagnostics and MiraBella 
Technologies,  Indianapolis;  JF  Howell,  DVM,  Indiana  State  Dept  of  Health;  MT
Temarantz, W Miller, DC, Pennsylvania Dept of Health; SE 
Whaley,  DM  Toney,  PhD,  M  Bibbs  Freeman,  MS,  Div  of  Consolidated  Laboratory  Svcs,
Dept of General Svcs, Commonwealth of Virginia; 
BL  Gomez,  PhD,  CM  Scheel,  PhD,  R  Miramontes,  MPH,  Mycotic  Diseases  Br,  Div  of
Foodborne, Bacterial, and Mycotic Diseases, 
National Center for Zoonotic, Vector-Borne, and Enteric Diseases, CDC.
References
 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from typeset documents.
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. 
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Date  last  reviewed:
12/17/2008
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5750a1.htm
