Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / August 23, 2019 / 68(33);713–717 Please note: An
erratum has been published for this report. To view the erratum, please click here. Ian
D. Plumb, MBBS1; Colin A. Schwensohn, MPH1; Laura Gieraltowski, PhD1; Selam Tecle,
MPH2;  Zachary  D.  Schneider,  MPH1,3;  Jennifer  Freiman,  MPH4;  Andrea  Cote,  DVM4;
Douglas  Noveroske,  MPH4;  Jonathan  Kolsin,  MPH5;  Joshua  Brandenburg1,3;  Jessica  C.
Chen, PhD1; Kaitlin A. Tagg, PhD1,6; Porscha Bumpus White, MS1; Hazel J. Shah, MPH1;
Louise K. Francois Watkins, MD1; Matthew E. Wise, PhD1; Cindy R. Friedman, MD1 (View
author affiliations) What is already known about this topic? Decreased susceptibility to
azithromycin  is  rare  among  Salmonella  serotypes  that  cause  human  infections  in  the
United States. If antibiotic treatment is indicated, azithromycin is recommended as an
oral therapy. What is added by this report? During June 2018–March 2019, an outbreak
caused  by  multidrug-resistant  Salmonella  Newport  with  decreased  susceptibility  to
azithromycin  led  to  255  infections  and  60  hospitalizations.  Infections  were  linked  to
Mexican-style soft cheese obtained in Mexico and beef obtained in the United States.
What are the implications for public health practice? Whole genome sequencing can be
used  in  Salmonella  outbreak  investigations  for  rapid  prediction  of  antimicrobial
resistance and can link cases to each other and to possible sources of infection. Views
equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads  Table  1  Table  2  In  September  2018,  CDC
identified  Salmonella  enterica  serotype  Newport  (Newport)  infections  that  were
multidrug
 resistant
 (MDR),
 with
 decreased
 susceptibility
 to
 azithromycin,
 a
recommended
 oral
 treatment
 agent.
 Until
 2017,
 decreased
 susceptibility
 to
azithromycin  had  occurred  in  fewer  than  0.5%  of  Salmonella  isolates  from  U.S.
residents.  This  report  summarizes  the  investigation  of  a  multistate  MDR  Salmonella
outbreak  conducted  by  CDC,  state  and  local  health  departments,  and  the  U.S.
Department  of  Agriculture’s  Food  Safety  and  Inspection  Service.  During  June
2018–March 2019, 255 cases of infection with the outbreak strain were identified in 32
states; 43% of patients (89 of 206 with information on travel) reported recent travel to
Mexico.  Infections  were  linked  to  consumption  of  soft  cheese  obtained  in  Mexico  and
beef  obtained  in  the  United  States.  Consumers  should  avoid  eating  soft  cheese  that
could be made from unpasteurized milk, regardless of the source of the cheese. When
preparing beef, a food thermometer should be used to ensure that appropriate cooking
temperatures are reached. When antibiotic treatment is needed for a patient, clinicians
should  choose  antibiotics  based  on  susceptibility  testing  wherever  possible.  Top  In
2018, during an investigation of antibiotic-susceptible Newport infections that led to a
U.S.  ground  beef  recall  (1),  a  genetically  distinct  group  of  MDR  Newport  isolates  was
identified.  Isolates  were  classified  as  the  outbreak  strain  if  they  fell  within  the  MDR
clade  (0–11  alleles  by  core  genome  multilocus  sequence  typing  [cgMLST]);  isolates
were identified using PulseNet, the national subtyping network for foodborne bacterial
disease  surveillance.  A  case  was  defined  as  isolation  of  the  outbreak  strain  from  a
patient  during  June  2018–March  2019.  After  interviews  conducted  by  state  and  local
health  departments,  some  patients  were  reinterviewed  using  a  standardized
hypothesis-generating  questionnaire  or  supplementary  questionnaires  that  included
questions about travel and antibiotic treatment. Food exposures were reported for the 7
days before illness onset. Exposures among patients who did not travel internationally
were  compared  with  those  expected  among  a  nationally  representative  sample  of
healthy persons included in the U.S. Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network
population survey (2006–2007) (2), after stratification by sex and ethnicity. During June
2018–March  2019,  255  cases  were  identified  in  32  U.S.  states  (Figure).  Overall,  29%
(60/209) of patients for whom information was available were hospitalized, 6% (4/70)
were admitted to an intensive care unit, 4% (10/255) had Salmonella bacteremia, and
two died. The median patient age was 36 years (range = <1–90 years), 58% (145/250)
were female, and 65% (143/221) were Hispanic. Overall, 43% (89/206) with information
on  travel  reported  visiting  Mexico  in  the  7  days  preceding  illness  onset.  Travelers  to
Mexico mostly reported visiting friends or family (67%, 24/36) and collectively reported
visiting  16  of  the  32  states  within  Mexico.  Patients  who  did  not  visit  Mexico  were
residents of 26 U.S. states. Among patients who traveled to Mexico with information on
food consumption, 87% (41/47) reported eating beef, and 63% (29/46) reported eating
soft cheese; among those, 79% (23/29) recalled obtaining the cheese in Mexico (Table
1). Of several types of artisanal cheese reported, the most frequently recalled cheese
was  queso  fresco,  a  cheese  that  is  typically  made  with  raw,  unpasteurized  milk  from
cows or goats (3). Among patients who did not travel to Mexico, 29% (20/70) reported
eating Mexican-style soft cheese, and 93% (68/73) reported eating beef (Table 1). The
percentage  who  ate  Mexican-style  soft  cheese  was  similar  to  the  percentage  in  the
nationally  representative  sample  of  healthy  persons  (p-value  =  0.54),  whereas  the
percentage who ate beef was higher than that among healthy persons (p<0.01). Top In
September  2018,  the  outbreak  strain  was  detected  in  a  cecal  sample  from  a  steer
collected at a slaughter and processing plant in Texas as part of National Antimicrobial
Resistance  Monitoring  System  (NARMS)  surveillance  (Figure).  In  October  2018,  the
outbreak  strain  was  detected  in  a  mixture  of  queso  fresco  and  Oaxaca  soft  cheese
purchased in a market in Tijuana, Mexico. The cheese had been brought into the United
States  by  a  patient  who  became  ill  with  a  strain  that  was  indistinguishable  (0  allele
difference) from the strain isolated from the cheese. The outbreak strain was detected
in beef samples collected in November 2018 and March 2019 at two Texas slaughter
and processing facilities. Isolates from the Mexican cheese, the steer cecum, and beef
differed by 0–2 alleles from one another and by a minimum of 0–1 alleles from patient
isolates (Table 2). Review of patient information did not identify any common suppliers
of  contaminated  beef  or  cheese.  Top  Antibiotic  resistance  was  predicted  using  whole
genome sequencing and confirmed in a subset of isolates by antimicrobial susceptibility
testing using broth microdilution; decreased susceptibility to azithromycin was defined
as  minimum  inhibitory  concentration  ≥32  μg/mL  (4).  Of  252  isolates  with  resistance
information,  226  (90%)  had  predicted  resistance  to  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
tetracycline, and chloramphenicol, and decreased susceptibility to azithromycin. In 143
(57%)
 isolates,
 there
 was
 additional
 predicted
 resistance
 to
 ampicillin
 and
streptomycin,  and  nonsusceptibility  to  ciprofloxacin  (defined  as  minimum  inhibitory
concentration ≥0.12 μg/mL) (4). All resistance genes were located on an IncR plasmid.
Among  patients  with  treatment  information,  65/87  (75%)  received  antibiotic  therapy,
and  28/86  (33%)  received  an  antibiotic  to  which  the  outbreak  strain  was  resistant  or
showed  decreased  susceptibility.  Top  This  investigation  identified  an  MDR  strain  of
Salmonella Newport with decreased susceptibility to azithromycin and nonsusceptibility
to ciprofloxacin, two oral agents recommended for treatment of Salmonella infections.
The presence of resistance genes on a plasmid is concerning because of the potential
for spread to other bacteria (5). The outbreak strain appears to have emerged recently
because  Newport  with  decreased  susceptibility  to  azithromycin  was  not  detected  in
animal, retail meat, or human isolates in NARMS surveillance before 2016 (4). During
2016–2017, two smaller multistate clusters of MDR Newport infections with decreased
susceptibility  to  azithromycin  were  investigated  among  U.S.  residents;  isolates  were
within  11  alleles  of  the  current  outbreak  isolates.  No  source  of  the  infections  was
identified, but a high percentage of patients reported recent travel to Mexico (Division
of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, unpublished data, 2019). Routine monitoring in
2016  detected  an  isolate  from  a  sample  of  beef  imported  from  Mexico  that  was
indistinguishable (0 allele difference) from the outbreak strain isolated from cheese in
2018. In this MDR outbreak, consumption of cheese and consumption of beef were both
associated  with  illness,  indicating  that  dairy  cattle  were  a  likely  source  of  these
infections. The detection of the outbreak strain in cheese purchased in Mexico and the
high percentage of travelers to Mexico who reported eating Mexican-style soft cheese
suggest  that  soft  cheese  from  Mexico  was  a  source  of  infection.  Mexican-style  soft
cheese  has  been  previously  identified  as  a  source  of  other  Salmonella  outbreaks  (6).
The  reported  consumption  of  queso  fresco,  travel  to  various  regions  in  Mexico,  and
detection  of  indistinguishable  Newport  strains  in  beef  and  cheese  suggest  that
contamination of soft cheese resulted from carriage by cattle rather than poor hygiene
during cheese production. Dairy cattle often are used as a source of ground beef and
have been implicated in previous MDR Newport outbreaks (5). Among patients who did
not travel to Mexico, beef was identified as a source of infection by the close genetic
relatedness  between  isolates  from  patients  and  beef  samples,  and  from  the  higher
percentage of patients who ate beef compared with the percentage of healthy persons
who  ate  beef.  It  is  also  possible  that  beef  was  a  source  of  infection  among  some
travelers  to  Mexico;  nearly  90%  of  them  also  reported  eating  beef,  and  in  2016  the
outbreak  strain  was  detected  in  beef  imported  from  Mexico.  The  genetic  similarity
between  isolates  from  beef  in  Mexico,  beef  in  the  United  States,  and  a  steer  in  the
United  States  strongly  suggests  that  the  outbreak  strain  is  present  in  cattle  in  both
countries. Because use of antibiotics in livestock can cause selection of resistant strains
(7), the reported 41% rise in macrolide use in U.S. cattle from 2016 to 2017 (8) might
have  accelerated  carriage  of  the  outbreak  strain  among  U.S.  cattle.  Avoiding  the
unnecessary  use  of  antibiotics  in  cattle,  especially  those  that  are  important  for  the
treatment  of  human  infections,  could  help  prevent  the  spread  of  MDR  Newport  with
decreased  susceptibility  to  azithromycin.  Further  investigation  is  warranted  to
determine the prevalence of Newport with decreased susceptibility to azithromycin in
U.S.  and  Mexican  cattle,  and  to  identify  measures  to  prevent  transmission  among
cattle.  Whole  genome  sequencing  was  valuable  in  linking  human  infections  to  food
sources,  distinguishing  the  MDR  outbreak  strain  from  an  antibiotic-susceptible  strain
causing a simultaneous outbreak, and predicting antibiotic resistance. In this outbreak,
one  in  three  patients  received  an  antibiotic  that  was  likely  to  have  been  ineffective.
Clinicians should limit use of antibiotics for patients with an acute diarrheal illness to
those  with  clinical  indications  (9),  and  antibiotic  selection  should  be  based  on
susceptibility  results  whenever  possible.  For  empiric  treatment  of  patients  with
suspected  Newport  with  decreased  susceptibility  to  azithromycin,  ceftriaxone  or
alternative agents should be considered. To prevent infection, consumers should avoid
eating  soft  cheese  that  could  be  made  with  unpasteurized  milk,  and  when  preparing
beef they should use a thermometer to ensure appropriate cooking temperatures are
reached:  145°F  (62.8°C)  for  steaks  and  roasts  followed  by  a  3-minute  rest  time,  and
160°F (71.1°C) for ground beef or hamburgers (10). Top Meseret Birhane, Katherine E.
Heiman-Marshall,  CDC;  Sherry  Shaw,  Uday  Dessai,  Bonnie  Kissler,  Food  Safety  and
Inspection  Service,  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Ian  D.
Plumb, iplumb@cdc.gov, 404-718-5543. Top 1Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and
Environmental  Diseases,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious
Diseases,  CDC;  2California  Department  of  Public  Health;  3Oak  Ridge  Institute  for
Science  and  Education,  Tennessee;  4Food  Safety  and  Inspection  Service,  U.S.
Department  of  Agriculture,  Washington,  DC;  5Texas  Department  of  State  Health
Services;  6Weems  Design  Studio  Inc.,  Suwanee,  Georgia.  Top  All  authors  have
completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of  Medical  Editors  form  for
disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were
disclosed.  Top  Top  *  Defined  as  reported  travel  within  7  days  before  illness  onset.  †
Cecal  sample  and  beef  samples  obtained  in  the  United  States;  sample  of  cheese
obtained in Mexico by a patient infected with the outbreak strain who consumed this
cheese. Top * Of patients with known travel status, 89 had visited Mexico, and 117 had
not visited Mexico.
† One patient who did not travel to Mexico reported eating beef obtained in Mexico in
addition to beef obtained in the United States
§  One  patient  who  traveled  to  Mexico  reported  eating  Mexican-style  soft  cheese
obtained in the United States and also Mexican-style soft cheese obtained in Mexico.
Top  *  Isolates  were  within  0–2  alleles  of  each  other  by  core  genome  multilocus
sequence typing.
† Obtained from the home of a patient who consumed some of it within 7 days before
illness  onset;  the  cheese  was  purchased  from  a  market  in  Tijuana,  Mexico.  Top
Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Plumb  ID,  Schwensohn  CA,  Gieraltowski  L,  et  al.
Outbreak
 of
 Salmonella
 Newport
 Infections
 with
 Decreased
 Susceptibility
 to
Azithromycin Linked to Beef Obtained in the United States and Soft Cheese Obtained in
Mexico — United States, 2018–2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2019;68:713–717.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6833a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6833a1.htm
