Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  This  overview  describes  current  information  on  the  types  of
tests used to detect SARS-CoV-2 infection and their intended uses. This information is
intended  for  use  by  healthcare  providers,  public  health  professionals,  and  those
organizing  and  implementing  testing  in  non-healthcare  settings.  Information  for  the
general  public  on  COVID-19  testing  is  also  available.  People  who  are  tested  for
COVID-19 should receive clear information on: Individuals tested are required to receive
patient  fact  sheets  as  part  of  the  test’s  Emergency  Use  Authorization  (EUA).
SARS-CoV-2  co-infection  with  another  pathogen,  including  a  respiratory  virus,
bacterium,
 or
 fungus,
 has
 been
 documented,
 particularly
 in
 hospitalized
patients.(10,11)  Detection  of  a  different  respiratory  pathogen  does  not  rule  out
SARS-CoV-2  infection.  Testing  for  other  causes  of  respiratory  illness,  in  addition  to
testing  for  SARS-CoV-2,  may  be  considered,  depending  on:  More  information  on
coinfection  and  recommendations  on  antimicrobial  stewardship  or  systematic
approaches  to  using  antimicrobials  can  be  found  on  CDC’s  Testing  Guidance  for
Clinicians When SARS-CoV-2 and Influenza Viruses are Co-circulating and the Infectious
Diseases  Society  of  America  (IDSA)  COVID-19  Real-Time  Learning  Network.  Several
markers  of  inflammation  and  abnormal  coagulation  are  associated  with  severe
COVID-19  illness.(12,13)  Studies  found  that  hospitalized  patients  with  COVID-19  may
have  coagulation  abnormalities  including  increased  D-dimer  concentration,  a  modest
decrease in platelet count, and a prolongation of the prothrombin time.(13) One study
that  compared  markers  of  inflammation  in  patients  with  and  without  COVID-19
observed  modestly  lower  leukocyte,  lymphocyte,  and  platelet  counts  and  higher
hemoglobin  values  in  patients  with  COVID-19.(12)  This  study  also  noted  that  serum
albumin,  neutrophil  to  lymphocyte  ratio,  and  red  cell  distribution  width  were  each
associated  with  disease  severity.(12)  Viral  tests,  including  nucleic  acid  amplification
tests (NAATs, such as PCR tests), antigen tests and other tests (such as breath tests)
are used as diagnostic tests to detect current infection with SARS-CoV-2, determine the
need  for  prevention  measures  like  isolation,  and  inform  an  individual’s  medical  care.
Viral  tests  can  also  be  used  as  screening  tests.  Viral  tests:  Positive  viral  test  results
indicate current, or sometimes recent, infection and the person with COVID-19 should
follow CDC recommendations for isolation. Negative viral test results mean the test did
not detect the virus, but this doesn’t rule out that you could have an infection. These
results represent a snapshot of the time around specimen collection and could change
if the same test was performed again in one or more days. Negative antigen test results
should  be  repeated  following  FDA  guidance.  Antibody  (or  serology)  tests  are  used  to
test for the presence of antibodies from previous infection or vaccination and can aid in
fulfilling the case definition for multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C)
and  adults  (MIS-A).2  Antibody  testing  does  not  diagnose  current  infection.  Antibody
testing  is  primarily  used  for  public  health  surveillance  and  epidemiologic  purposes.
Antibody  tests  detect  specific  antibodies  that  target  different  parts  (nucleocapsid  or
spike  protein)  of  the  virus.  Detection  of  anti-nucleocapsid  antibody  indicates
SARS-CoV-2  infection,  while  anti-spike  protein  antibody  may  be  induced  by  COVID-19
vaccination  or  by  SARS-CoV-2  infection.  This  should  be  considered  when  choosing
whether  to  test  for  antibodies  originating  from  past  infection  versus  those  from
vaccination. 
FDA continually monitors the accuracy of COVID-19 tests. Their website provides
up-to-date information on the impact of viral mutations on COVID-19 tests. See FDA’s
list of In Vitro Diagnostics Emergency Use Authorizations for more information about the
performance and interpretation of specific authorized tests. Diagnostic testing is
intended  to  identify  current  infection.  It  is  performed  when  a  person  has  signs  or
symptoms  consistent  with  COVID-19  or  is  asymptomatic  but  has  recent  known  or
suspected  exposure  to  someone  with  COVID-19.  Screening  testing  is  intended  to
identify  people  with  COVID-19  who  are  asymptomatic  or  do  not  have  any  known,
suspected, or reported exposure to someone with COVID-19. Public health surveillance
testing  is  conducted  to  specifically  monitor  population-level  burden  of  disease,  or  to
characterize the incidence and prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Surveillance testing
is  primarily  used  to  gain  information  at  a  population  level,  rather  than  an  individual
level,  and  involves  testing  of  de-identified  specimens.  Surveillance  testing  results  are
not reported back to the individual. As such, surveillance testing cannot be used for an
individual’s  healthcare  decision-making  or  individual  public  health  actions,  such  as
isolation. Examples of public health surveillance testing are genomic surveillance and
wastewater surveillance. When choosing which test to use, it is important to understand
the  purpose  of  the  testing  (diagnostic  or  screening),  test  performance  in  context  of
current COVID-19 incidence, need for rapid results, and other considerations (See Table
1).   Positive  predictive  values  (probability  that  the  person  testing  positive  is  actually
infected) and negative predictive values (probability that the person testing negative is
actually  not  infected)  of  NAAT  and  antigen  tests  vary  depending  upon  the  pretest
probability.  Pretest  probability  considers  both  the  prevalence  of  COVID-19  in  the
community and the clinical context of the individual being tested. CDC provides general
information  on  sensitivity,  specificity,  and  positive  and  negative  predictive  values  for
antigen  tests  and  antibody  tests.  For  information  on  a  specific  test,  refer  to  FDA’s
website.  Table  1  summarizes  some  characteristics  of  NAATs  and  antigen  tests  to
consider  for  a  testing  program.  Laboratories  that  perform  screening  or  diagnostic
testing for SARS-CoV-2 must have a CLIA certificate and meet regulatory requirements.
Tests that have received an EUA from FDA for point-of-care (POC) use can be performed
with a CLIA certificate of waiver. Vaccination does not affect the results of someone’s
SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic or screening tests (NAAT, antigen or other diagnostic tests). The
main effect of vaccination on SARS-CoV-2 testing is related to antibody testing. Because
mRNA  COVID-19  vaccines  use  the  SARS-CoV-2  spike  protein  to  generate  an  immune
response,  a  positive  serologic  (antibody)  test  for  spike  protein  IgM/IgG  could  indicate
either previous infection or vaccination. Antibody testing is not currently recommended
to  assess  a  person’s  protection  against  SARS-CoV-2  infection  or  severe  COVID-19
following COVID-19 vaccination or prior infection, or to assess the need for vaccination
in  an  unvaccinated  person.  Antibody  testing  can  be  used  in  the  diagnosis  of
Multisystem  Inflammatory  Syndrome  in  Children  (MIS-C)  or  Multisystem  Inflammatory
Syndrome  in  Adults  (MIS-A).  To  evaluate  for  evidence  of  previous  infection  in  a
vaccinated  individual,  use  an  antibody  test  specifically  evaluating  IgM/IgG  to  the
nucleocapsid protein. For example, specific antibody tests can be used for public health
surveillance.
 Intended
 Use
 Intended
 Use
 Diagnose
 current
 infection
Diagnose  current  infection  Diagnose  current  infection  Diagnose  current  infection
Analyte  Detected  Analyte  Detected  Viral  ribonucleic  acid  (RNA)  Viral  ribonucleic  acid
(RNA)  Viral  antigens  Viral  antigens  Specimen  Type(s)  Specimen  Type(s)  Nasal,
Nasopharyngeal,
 Oropharyngeal,
 Sputum,
 Saliva
 Nasal,
 Nasopharyngeal,
Oropharyngeal,
 Sputum,
 Saliva
 Nasal,
 Nasopharyngeal
 Nasal,
 Nasopharyngeal
Sensitivity Sensitivity Varies by test, but generally high for laboratory-based tests and
moderate-to-high  for  point-of-care  (POC)  tests  Varies  by  test,  but  generally  high  for
laboratory-based tests and moderate-to-high for point-of-care (POC) tests Less sensitive
than NAATs. Varies by test and depending on the course of infection+* Less sensitive
than  NAATs.  Varies  by  test  and  depending  on  the  course  of  infection+*  Specificity
Specificity High High High High Test Complexity Test Complexity Varies by test Varies
by  test  Relatively  easy  to  use  Relatively  easy  to  use  Authorized  for  Use  at  the
Point-of-Care Authorized for Use at the Point-of-Care Most are not, some are Most are
not,  some  are  Most  are,  some  are  not  Most  are,  some  are  not  Turnaround  Time
Turnaround Time Most 1–3 days; some are rapid with results in 15 minutes Most 1–3
days; some are rapid with results in 15 minutes Ranges from 15 minutes to 30 minutes
Ranges  from  15  minutes  to  30  minutes  Cost/Test  Cost/Test  ~$75-$100/test
~$75-$100/test ~$5-$50/test ~$5-$50/test Advantages Advantages Most sensitive test
method available Short turnaround time for NAAT POC tests, but few available Usually
does not need to be repeated to confirm results Most sensitive test method available
Short turnaround time for NAAT POC tests, but few available Usually does not need to
be  repeated  to  confirm  results  Short  turnaround  time  (approximately  15  minutes)  ◊
Cost-effective  Some  can  be  performed  at-home,  or  anywhere  else  Short  turnaround
time (approximately 15 minutes) ◊ Cost-effective Some can be performed at-home, or
anywhere  else  Disadvantages  Disadvantages  Longer  turnaround  time  for  lab-based
tests  (1–3  days)  Higher  cost  per  test  After  an  infection  has  ended,  and  the  risk  of
transmission has passed, people may have detectable RNA and test positive for up to
90  days  Longer  turnaround  time  for  lab-based  tests  (1–3  days)  Higher  cost  per  test
After an infection has ended, and the risk of transmission has passed, people may have
detectable RNA and test positive for up to 90 days Negative tests should be confirmed
by  NAAT  or  repeated  as  recommended  by  FDA  Less  sensitive  (more  false  negative
results)  compared  to  NAATs,  especially  among  asymptomatic  people  and  with  some
variants Negative tests should be confirmed by NAAT or repeated as recommended by
FDA Less sensitive (more false negative results) compared to NAATs, especially among
asymptomatic people and with some variants * As noted in the labeling for authorized
over-the-counter  antigen  tests:  negative  results  should  be  treated  as  presumptive
(meaning  that  they  are  preliminary  results).  Negative  results  do  not  rule  out
SARS-CoV-2 infection and should not be used as the sole basis for treatment or patient
management  decisions,  including  infection  control  decisions.  Please  see  FDA
guidance  on the use of at-home COVID-19 antigen tests. † The decreased sensitivity of
antigen tests might be offset if the POC antigen tests are repeated more frequently. ◊
Refers to point-of-care antigen tests only. Social determinants of health may influence
access  to  testing.   For  example,  travel  time  may  limit  access  to,  and  use  of,  testing
services for those who have limited access to transportation and who live in areas with
fewer  public  transit  services  and  schedules.  Racial  and  ethnic  disparities  in  test  site
distribution have been found.3 Other factors that may affect both access to, and use of,
testing services include: Delays in testing may also delay seeking care and treatment
(when sick) as well as delays in self-isolation that could reduce the spread of the virus
to others. CDC’s COVID-19 Response Health Equity Strategy outlines a plan to reduce
the  disproportionate  burden  of  COVID-19  among  people  in  some  racial  and  ethnic
minority  groups,  people  with  disabilities,  and  other  population  groups  (e.g.,  essential
and frontline workers, people living in rural or frontier areas) who have experienced a
disproportionate burden of COVID-19. One component to move towards greater health
equity is ensuring availability of resources, including access to testing for populations
who  have  experienced  longstanding,  systemic  health  and  social  inequities.  All
population  groups,  including  racial  and  ethnic  minority  groups,  should  have  equal
access to affordable, quality, and timely SARS-CoV-2 testing—with fast turnaround time
for results—for diagnosis and screening. Efforts should be made to address barriers that
might overtly or inadvertently create inequalities in testing. In addition, completeness
of race and ethnicity data is an important factor in understanding the impact the virus
has on racial and ethnic minority populations. When possible, healthcare providers and
public  health  professionals  should  ask  and  record  race  and  ethnicity  for  anyone
receiving a reportable test result and ensure these data are reported with the person’s
test  results  to  facilitate  understanding  the  impact  of  COVID-19  on  racial  and  ethnic
minority  populations.  Some  strategies  to  achieve  health  equity  in  testing  access  and
availability include: Positive test results using a viral test (NAAT, antigen or other tests)
in individuals with signs or symptoms consistent with COVID-19 indicate that the person
has  COVID-19.  A  negative  antigen  test  in  individuals  with  signs  or  symptoms  of
COVID-19 should be repeated following FDA recommendations or confirmed by NAAT.
For more information, see Antigen Test Algorithm. Additionally, consider other illnesses
with similar symptoms that may require testing. For many diseases, including flu, early
diagnosis  and  prompt  treatment  are  very  important  for  preventing  severe  illness.
Anyone  who  tests  positive  should  isolate  at  home  or,  if  in  a  healthcare  setting,  be
placed on appropriate precautions. Some people should receive treatment. Most people
with COVID-19 have mild illness and can recover at home. For more information, see
CDC’s  COVID-19  isolation  guidance.  Viral  testing  is  recommended  for  individuals  who
have been exposed to someone with COVID-19. People who have had an exposure to
someone known or suspected of having COVID-19 should be tested at least 5 days after
the exposure. If symptoms develop before 5 days, they should get tested immediately.
People  with  a  positive  test  result  should  follow  CDC’s  COVID-19  isolation  guidance.  If
someone has had exposure to someone with COVID-19 and is asymptomatic, but has
had COVID-19 within the past 30 days*, testing to identify a new infection is generally
not  recommended.  If  someone  has  become  newly  symptomatic  after  having  had
COVID-19  within  the  past  30  days*,  antigen  tests  should  be  used  to  identify  a  new
infection.  If  they  test  negative,  they  should  repeat  the  antigen  test  following  FDA
recommendations. If someone had exposure to another person with COVID-19, but the
exposed  individual  has  had  COVID-19  within  the  past  31-90  days*,  consider  using
antigen  tests  (rather  than  an  NAAT,  such  as  a  PCR  test)  to  identify  a  new  infection.
 They should get tested at least 5 full days after their exposure.  If they test negative
with  an  antigen  test,  they  should  repeat  the  antigen  test  following  FDA
recommendations. *The clock starts from the day the person is tested (not the day they
received their positive test result) or their original onset of symptoms, whichever came
first.  Some  adults  with  severe  illness  or  who  are  moderately  or  severely
immunocompromised  may  produce  replication-competent  virus  beyond  10  days  that
may warrant extending duration of isolation and precautions. A test-based strategy for
ending  isolation  in  these  patients  may  be  considered  in  consultation  with  infectious
disease experts. For more information, including on retesting people previously infected
with  SARS-CoV-2,  visit  Preventing  Spread  of  Respiratory  Viruses  When  You’re  Sick.
Testing  asymptomatic  people  without  recent  known  or  suspected  exposure  to
SARS-CoV-2 for early identification, isolation, and disease prevention Screening testing
allows  early  identification  and  isolation  of  people  who  are  asymptomatic  or
pre-symptomatic and who might be unknowingly transmitting virus. Screening testing
may  be  most  valuable  in  specific  settings  where  early  identification  is  essential  to
reducing transmission and mitigating risk for severe disease among populations at high
risk.  When  COVID-19  hospital  admission  levels  are  high,  CDC  recommends
implementing screening testing in certain high-risk settings. When screening testing is
used, it should be applied to participants regardless of vaccination status. Any type of
viral  test  can  be  used  for  screening  purposes;  however,  consider  the  characteristics
(including  accessibility,  accuracy  and  efficiency)  of  different  test  types  to  determine
which best suits screening testing needs. People without symptoms and without known
exposure to COVID-19 do not need to take any special actions while awaiting screening
test  results.  Settings  that  should  be  prioritized  for  screening  testing  include  facilities
and situations where transmission risk is high and the population served is at high risk
of severe outcomes from COVID-19 or there is limited access to healthcare, including:
Serial  screening  testing  is  less  effective  at  reducing  COVID-19’s  impacts  in  settings
where disease rates are lower, risk of spread is lower, and risk of severe illness is lower.
Because of this, CDC does not recommend serial screening testing in most lower risk
settings.  Public  health  surveillance  testing  may  sample  a  certain  percentage  of  a
specific  population  to  monitor  for  increasing  or  decreasing  infection  rate  or  to
determine  the  population  effect  from  community  interventions.  An  example  of  public
health surveillance testing is when a state public health department samples a random
percentage of all people in a city on a rolling basis to assess local infection rates and
trends. CDC is working with state, local, territorial, academic, and commercial partners
to conduct surveillance testing to better understand COVID-19 in the United States. For
more on surveillance conducted by CDC: Updates as of May 27, 2022 As of January 21,
2022 As of October 22, 2021 As of August 2, 2021 As of July 1, 2021 As of June 14, 2021
As of September 18, 2020 As of August 24, 2020 As of July 17, 2020 As of July 2, 2020
To receive email updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/testing-overview.html
