Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Trichomonas Susceptibility Testing MLC Distributions [XLS – 27
KB] Susceptibility Testing The CDC Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria performs
susceptibility  testing  of  Trichomonas  vaginalis  isolates  collected  from  individuals  with
infections that are refractory to treatment. Susceptibility testing is conducted by broth
microdilution for both metronidazole and tinidazole.  Susceptibility data are reported as
the  minimum  lethal  dose  (MLC)  which  is  defined  as  the  lowest  antimicrobial
concentration that results in loss of parasite motility in culture. Currently there are no
established breakpoints for metronidazole and tinidazole in T. vaginalis.  CDC is making
MLC  distribution  data  available  online  to  aid  in  the  interpretation  of  Trichomonas
susceptibility  testing  results.  These  downloadable  data  contain  tables  and  graphic
representations  that  display  MLC  distributions  for  isolates  collected  from  successfully
treated individuals and from individuals with infections that are refractory to treatment.
CDC  will  continue  to  expand  this  database  to  include  additional  data  as  additional
studies  are  conducted.  Trichomonas  vaginalis  Clinical  Management  and  Consultation
The  CDC  Division  of  STD  Prevention  provides  recommendations  on  the  treatment  of
various  sexually  transmitted  diseases  including  Trichomoniasis  –  STI  Treatment
Guidelines  (cdc.gov).  For  clinical  guidance  with  the  management  of  recurrent  or
persistent  trichomoniasis,  please  contact  the  CDC  Division  of  STD  Prevention
Trichomonas  Clinical  Consultation  team  at  TVconsultation@cdc.gov.  Susceptibility
testing may be helpful in selection of alternative treatment regimens (1,2).   References
To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address: Neglected Tropical
Diseases Laboratory Diagnostic Assistance (DPDx) CDC Traveler’s Health For Healthcare
Providers, Emergency Consultations, and General Public. Contact Us  
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/resources/Trichomonas_vaginalis.html
