A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Recommendations from the Guidelines for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  (2003).  As  in  previous  CDC
guidelines, each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing scientific data,
theoretic rationale, applicability, and possible economic benefit. The recommendations
are evidence-based wherever possible. However, certain recommendations are derived
from  empiric  infection-control  or  engineering  principles,  theoretic  rationale,  or  from
experience gained from events that cannot be readily studied (e.g., floods). The HICPAC
system for categorizing recommendations has been modified to include a category for
engineering standards and actions required by state or federal regulations. Guidelines
and standards published by the American Institute of Architects (AIA), American Society
of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), and the Association
for  the  Advancement  in  Medical  Instrumentation  (AAMI)  form  the  basis  of  certain
recommendations.  These  standards  reflect  a  consensus  of  expert  opinions  and
extensive  consultation  with  agencies  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services.  Compliance  with  these  standards  is  usually  voluntary.  However,  state  and
federal  governments  often  adopt  these  standards  as  regulations.  For  example,  the
standards from AIA regarding construction and design of new or renovated health-care
facilities,  have  been  adopted  by  reference  by  >40  states.  Certain  recommendations
have two category ratings (e.g., Categories IA and IC or Categories IB and IC), indicating
the  recommendation  is  evidence-based  as  well  as  a  standard  or  regulation.
Recommendations  are  rated  according  to  the  following  categories:  Clarification
Statement:  CDC  and  HICPAC  have  recommendations  in  both  2003  Guidelines  for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  and  the  2008  Guideline  for
Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities that state that the CDC does not
support disinfectant fogging. Specifically, the 2003 and 2008 Guidelines state:   2003:
"Do  not  perform  disinfectant  fogging  for  routine  purposes  in  patient-care  areas.
Category IB" 2008: "Do not perform disinfectant fogging in patient-care areas. Category
II"   These  recommendations  refer  to  the  spraying  or  fogging  of  chemicals  (e.g.,
formaldehyde, phenol-based agents, or quaternary ammonium compounds) as a way to
decontaminate  environmental  surfaces  or  disinfect  the  air  in  patient  rooms.  The
recommendation  against  fogging  was  based  on  studies  in  the  1970's  that  reported  a
lack  of  microbicidal  efficacy  (e.g.,  use  of  quaternary  ammonium  compounds  in  mist
applications)  but  also  adverse  effects  on  healthcare  workers  and  others  in  facilities
where  these  methods  were  utilized.  Furthermore,  some  of  these  chemicals  are  not
EPA-registered  for  use  in  fogging-type  applications.   These  recommendations  do  not
apply  to  newer  technologies  involving  fogging  for  room  decontamination  (e.g.,  ozone
mists,  vaporized  hydrogen  peroxide)  that  have  become  available  since  the  2003  and
2008 recommendations were made. These newer technologies were assessed by CDC
and  HICPAC  in  the  2011  Guideline  for  the  Prevention  and  Control  of  Norovirus
Gastroenteritis  Outbreaks  in  Healthcare  Settings,  which  makes  the  recommendation:  
"More  research  is  required  to  clarify  the  effectiveness  and  reliability  of  fogging,  UV
irradiation,  and  ozone  mists  to  reduce  norovirus  environmental  contamination.  (No
recommendation/unresolved issue)"  The 2003 and 2008 recommendations still apply;
however,  CDC  does  not  yet  make  a  recommendation  regarding  these  newer
technologies. This issue will be revisited as additional evidence becomes available. Top
of  PageI.IV.  Treatment  and  Disposal  of  Regulated  Medical  Wastes  CDC  provides
information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections
among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/environmental-control/recommendations.html
