Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / February 25, 2022 / 71(8);319–324 On February 18,
2022,  this  report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Lakshmi
Radhakrishnan, MPH1; Rebecca T. Leeb, PhD2; Rebecca H. Bitsko, PhD2; Kelly Carey,
MPH1;  Abigail  Gates,  MSPH1;  Kristin  M.  Holland,  PhD3;  Kathleen  P.  Hartnett,  PhD1;
Aaron Kite-Powell, MS1; Jourdan DeVies, MS4; Amanda R. Smith, PhD1,5; Katharina L.
van  Santen,  MSPH4;  Sophia  Crossen,  MS6;  Michael  Sheppard,  MS1;  Samantha  Wotiz,
MPH7;  Rashon  I.  Lane,  PhD8;  Rashid  Njai,  PhD9;  Amelia  G.  Johnson,  DrPH10;  Amber
Winn, MPH10; Hannah L. Kirking, MD10; Loren Rodgers, PhD1; Craig W. Thomas, PhD11;
Karl  Soetebier,  MAPW1;  Jennifer  Adjemian,  PhD1;  Kayla  N.  Anderson,  PhD12  (View
author affiliations) What is already known about this topic? The proportion of pediatric
emergency department (ED) visits for mental health conditions (MHCs) increased during
2020. What is added by this report? Weekly ED visits among adolescent females (aged
12–17  years)  increased  for  two  MHCs  (eating  and  tic  disorders)  during  2020,  four
(depression,  eating,  tic,  and  obsessive-compulsive  disorders)  during  2021,  and  five
(anxiety; trauma and stressor-related; eating; tic; and obsessive-compulsive disorders)
and overall MHC visits during January 2022, compared with 2019. The proportion of ED
visits with eating disorders doubled among adolescent females; those for tic disorders
approximately tripled during the pandemic. What are the implications for public health
practice? Early identification and expanded evidence-based prevention and intervention
strategies  are  critical  to  improving  pediatric  mental  health,  especially  among
adolescent females, who might have increased need. Views equals page views plus PDF
downloads  Figure  1  Figure  2  In  2021,  a  national  emergency*  for  children’s  mental
health  was  declared  by  several  pediatric  health  organizations,  and  the  U.S.  Surgeon
General released an advisory† on mental health among youths. These actions resulted
from ongoing concerns about children’s mental health in the United States, which was
exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic (1,2). During March–October 2020, among all
emergency  department  (ED)  visits,  the  proportion  of  mental  health-related  visits
increased by 24% among U.S. children aged 5–11 years and 31% among adolescents
aged 12–17 years, compared with 2019 (2). CDC examined changes in U.S. pediatric ED
visits for overall mental health conditions (MHCs) and ED visits associated with specific
MHCs  (depression;  anxiety;  disruptive  behavioral  and  impulse-control  disorders;
attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder;  trauma  and  stressor-related  disorders;  bipolar
disorders;  eating  disorders;  tic  disorders;  and  obsessive-compulsive  disorders  [OCD])
during 2019 through January 2022 among children and adolescents aged 0–17 years,
overall and by sex and age. After declines in weekly visits associated with MHCs among
those aged 0–17 years during 2020, weekly numbers of ED visits for MHCs overall and
for specific MHCs varied by age and sex during 2021 and January 2022, when compared
with  corresponding  weeks  in  2019.  Among  adolescent  females  aged  12–17  years,
weekly  visits  increased  for  two  of  nine  MHCs  during  2020  (eating  disorders  and  tic
disorders),  for  four  of  nine  MHCs  during  2021  (depression,  eating  disorders,  tic
disorders, and OCD), and for five of nine MHCs during January 2022 (anxiety, trauma
and  stressor-related  disorders,  eating  disorders,  tic  disorders,  and  OCD),  and  overall
MHC visits during January 2022, compared with 2019. Early identification and expanded
evidence-based  prevention  and  intervention  strategies  are  critical  to  improving
children’s and adolescents’ mental health (1–3), especially among adolescent females,
who  might  have  increased  need.  CDC  examined  data  from  the  National  Syndromic
Surveillance Program (NSSP)§ using three pandemic surveillance periods following the
declaration  of  a  national  COVID-19  emergency  on  March  13,  2020:  March  15,
2020–January 2, 2021 (2020); January 3, 2021–January 1, 2022 (2021); and January 2,
2022–January  29,  2022  (January  2022).  These  periods  were  compared  with
corresponding  weeks  in  2019,  from  facilities  consistently  reporting  data  during
2019–2022.¶  Keyword  syndromes**  using  reported  reason  for  visit  (chief  complaint)
and  administrative  diagnosis  codes  were  developed  and  validated  by  CDC  in
partnership with state, tribal, local, and territorial health departments (Supplementary
Box,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477).  To  quantify  change  over  time,  CDC
calculated the percent change in mean number of weekly ED visits†† for children and
adolescents aged 0–17 years, as well as by age group (0–4, 5–11, and 12–17 years) and
sex. To describe changes in visit volume reported to NSSP, CDC classified the percent
change  in  visits  as  decreasing  (less  than  a  −10%  change),  stable  (−10%  to  10%
change), or increasing >10% change). Visit ratios (VRs)§§ with 95% CIs were calculated;
CIs that excluded 1 were considered statistically significant. Analyses were conducted
using R software (version 4.1.2; R Foundation). This activity was reviewed by CDC and
was  conducted  consistent  with  applicable  federal  law  and  CDC  policy.¶¶  Average
weekly visits for overall MHCs*** among all children and adolescents (aged 0–17 years)
decreased  during  2020  (–27%)  and  were  stable  during  2021  (–8%)  and  January  2022
(–5%)  compared  with  2019,  with  differences  by  sex  (Figure  1)  (Supplementary  Table,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477).  However,  visits  for  overall  MHCs  among  all
children and adolescents accounted for a larger proportion of all pediatric visits during
2020, 2021, and January 2022 than during 2019, with variation by age group and MHC.
By age group and sex, female adolescents aged 12–17 years accounted for the largest
increases  in  the  number  and  proportion  of  visits  for  overall  MHCs  and  specific  MHCs
during
 all
 periods
 compared
 with
 2019
 (Supplementary
 Figure
 1,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477). The number of weekly visits for overall MHCs
and specific MHCs mostly decreased for males aged 0–17 years and for children aged
0–4  and  5–11  years  across  surveillance  periods;  the  proportion  of  ED  visits  for  males
and  younger  children  varied  by  MHCs  and  surveillance  period  (Supplementary  Table;
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477)
 (Supplementary
 Figure
 2,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477). The volume of visits was low for overall MHCs
and  for  specific  MHCs  among  children  aged  0–4  years.  With  regard  to  specific  MHCs,
weekly  visits  for  tic  disorders  among  girls  aged  5–11  years  increased  during  2020,
2021, and in January 2022, compared with 2019, as did the proportion of visits for tic
disorders (VR = 3.04, 2.03, and 2.16, respectively); this pattern was not found among
children aged 5–11 years overall or among boys within this age group (Supplementary
Table,
 https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477)
 (Supplementary
 Figure
 2,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477). Among adolescents aged 12–17 years, weekly
visits increased among females for two of nine MHCs in 2020 (eating and tic disorders);
four of nine MHCs during 2021 (depression, eating and tic disorders, and OCD); and five
of nine MHCs during January 2022 (anxiety, trauma and stressor-related, eating and tic
disorders, and OCD) and overall MHC visits during January 2022, compared with 2019
(Figure  1)  (Figure  2)  (Supplementary  Table,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477)
(Supplementary
 Figure
 1,
 https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/114477).
 Whereas
 the
proportion  of  visits  varied  by  MHC  and  surveillance  period  compared  with  2019,  the
proportion  of  visits  for  eating  disorders  among  adolescent  females  increased  during
2020, 2021, and January 2022 (VR = 1.95, 2.29, and 1.99, respectively) as did those for
tic disorders (VR = 3.65, 3.94, and 2.96 respectively). Top Following declines in weekly
visits associated with MHCs among children and adolescents aged 0–17 years, during
2020  compared  with  2019,  weekly  ED  visits  for  MHCs  overall  and  for  specific  MHCs
varied  by  age  and  sex  during  2021  and  in  January  2022.  The  current  trends  in  the
number and proportion of MHC-related ED visits, along with previous research (1,2,4–8),
indicate  that  the  mental  health  effects  of  the  pandemic  might  be  particularly  high
among  adolescent  girls.  Increases  in  weekly  visits  for  eating  and  tic  disorders  for
females,  and  particularly  among  adolescent  females  aged  12–17  years  during  2020,
2021,  and  in  January  2022,  could  represent  an  overall  increase  in  distress  among
females during the pandemic. Both eating and tic disorders can co-occur with anxiety,
depression,  and  OCD  (1,4–7).  Eating  disorders  can  be  triggered  by  pandemic-related
risk factors (e.g., lack of structure in daily routine, emotional distress, and changes in
food  availability)  or  exacerbated  by  reduced  access  to  mental  health  care  during  the
pandemic  (4,5).  Increases  in  visits  for  tic  disorders  among  adolescent  females  are
atypical; tic disorders usually begin earlier in childhood and are more prevalent among
males  (6,7).  Stress  of  the  pandemic  or  exposure  to  severe  tics,  highlighted  on  social
media  platforms,  might  be  associated  with  increases  in  visits  with  tics  and  tic-like
behavior among adolescent females (6). In general, the number of MHC-related visits
decreased for adolescent males aged 12–17 years during 2020, 2021, and in January
2022, but there was variation in the proportion of MHCs of all ED visits by pandemic
year  and  specific  MHC.  These  sex  differences  might  represent  differences  in  need,
recognition,  and  health  care–seeking  behavior.  Systemic  changes,  such  as  increasing
access  to  available  tools†††  and  mental  health  services  can  improve  emotional
well-being during and after crises among children and adolescents (3). EDs are often
the  access  point  of  care  for  pediatric  mental  health  emergencies.  Declines  in
MHC-related  visits  during  2020  align  with  previous  research  (2),  and  with  reported
declines in overall volume of pediatric ED visits during the pandemic (8). During 2021
and January 2022, visits for overall MHCs were stable among children and adolescents
aged 0–17 years but accounted for a larger proportion of all ED visits compared with
2019.  Concerns  about  ED  capacity  and  potential  spread  of  COVID-19  might  have
contributed to a delay in seeking health care; thus, ED visits related to MHCs during the
pandemic  might  underestimate  the  actual  need  and  represent  more  severe
presentations of MHCs than if earlier intervention and treatment were available (5). The
highly  complex  nature  of  individual  experiences  makes  it  difficult  to  identify  a  single
reason  for  changes  in  MHCs  during  the  pandemic.  Although  prolonged  time  at  home
could have increased familial support and identification of mental health care needs for
some  youths,  it  might  have  amplified  adversities  and  stressors  among  others.§§§
Exposure to adverse childhood experiences,¶¶¶ such as loss of parents and caregivers,
increases  in  parental  mental  health  challenges  and  substance  use  (9),  and  financial
vulnerabilities**** might have been exacerbated by the pandemic and are associated
with poor mental health outcomes among children and adolescents. As of June 2021,
approximately 140,000 U.S. children and adolescents had lost parents and caregivers
to  COVID-19  (10).  In  addition,  the  pandemic  disrupted  social  and  physical  activities:
many  adolescents  have  experienced  substantial  disruption  to  daily  and  academic
routines,  faced  uncertainty  and  loneliness,  and  increased  social  media  use  (3–7,9).
These  factors  could  have  created  or  exacerbated  risk  for  MHCs  among  children  and
adolescents. Promoting policies to improve access to mental health services, including
telemental  health,  and  community-based  primary  prevention  strategies  to  reduce
exposure to adverse childhood experiences can help mitigate risk for MHCs before they
begin  (3,9).  The  findings  of  this  study  are  subject  to  at  least  five  limitations.  First,
findings might differ from other studies based on the method of assessing ED visits for
health  effects.  Second,  these  cross-sectional  data  cannot  be  used  to  make  causal
inferences for changes in visit trends, draw conclusions about the acute versus chronic
presentation  of  MHC  visits  within  EDs,  or  distinguish  between  visits  where  MHCs  are
primary reason for visit versus those where MHCs are present but might not be the sole
reason for the visit. Third, estimates for the youngest age group (0–4 years) should be
interpreted with caution because of small numbers of weekly visits. Fourth, fluctuations
in  underlying  data  quality,  coding  practices,  and  variations  in  lengths  of  surveillance
periods, particularly during 2022, might not be reflective of trends from a longer period,
potentially  over-  or  underrepresenting  visit  trends.  To  account  for  this,  only  facilities
with  more  complete  data  during  the  period  of  study  were  included.  Finally,  NSSP  ED
visit  data  are  a  convenience  sample  and  should  not  be  considered  nationally
representative.  However,  surveillance  periods  were  compared  with  corresponding
weeks in 2019 from facilities consistently reporting data during 2019–January 2022, and
numbers of EDs remained relatively constant over time. Implementing evidence-based
primary prevention, early identification, and intervention, and treatment strategies that
promote physical and mental health among children and adolescents and that can be
rapidly adapted during public health emergencies, can help prevent MHCs and improve
pediatric  health  (1–3).  CDC  supports  efforts  to  promote  the  emotional  well-being  of
children  and  adolescents  and  provides  resources  for  clinicians,††††  families,§§§§
schools,¶¶¶¶  and  communities.*****  Top  National  Syndromic  Surveillance  Program
Community  of  Practice  (NSSP  CoP);  NSSP  CoP  Syndrome  Definition  Committee  and
Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists;  Dylan  Johns,  Zachary  Stein,  Barbara
Lopes-Cardozo,  Matthew  D.  Ritchey,  Umed  A.  Ajani,  Paula  Yoon.  Top  Corresponding
author:  Lakshmi  Radhakrishnan,  LRadhakrishnan@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of  Health
Informatics  and  Surveillance,  Center  for  Surveillance,  Epidemiology,  and  Laboratory
Services,  CDC;  2Division  of  Human  Development  and  Disability,  National  Center  on
Birth  Defects  and  Developmental  Disabilities,  CDC;  3Division  of  Overdose  Prevention,
National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control,  CDC;  4ICF  International,  Fairfax,
Virginia;  5Epidemic  Intelligence  Service,  CDC;  6InductiveHealth  Informatics,  Atlanta,
Georgia;  7Deloitte,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  8Division  of  STD  Prevention,  National  Center  for
HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, & TB Prevention, CDC; 9Office of Minority Health and Health
Equity,  Office  of  the  Deputy  Director  for  Public  Health  Service  and  Implementation,
CDC;  10Division  of  Viral  Diseases,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory
Diseases,  CDC;  11Division  of  Population  Health,  National  Center  for  Chronic  Disease
Prevention  and  Health  Promotion,  CDC;  12Division  of  Violence  Prevention,  National
Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control,  CDC.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and
submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of
potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *
https://www.aap.org/en/advocacy/child-and-adolescent-healthy-mental-development/aa
p-aacap-cha-declaration-of-a-national-emergency-in-child-and-adolescent-mental-health
/
 †
https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/surgeon-general-youth-mental-health-advisory.p
df  §  NSSP  is  a  collaboration  among  CDC,  local,  and  state  health  departments,  and
federal, academic, and private sector partners. https://www.cdc.gov/nssp/index.html ¶
To  reduce  artifactual  impact  from  changes  in  reporting  patterns,  analyses  were
restricted  to  facilities  with  a  coefficient  of  variation  ≤40  and  average  weekly
informative  discharge  diagnosis  ≥75%  complete  during  2019–2022.  **  NSSP  collects
free-text  reason  for  visit  (chief  complaint),  discharge  diagnosis,  and  patient
demographic  details.  Diagnosis  information  is  collected  using  codes  from  the
International
 Classification
 of
 Diseases,
 Ninth
 Revision,
 Clinical
 Modification,
International  Classification  of  Diseases,  Tenth  Revision,  Clinical  Modification,  and
Systematized  Nomenclature  of  Medicine.  Free-text  keywords  and  diagnostic  codes
combined using Boolean searches were used to create distinct keyword syndromes to
identify  visits  associated  with  overall  MHCs  and  nine  distinct  disorders  (anxiety;
depression;
 attention-deficit/hyperactivity;
 bipolar;
 disruptive
 behavioral
 and
impulse-control;  eating;  obsessive-compulsive;  tic;  trauma  and  stressor-related).  The
overall  MHC  keyword  syndrome  captures  any  mental  health-related  visits,  nine
individual  mental  disorders,  schizophrenia  spectrum  disorders,  some  additional  low
prevalence  mental  health  conditions  (e.g.,  reactive  attachment  disorder,  delusional
disorders, and somatoform disorders), and general mental health terms and codes. ††
Percent  change  in  visits  per  week  during  each  surveillance  period  was  calculated  as
([mean weekly ED visits with health outcome during surveillance period − mean weekly
ED visits with health outcome during comparison period] / mean weekly ED visits with
health  outcome  during  comparison  period)  ×  100.  §§  VRs  =  (ED  visits  with  health
outcome [surveillance period] / all ED visits [surveillance period]) / (ED visits with health
outcome [comparison period] / all ED visits [comparison period]). Ratios >1 indicate a
higher  proportion  of  ED  visits  with  the  health  outcome  during  the  surveillance  period
than  the  comparison  period;  ratios  1  indicate  a  higher  proportion  of  ED  visits  with
health outcome during the surveillance period for females compared with males. ¶¶ 45
C.F.R. part 46.102(l)(2), 21 C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C. Sect. 241(d); 5 U.S.C. Sect. 552a;
44 U.S.C. Sect. 3501 et seq *** Overall MHCs keyword syndrome captures any mental
health–related visit, nine individual mental disorders, schizophrenia spectrum disorders,
some  additional  low  prevalence  mental  health  conditions  (e.g.,  reactive  attachment
disorder,  delusional  disorders,  and  somatoform  disorders),  and  general  mental  health
terms
 and
 codes.
 †††
https://www.nap.edu/resource/other/dbasse/wellbeing-tools/interactive/
 §§§
https://www.aap.org/en/patient-care/family-snapshot-during-the-covid-19-pandemic/
¶¶¶
 https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/preventingACES.pdf
 ****
https://www.aap.org/en/patient-care/family-snapshot-during-the-covid-19-pandemic/the
-financial-impact-of-the-pandemic-on-families-with-children/
 ††††
https://www.cdc.gov/childrensmentalhealth/documents/access-infographic.html
 §§§§
https://www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/stress-coping/help-children-cope/index.html
 ¶¶¶¶
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/whatworks/what-works-safe-and-supportive-environ
ments.htm
 *****
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/childabuseandneglect/essentials/
 Top
 Top
Abbreviations: ED = emergency department; ICD-9-CM = International Classification of
Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification; ICD-10-CM = International Classification
of Diseases, Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification; MHC = mental health condition; NSSP
= National Syndromic Surveillance Program; SNOMED = Systematized Nomenclature of
Medicine. * NSSP receives anonymized medical record information from approximately
71%  of  nonfederal  EDs  nationwide.  To  reduce  artifactual  impact  from  changes  in
reporting patterns, analyses were restricted to facilities with more consistent reporting
of  more  complete  data  (coefficient  of  variation  ≤40  and  average  weekly  informative
discharge  diagnosis  ≥75%  complete  during  2019–2022).  †  NSSP  collects  free-text
reason for visit (chief complaint), discharge diagnosis, and patient demographic details.
Diagnosis  information  is  collected  using  ICD-9-CM,  ICD-10-CM,  and  SNOMED  codes.
Free-text keywords and diagnostic codes combined using Boolean searches were used
to  create  a  keyword  syndrome  to  identify  visits  associated  with  overall  MHCs.  This
keyword  syndrome  includes  visits  related  to  nine  distinct  disorders  (anxiety;
depression;
 attention-deficit/hyperactivity;
 bipolar;
 disruptive
 behavioral
 and
impulse-control;  eating;  obsessive-compulsive;  tic;  and  trauma  and  stressor-related),
schizophrenia spectrum disorders, some additional low prevalence MHCs (e.g., reactive
attachment  disorder,  delusional  disorders,  or  somatoform  disorders),  and  general
mental  health  terms  and  codes.  Top  Abbreviations:  ED  =  emergency  department;
ICD-9-CM = International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification;
ICD-10-CM  =  International  Classification  of  Diseases,  Tenth  Revision,  Clinical
Modification;
 NSSP
 =
 National
 Syndromic
 Surveillance
 Program;
 SNOMED
 =
Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine. * NSSP receives anonymized medical record
information  from  approximately  71%  of  nonfederal  EDs  nationwide.  To  reduce
artifactual  impact  from  changes  in  reporting  patterns,  analyses  were  restricted  to
facilities with more consistent reporting of more complete data (coefficient of variation
≤40  and  average  weekly  informative  discharge  diagnosis  ≥75%  complete  during
2019–2022).  †  NSSP  collects  free-text  reason  for  visit  (chief  complaint),  discharge
diagnosis,  and  patient  demographic  details.  Diagnosis  information  is  collected  using
ICD-9-CM,  ICD-10-CM,  and  SNOMED  codes.  Free-text  keywords  and  diagnostic  codes
combined using Boolean searches were used to create a keyword syndrome to identify
visits associated with eating and tic disorders. Top Suggested citation for this article:
Radhakrishnan  L,  Leeb  RT,  Bitsko  RH,  et  al.  Pediatric  Emergency  Department  Visits
Associated with Mental Health Conditions Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic —
United
 States,
 January
 2019–January
 2022.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
2022;71:319–324. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7108e2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7108e2.htm
