Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  PID  comprises  a  spectrum  of  inflammatory  disorders  of  the
upper  female  genital  tract,  including  any  combination  of  endometritis,  salpingitis,
tubo-ovarian  abscess,  and  pelvic  peritonitis  (1155–1157).  Sexually  transmitted
organisms, especially N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, often are implicated. Recent
studies  report  that  the  proportion  of  PID  cases  attributable  to  N.  gonorrhoeae  or  C.
trachomatis  is  decreasing;  of  women  who  received  a  diagnosis  of  acute  PID,
approximately  50%  have  a  positive  test  for  either  of  those  organisms  (1158–1160).
Micro-organisms  that  comprise  the  vaginal  flora,  such  as  strict  and  facultative
anaerobes  (1160)  and  G.  vaginalis,  H.  influenzae,  enteric  gram-negative  rods,  and
Streptococcus  agalactiae,  have  been  associated  with  PID  (1161).  In  addition,
cytomegalovirus  (CMV),  T.  vaginalis,  M.  hominis,  and  U.  urealyticum  might  be
associated with certain PID cases (1072). Data also indicate that M. genitalium might
have  a  role  in  PID  pathogenesis  (765,928)  and  might  be  associated  with  milder
symptoms  (919,923,928),  although  one  study  failed  to  demonstrate  a  substantial
increase  in  PID  after  detection  of  M.  genitalium  in  the  lower  genital  tract  (925).
Screening  and  treating  sexually  active  women  for  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  reduces
their  risk  for  PID  (1162,1163).  Although  BV  is  associated  with  PID,  whether  PID
incidence can be reduced by identifying and treating women with BV is unclear (1161).
Whether screening young women for M. genitalium is associated with a reduction in PID
is unknown. Acute PID is difficult to diagnose because of the considerable variation in
symptoms and signs associated with this condition. Women with PID often have subtle
or  nonspecific  symptoms  or  are  asymptomatic.  Delay  in  diagnosis  and  treatment
probably contributes to inflammatory sequelae in the upper genital tract. Laparoscopy
can  be  used  to  obtain  a  more  accurate  diagnosis  of  salpingitis  and  a  more  complete
bacteriologic diagnosis. However, this diagnostic tool frequently is not readily available,
and  its  use  is  not  easily  justifiable  when  symptoms  are  mild  or  vague.  Moreover,
laparoscopy  will  not  detect  endometritis  and  might  not  detect  subtle  inflammation  of
the fallopian tubes. Consequently, a PID diagnosis usually is based on imprecise clinical
findings (1164–1166). Data indicate that a clinical diagnosis of symptomatic PID has a
positive  predictive  value  for  salpingitis  of  65%–90%,  compared  with  laparoscopy
(1167–1170). The positive predictive value of a clinical diagnosis of acute PID depends
on  the  epidemiologic  characteristics  of  the  population,  with  higher  positive  predictive
values  among  sexually  active  young  women  (particularly  adolescents),  women
attending STD clinics, and those who live in communities with high rates of gonorrhea
or chlamydia. Regardless of positive predictive value, no single historical, physical, or
laboratory  finding  is  both  sensitive  and  specific  for  the  diagnosis  of  acute  PID.
Combinations  of  diagnostic  findings  that  improve  either  sensitivity  (i.e.,  detect  more
women who have PID) or specificity (i.e., exclude more women who do not have PID) do
so  only  at  the  expense  of  the  other.  For  example,  requiring  two  or  more  findings
excludes more women who do not have PID and reduces the number of women with PID
who are identified. Episodes of PID often go unrecognized. Although certain cases are
asymptomatic,  others  are  not  diagnosed  because  the  patient  or  the  health  care
provider  do  not  recognize  the  implications  of  mild  or  nonspecific  symptoms  or  signs
(e.g., abnormal bleeding, dyspareunia, and vaginal discharge). Even women with mild
or asymptomatic PID might be at risk for infertility (1157). Because of the difficulty of
diagnosis  and  the  potential  for  damage  to  the  reproductive  health  of  women,  health
care providers should maintain a low threshold for the clinical diagnosis of PID (1158).
The recommendations for diagnosing PID are intended to assist health care providers to
recognize  when  PID  should  be  suspected  and  when  additional  information  should  be
obtained to increase diagnostic certainty. Diagnosis and management of other causes
of  lower  abdominal  pain  (e.g.,  ectopic  pregnancy,  acute  appendicitis,  ovarian  cyst,
ovarian torsion, or functional pain) are unlikely to be impaired by initiating antimicrobial
therapy for PID. Presumptive treatment for PID should be initiated for sexually active
young women and other women at risk for STIs if they are experiencing pelvic or lower
abdominal pain, if no cause for the illness other than PID can be identified, and if one or
more of the following three minimum clinical criteria are present on pelvic examination:
cervical  motion  tenderness,  uterine  tenderness,  or  adnexal  tenderness.  More  specific
criteria for diagnosing PID include endometrial biopsy with histopathologic evidence of
endometritis;  transvaginal  sonography  or  magnetic  resonance  imaging  techniques
demonstrating  thickened,  fluid-filled  tubes  with  or  without  free  pelvic  fluid  or
tubo-ovarian  complex,  or  Doppler  studies  indicating  pelvic  infection  (e.g.,  tubal
hyperemia); and laparoscopic findings consistent with PID. A diagnostic evaluation that
includes some of these more extensive procedures might be warranted in certain cases.
Endometrial biopsy is warranted for women undergoing laparoscopy who do not have
visual  evidence  of  salpingitis  because  endometritis  is  the  only  sign  of  PID  for  certain
women.  Requiring  that  all  three  minimum  criteria  be  present  before  the  initiation  of
empiric treatment can result in insufficient sensitivity for a PID diagnosis. After deciding
whether to initiate empiric treatment, clinicians should also consider the risk profile for
STIs.  More  elaborate  diagnostic  evaluation  frequently  is  needed  because  incorrect
diagnosis  and  management  of  PID  might  cause  unnecessary  morbidity.  For  example,
the presence of signs of lower genital tract inflammation (predominance of leukocytes
in vaginal secretions, cervical discharge, or cervical friability), in addition to one of the
three minimum criteria, increases the specificity of the diagnosis. One or more of the
following  additional  criteria  can  be  used  to  enhance  the  specificity  of  the  minimum
clinical criteria and support a PID diagnosis: The majority of women with PID have either
mucopurulent cervical discharge or evidence of WBCs on a microscopic evaluation of a
saline  preparation  of  vaginal  fluid  (i.e.,  wet  prep).  If  the  cervical  discharge  appears
normal and no WBCs are observed on the wet prep of vaginal fluid, a PID diagnosis is
unlikely,  and  alternative  causes  of  pain  should  be  considered.  A  wet  prep  of  vaginal
fluid also can detect the presence of concomitant infections (e.g., BV or trichomoniasis).
PID  treatment  regimens  should  provide  empiric,  broad-spectrum  coverage  of  likely
pathogens. Multiple parenteral and oral antimicrobial regimens have been effective in
achieving  clinical  and  microbiologic  cure  in  randomized  clinical  trials  with  short-term
follow-up (1171–1173). However, only a limited number of studies have assessed and
compared these regimens with regard to infection elimination in the endometrium and
fallopian  tubes  or  determined  the  incidence  of  long-term  complications  (e.g.,  tubal
infertility  and  ectopic  pregnancy)  after  antimicrobial  regimens  (1159,1164,1174).  The
optimal treatment regimen and long-term outcome of early treatment of women with
subclinical  PID  are  unknown.  All  regimens  used  to  treat  PID  should  also  be  effective
against  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  because  negative  endocervical  screening
for these organisms does not rule out upper genital tract infection. Anaerobic bacteria
have been isolated from the upper genital tract of women who have PID, and data from
in  vitro  studies  have  revealed  that  some  anaerobes  (e.g.,  Bacteroides  fragilis)  can
cause tubal and epithelial destruction. BV is often present among women who have PID
(22,1160,1161,1175).  Addition  of  metronidazole  to  IM  or  oral  PID  regimens  more
effectively  eradicates  anaerobic  organisms  from  the  upper  genital  tract  (1160).  Until
treatment regimens that do not cover anaerobic microbes have been demonstrated to
prevent long-term sequelae (e.g., infertility and ectopic pregnancy) as successfully as
the regimens that are effective against these microbes, using regimens with anaerobic
activity  should  be  considered.  Treatment  should  be  initiated  as  soon  as  the
presumptive  diagnosis  has  been  made  because  prevention  of  long-term  sequelae  is
dependent on early administration of recommended antimicrobials. For women with PID
of  mild  or  moderate  clinical  severity,  parenteral  and  oral  regimens  appear  to  have
similar efficacy. The decision of whether hospitalization is necessary should be based
on provider judgment and whether the woman meets any of the following criteria: No
evidence  is  available  to  indicate  that  adolescents  have  improved  outcomes  from
hospitalization for treatment of PID, and the clinical response to outpatient treatment is
similar among younger and older women. The decision to hospitalize adolescents with
acute  PID  should  be  based  on  the  same  criteria  used  for  older  women.  Randomized
trials  have  demonstrated  the  efficacy  of  parenteral  regimens  (1160,1171,1172,1176).
Clinical  experience  should  guide  decisions  regarding  transition  to  oral  therapy,  which
usually  can  be  initiated  within  24–48  hours  of  clinical  improvement.  For  women  with
tubo-ovarian  abscesses,  >24  hours  of  inpatient  observation  is  recommended.
Ceftriaxone 1 g IV every 24 hours PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours
PLUS Metronidazole 500 mg orally or IV every 12 hours OR Cefotetan 2 g IV every 12
hours PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours OR Cefoxitin 2 g IV every 6
hours  PLUS  Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  or  IV  every  12  hours  Because  of  the  pain
associated  with  IV  infusion,  doxycycline  should  be  administered  orally  when  possible.
Oral  and  IV  administration  of  doxycycline  and  metronidazole  provide  similar
bioavailability. Oral metronidazole is well absorbed and can be considered instead of IV
for women without severe illness or tubo-ovarian abscess when possible. After clinical
improvement with parenteral therapy, transition to oral therapy with doxycycline 100
mg 2 times/day and metronidazole 500 mg 2 times/day is recommended to complete
14 days of antimicrobial therapy. Only limited data are available to support using other
parenteral
 second-
 or
 third-
 generation
 cephalosporins
 (e.g.,
 ceftizoxime
 or
cefotaxime). Because these cephalosporins are less active than cefotetan or cefoxitin
against  anaerobic  bacteria,  the  addition  of  metronidazole  should  be  considered.
Ampicillin-sulbactam plus doxycycline has been investigated in at least one clinical trial
and  has  broad-spectrum  coverage  (1177).  Ampicillin-sulbactam  plus  doxycycline  is
effective  against  C.  trachomatis,  N.  gonorrhoeae,  and  anaerobes  for  women  with
tubo-ovarian  abscess.  Another  trial  demonstrated  short-term  clinical  cure  rates  with
azithromycin  monotherapy  or  combined  with  metronidazole  (1178).  When  using  the
clindamycin  and  gentamicin  alternative  parenteral  regimen,  women  with  clinical
improvement  after  24–48  hours  can  be  transitioned  to  clindamycin  (450  mg  orally  4
times/day) or doxycycline (100 mg orally 2 times/day) to complete the 14-day therapy.
However,  when  tubo-ovarian  abscess  is  present,  clindamycin  (450  mg  orally  4
times/day) or metronidazole (500 mg orally 2 times/day) should be used to complete 14
days  of  therapy  with  oral  doxycycline  to  provide  more  effective  anaerobic  coverage.
Ampicillin-sulbactam 3 g IV every 6 hours PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every
12 hours OR Clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours PLUS Gentamicin loading dose IV or
IM  (2  mg/kg  body  weight),  followed  by  a  maintenance  dose  (1.5  mg/kg  body  weight)
every 8 hours; single daily dosing (3–5 mg/kg body weight) can be substituted IM or oral
therapy  can  be  considered  for  women  with  mild-to-moderate  acute  PID  because  the
clinical  outcomes  among  women  treated  with  these  regimens  are  similar  to  those
treated with IV therapy (1158). Women who do not respond to IM or oral therapy within
72 hours should be reevaluated to confirm the diagnosis and be administered therapy
IV. Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM in a single dose* PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day
for 14 days WITH Metronidazole 500 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days OR Cefoxitin 2 g
IM in a single dose and Probenecid 1 g orally administered concurrently in a single dose
PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days WITH Metronidazole 500 mg
orally 2 times/day for 14 days OR Other parenteral third-generation cephalosporin (e.g.,
ceftizoxime  or  cefotaxime)  PLUS  Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  2  times/day  for  14  days
WITH Metronidazole 500 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days *For persons weighing >150
kg  (~300  lbs.)  with  documented  gonococcal  infection,  1  g  of  ceftriaxone  should  be
administered.  These  regimens  provide  coverage  against  frequent  etiologic  agents  of
PID;  however,  the  optimal  choice  of  a  cephalosporin  is  unclear.  Cefoxitin,  a
second-generation cephalosporin, has better anaerobic coverage than ceftriaxone, and,
in  combination  with  probenecid  and  doxycycline,  has  been  effective  in  short-term
clinical response among women with PID. Ceftriaxone has better coverage against N.
gonorrhoeae.  The  addition  of  metronidazole  to  these  regimens  provides  extended
coverage  against  anaerobic  organisms  and  will  also  effectively  treat  BV,  which  is
frequently  associated  with  PID.  No  data  have  been  published  regarding  use  of  oral
cephalosporins for treating PID. As a result of the emergence of quinolone-resistant N.
gonorrhoeae,  regimens  that  include  a  quinolone  agent  are  not  recommended  for  PID
treatment.  However,  if  the  patient  has  cephalosporin  allergy,  the  community
prevalence and individual risk for gonorrhea are low, and follow-up is likely, alternative
therapy  can  be  considered  with  one  of  the  following  alternative  regimens:  1)
levofloxacin 500 mg orally once daily in combination with metronidazole 500 mg orally
2  times/day  for  14  days,  2)  moxifloxacin  400  mg  orally  once  daily  for  14  days,  or  3)
azithromycin 500 mg IV daily for 1–2 doses, followed by 250 mg orally daily for a total
azithromycin  duration  of  7  days  or  in  combination  with  metronidazole  500  mg  3
times/day  for  12–14  days  (1178-1181).  Moxifloxacin  is  the  preferred  quinolone
antimicrobial  for  M.  genitalium  infections;  however,  the  importance  of  providing
coverage  for  M.  genitalium  is  unknown.  Diagnostic  tests  for  gonorrhea  should  be
obtained  before  starting  therapy,  and  persons  should  be  managed  as  follows:  To
minimize  disease  transmission,  women  should  be  instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual
intercourse until therapy is complete, symptoms have resolved, and sex partners have
been treated (see Chlamydial Infections; Gonococcal Infections). All women who receive
a  diagnosis  of  PID  should  be  tested  for  gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  HIV,  and  syphilis.  The
value  of  testing  women  with  PID  for  M.  genitalium  is  unknown  (see  Mycoplasma
genitalium).  All  contraceptive  methods  can  be  continued  during  treatment.  Women
should  demonstrate  clinical  improvement  (e.g.,  defervescence;  reduction  in  direct  or
rebound abdominal tenderness; and reduction in uterine, adnexal, and cervical motion
tenderness)  <3  days  after  therapy  initiation.  If  no  clinical  improvement  has  occurred
<72 hours after outpatient IM or oral therapy, then hospitalization, assessment of the
antimicrobial regimen, and additional diagnostics, including consideration of diagnostic
laparoscopy for alternative diagnoses, are recommended. All women who have received
a  diagnosis  of  chlamydial  or  gonococcal  PID  should  be  retested  3  months  after
treatment,  regardless  of  whether  their  sex  partners  have  been  treated  (753).  If
retesting at 3 months is not possible, these women should be retested whenever they
next  seek  medical  care  <12  months  after  treatment.  Persons  who  have  had  sexual
contact with a partner with PID during the 60 days preceding symptom onset should be
evaluated, tested, and presumptively treated for chlamydia and gonorrhea, regardless
of the PID etiology or pathogens isolated. If the last sexual intercourse was >60 days
before symptom onset or diagnosis, the most recent sex partner should be treated. Sex
partners  of  persons  who  have  PID  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  or  N.  gonorrhoeae
frequently  are  asymptomatic.  Arrangements  should  be  made  to  link  sex  partners  to
care.  If  linkage  is  delayed  or  unlikely,  EPT  is  an  alternative  approach  to  treating  sex
partners who have chlamydial or gonococcal infection (125,126) (see Partner Services).
Partners should be instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until they and their sex
partners  have  been  treated  (i.e.,  until  therapy  is  completed  and  symptoms  have
resolved,  if  originally  present).  The  risk  for  penicillin  cross-reactivity  is  highest  with
first-generation
 cephalosporins
 but
 is
 negligible
 between
 the
 majority
 of
second-generation
 (e.g.,
 cefoxitin)
 and
 all
 third-generation
 (e.g.,
 ceftriaxone)
cephalosporins (619,631,653,656) (see Management of Persons Who Have a History of
Penicillin  Allergy).  Pregnant  women  suspected  of  having  PID  are  at  high  risk  for
maternal  morbidity  and  preterm  delivery.  These  women  should  be  hospitalized  and
treated  with  IV  antimicrobials  in  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist.
Differences  in  PID  clinical  manifestations  among  women  with  HIV  infection  and  those
without  have  not  been  well  delineated  (1182).  In  early  observational  studies,  women
with  HIV  infection  and  PID  were  more  likely  to  require  surgical  intervention.  More
comprehensive  observational  and  controlled  studies  have  demonstrated  that  women
with HIV infection and PID have similar symptoms, compared with women without HIV
(1183–1185), except they are more likely to have a tubo-ovarian abscess. Women with
HIV  responded  equally  well  to  recommended  parenteral  and  IM  or  oral  antibiotic
regimens  as  women  without  HIV.  The  microbiologic  findings  for  women  with  HIV  and
women  without  HIV  were  similar,  except  women  with  HIV  had  higher  rates  of
concomitant  M.  hominis  and  streptococcal  infections.  These  data  are  insufficient  for
determining  whether  women  with  HIV  infection  and  PID  require  more  aggressive
management  (e.g.,  hospitalization  or  IV  antimicrobial  regimens).  IUDs  are  one  of  the
most effective contraceptive methods. Copper-containing and levonorgestrel-releasing
IUDs  are  available  in  the  United  States.  The  risk  for  PID  associated  with  IUD  use  is
primarily  confined  to  the  first  3  weeks  after  insertion  (1186–1188).  If  an  IUD  user
receives a diagnosis of PID, the IUD does not need to be removed (59,1189). However,
the woman should receive treatment according to these recommendations and should
have  close  clinical  follow-up.  If  no  clinical  improvement  occurs  within  48–72  hours  of
initiating treatment, providers should consider removing the IUD. A systematic review
of evidence demonstrated that treatment outcomes did not differ between women with
PID who retained the IUD and those who had the IUD removed (1190). These studies
primarily  included  women  using  copper-containing  or  other  nonhormonal  IUDs.  No
studies
 are
 available
 regarding
 treatment
 outcomes
 among
 women
 using
levonorgestrel-releasing IUDs. Next
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/pid.htm
