A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Pertussis  from  the  Infection  Control  in
Healthcare  Personnel:  Epidemiology  and  Control  of  Selected  Infections  Transmitted
Among  Healthcare  Personnel  and  Patients  (2024)  guideline.  Healthcare-associated
transmission  of  Bordetella  pertussis  (B.  pertussis)  has  involved  both  patients  and
healthcare personnel (HCP); nonimmunized infants and children are at greatest risk for
severe  morbidity  and  mortality123456789101112.  Serologic  studies  of  HCP  suggest
that they may be infected with pertussis much more frequently than indicated by attack
rates  of  clinical  disease1314.  Prevention  of  transmission  of  B.  pertussis  in  healthcare
settings involves: 51315 16 Guidelines for pertussis vaccination of HCP are maintained
by ACIP in Prevention of Pertussis, Tetanus, and Diphtheria with Vaccines in the United
States:
 Recommendations
 of
 the
 ACIP
(https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/rr/rr6702a1.htm).
 131718In
 addition,
information  and  recommendations  addressing  the  potential  need  for  revaccination  of
HCP  with  Tdap  are  available  from  the  CDC  webpage  Evaluating  Revaccination  of
Healthcare
 Personnel
 with
 Tdap:
 Factors
 to
 Consider
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/pertussis/tdap-revac-hcp.html).17  During  pertussis
outbreaks in healthcare settings, the risk for HCP contracting pertussis is often difficult
to quantify because exposure is not well-defined13. Transmission of B. pertussis occurs
through  deposition  of  respiratory,  oral,  or  nasal  secretions  from  an  infected  source
person on the mucous membranes of a susceptible host. Unprotected (e.g., not wearing
a  facemask),  close,  face-to-face  contact  with  an  infectious  source  person  or  contact
with their secretions may be considered an exposure to pertussis. Close contact may
include, but is not limited to, performing a physical examination on, feeding, or bathing
a
 patient;
 bronchoscopy;
 intubation;
 or
 administration
 of
 bronchodilators.
Determination of close contact may be more inclusive in settings where interaction with
persons  at  increased  risk  for  severe  pertussis  is  more  likely.  Pertussis  is  highly
contagious; secondary attack rates exceed 80% in susceptible household contacts1920.
The  incubation  period  is  usually  5  to  10  days,  but  symptoms  may  develop  up  to  3
weeks  after  exposure21.  The  clinical  course  of  pertussis  infection  has  3  stages:
catarrhal,  paroxysmal,  and  convalescent.  Populations  at  increased  risk  for  serious
complications  and  death  from  severe  pertussis  include:  Symptomatic  persons  who
receive  effective  antimicrobial  therapy  for  pertussis  are  no  longer  contagious  after  5
days of appropriate treatment1323. The period of communicability starts at the onset of
the  catarrhal  stage  and  extends  into  the  paroxysmal  stage,  up  to  3  weeks  after  the
onset of paroxysms21. Prevention of secondary transmission of pertussis is especially
difficult  during  the  early  stages  of  the  disease  because  pertussis  is  highly
communicable  in  the  catarrhal  stage,  when  symptoms  are  nonspecific  and  the
diagnosis is uncertain. Furthermore, clinical symptoms in adults and adolescents may
be  less  severe  than  in  children  and  young  infants  and  may  not  be  recognized  as
pertussis21.  Diagnosis  of  pertussis  is  typically  made  based  upon  compatible  clinical
history  and  diagnostic  laboratory  testing.  Although  culture  is  considered  the  "gold
standard"  for  establishing  a  diagnosis  of  pertussis,  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)
provides  sensitive  results  more  rapidly2425.  More  detailed  information  regarding
testing  persons  for  pertussis  is  available  on  the  CDC  Pertussis  (Whooping  Cough)
Diagnostic
 Testing
 website
(https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/clinical/diagnostic-testing/specimen-collection-diagnosis.
html).26 Other Bordetella species (e.g., B. parapertussis, B. holmesii) may be detected
and can occur alone or simultaneously with B. pertussis infection2728293031. Although
the  clinical  presentation  for  B.  parapertussis  is  similar  to  that  of  B.  pertussis,  B.
parapertussis  usually  causes  less  severe  disease,  which  may  be  related  to  its  lack  of
production of pertussis toxin27283233. One report from 1971 estimated that 3-4% of
patients with parapertussis develop clinical disease, compared to 75% with pertussis33.
The  severity  of  parapertussis  illness  among  special  populations,  such  as  infants  and
immunocompromised persons, is unclear, with few hospitalizations and related deaths
reported343536373839.  Data  on  the  effectiveness  of  antibiotics  for  the  treatment  or
chemoprophylaxis of B. parapertussis are also limited. Some states have parapertussis
postexposure and illness management guidance, and some institutions choose to apply
pertussis strategies for parapertussis2540. Vaccinated HCP may still be susceptible to
pertussis due to waning immunity, lack of response to the vaccine, immunosuppression,
or  other  factors.  Because  vaccinated  HCP  may  still  be  at  risk  for  pertussis  infection,
vaccination  does  not  preclude  the  need  for  PEP,  when  indicated131718.  Data  on  the
efficacy of, and need for, PEP in Tetanus, Diphtheria, Pertussis (Tdap)-vaccinated HCP
are inconclusive, but studies suggest that it may minimize transmission513414243. The
preferred  agents  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  are  azithromycin,  erythromycin,  and
clarithromycin44.  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  (TMP-SMZ)  may  also  be  used  as  an
alternative agent. Detailed information regarding dosage and administration of PEP is
available  in  the  Recommended  Antimicrobial  Agents  for  the  Treatment  and
Postexposure
 Prophylaxis
 of
 Pertussis,
 2005
 CDC
 Guidelines
(https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5414a1.htm).44
 Information
 and
recommendations on the potential need for booster doses of vaccine during outbreaks
or periods of increased risk for healthcare-associated transmission of pertussis can be
found
 on
 the
 CDC
 Pertussis
 (Whooping
 Cough)
 website
(https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/outbreaks.html).45
 CDC
 provides
 information
 on
infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among
healthcare workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/healthcare-personnel-epidemiology-control/pertussis.html
