Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / April 6, 2018 / 67(13);387–389 Emily M. Hall, MPH1;
Ketki  Patel,  MD,  PhD1;  Kerton  R.  Victory,  PhD2;  Geoffrey  M.  Calvert,  MD3;  Leticia  M.
Nogueira, PhD1; Heidi K. Bojes, PhD1 (View author affiliations) What is already known
on this topic? To prevent exposure to harmful chemical substances among emergency
responders,  use  of  respiratory  and  other  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  is
recommended  during  incident  responses  when  release  of  an  unknown  hazardous
substance  is  suspected.  Past  studies  have  found  low  prevalences  of  respiratory
protection  use  during  hazardous  substance  release  incidents.  What  is  added  by  this
report?  Forty  (78.4%)  of  51  emergency  personnel  responding  to  an  acute  phosphine
exposure incident in Texas in January 2017 did not use respiratory protection, including
15  (37.5%)  who  received  medical  care  after  the  incident  and  seven  (17.5%)  who
reported  new  or  worsening  symptoms  consistent  with  phosphine  exposure  within  24
hours of the incident. The majority had received standard emergency response training
and  knew  of  agency  standard  operating  procedures  for  responding  to  incidents
involving hazardous substances.  What are the implications for public health practice?
Although  emergency  responder  risk  of  exposure  during  incidents  involving  unknown
hazardous  substances  is  well  documented,  methods  for  improving  compliance  with
existing  recommendations  and  regulations  for  respiratory  protection  use  are  not  well
understood.  Additional  evaluation  is  needed  to  identify  targeted  interventions  that
effectively increase appropriate PPE use among emergency responders during incidents
involving such unknown hazards. Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Table 1
Table  2  Phosphine  is  a  highly  toxic  gas  that  forms  when  aluminum  phosphide,  a
restricted-use pesticide* typically used in agricultural settings, reacts with water. Acute
exposure can lead to a wide range of respiratory, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal
symptoms,  and  can  be  fatal  (1).  On  January  2,  2017,  the  Texas  Department  of  State
Health Services (DSHS) was notified by the Texas Panhandle Poison Center of an acute
phosphine  exposure  incident  in  Amarillo,  Texas.  DSHS  investigated  potential
occupational phosphine exposures among the 51 on-scene emergency responders; 40
(78.4%) did not use respiratory protection during response operations. Fifteen (37.5%)
of these 40 responders received medical care for symptoms or as a precaution after the
incident,  and  seven  (17.5%)  reported  new  or  worsening  symptoms  consistent  with
phosphine exposure within 24 hours of the incident. Emergency response organizations
should ensure that appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) is used during all
incidents when an unknown hazardous substance is suspected. Additional evaluation is
needed to identify targeted interventions that increase emergency responder PPE use
during  this  type  of  incident.  Top  At  approximately  5:00  a.m.  on  January  2,  2017,
emergency responders were dispatched to a single-family residence following a 9-1-1
call reporting shortness of breath, loss of consciousness, and other symptoms among
occupants.  These  health  effects  were  initially  thought  to  be  the  result  of  carbon
monoxide exposure; however, air monitoring detected no carbon monoxide. Emergency
responders discovered  that a  restricted-use pesticide containing  aluminum phosphide
had  been  applied  outside  the  residence  several  days  before  the  9-1-1  call.  It  was
determined that phosphine had been released when the pesticide reacted with water,
first from ambient humidity, and then when attempts were made to wash the pesticide
away on January 1, 2017. Because a hazardous substance was suspected, the City of
Amarillo  dispatched  a  hazardous  materials  (HAZMAT)  team  composed  of  fire
department  personnel  and  established  a  secure  perimeter  around  the  home.  Persons
found  inside  were  assisted  out  of  the  residence,  given  emergency  medical  care,  and
transported
 to
 a
 nearby
 hospital.
 Domestic
 animals
 found
 on-scene
 were
decontaminated by dry brushing and taken to a local animal welfare facility. The local
health authority issued a health alert to inform medical care providers. Later on January
2,  the  City  of  Amarillo  requested  a  toxicologic  consultation  from  DSHS  related  to  the
incident. Based on incident response activities described during the consultation, it was
determined that emergency responders might have been exposed to phosphine at the
scene.  Therefore,  DSHS  investigated  potential  occupational  phosphine  exposures  and
associated health effects among all City of Amarillo personnel who participated in the
emergency response. DSHS reviewed Texas Poison Control Network call records related
to  the  event,  and  then  designed  a  standardized  health  questionnaire  based  on  the
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry’s (ATSDR’s) Assessment of Chemical
Exposures  toolkit  to  interview  potentially  exposed  emergency  responders  (2).  Data
collected included demographics, work history, role in the response, PPE use, potential
exposure to phosphine and related acute health effects, emergency response training,
and  medical  care  received.  Local  health  department  personnel  administered  the
questionnaire for DSHS via in-person and telephone interviews from January 23 through
February 3, 2017. Data were analyzed by DSHS; data that could potentially identify an
individual  were  suppressed  if  counts  were  fewer  than  five.  Fifty-one  emergency
responders participated on-scene in the response. Air monitoring data were limited, so
all  were  considered  potentially  exposed  to  phosphine  and  contacted  for  a  follow-up
interview. All 51 (100%) responders participated, including fire, police, animal welfare,
and emergency medical services personnel. The median emergency responder age was
31 years (range = 20–54 years) and the median length of time in their current job was
5  years  (range  =  2  months–30  years).  Eleven  responders  (21.6%),  including  seven
firefighters  and  HAZMAT  team  members,  reported  use  of  respiratory  protection  while
on-scene; none of these persons reported symptoms within 24 hours or sought medical
care following the incident (Table 1). Fifteen (37.5%) of the 40 emergency responders
who  did  not  use  respiratory  protection  received  medical  care  for  symptoms  or  as  a
precaution  after  the  incident.  Seven  (17.5%)  of  these  40  reported  new  or  worsening
symptoms within 24 hours of the response. Symptoms included irritability, ocular pain
or  burning,  headache,  nausea,  drowsiness,  dizziness,  burning  of  nose  or  throat,
abdominal  cramps,  diarrhea,  generalized  weakness,  trembling  legs  or  hands,  and
trouble walking. Among the 40 responders who did not use respiratory protection, 14
(35%)  provided  the  following  nonmutually  exclusive  reasons:  did  not  know  it  was
needed or were not told to use it (five); rescuing victims was more important (four); did
not know the contaminant was present (four); was not required for the work performed
(two);  and  did  not  have  equipment  (one).  Thirty-seven  (72.5%)  of  the  51  responders
stated that their agency had plans or standard operating procedures for responding to
situations where hazardous materials are present. Forty (78.4%) reported receiving at
least  one  emergency  response  training†  before  the  incident  (Table  2),  including  29
(72.5%)  of  the  40  responders  who  did  not  use  respiratory  protection.  Top  CDC  and
other agencies have developed protocols and tools to facilitate implementation of best
practices  for  responding  to  incidents  involving  unknown  chemical  hazards,  and  their
use  has  been  recommended  following  similar  incidents  in  the  past  (3,4).  Federal
regulations  require  the  use  of  appropriate  respiratory  protection  in  emergency
responses
 involving
 suspected
 hazardous
 substances.§
 DSHS
 recommends
implementation of these recommendations and has worked with the National Institute
for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Emergency  Preparedness  and  Response  Office  to
develop and disseminate educational materials targeted to emergency responders and
emergency  response  organizations  to  highlight  the  importance  of  using  appropriate
respiratory  protection.  The  51  emergency  responders  involved  in  this  incident  were
faced with limited information about the hazards present, combined with the need to
act  quickly  to  rescue  victims.  Many  did  not  use  recommended  respiratory  protection.
These issues exemplify challenges faced by emergency responders who often confront
unknown hazards and, given the need to save lives or secure the scene, might feel they
do not have time to identify, obtain, and don recommended PPE (3,6). They also might
perceive  that  PPE  would  physically  restrict  their  ability  to  perform  required  tasks  (6).
Studies  of  other  incidents  involving  the  known  or  suspected  release  of  hazardous
substances  have  similarly  found  low  prevalences  of  respiratory  PPE  use  among
emergency  responders,  especially  police  and  emergency  medical  services.  For
example, one investigation found that among 92 emergency personnel who responded
to  an  unintentional  vinyl  chloride  release,  only  20  (21.7%)  reported  using  indicated
respiratory  protection  during  the  response  (3).  Multiple  studies  have  found  that  the
prevalence of appropriate respiratory protection was low among emergency responders
to  the  World  Trade  Center  collapse  (7).  A  recent  analysis  of  ATSDR  surveillance  data
found that, among 1,275 emergency personnel with known PPE status who were injured
or  became  ill  during  acute  hazardous  substance  release  incident  responses  during
2002–2012, only 382 (30.0%) wore some type of respiratory protection (8). Respiratory
protection  prevalence  was  45.8%  among  injured  firefighters,  compared  with  1.4%
among  police  and  2.3%  among  emergency  medical  services  personnel.  Firefighters’
injuries were more likely to involve trauma or burns than were those sustained by other
types  of  responders.  Because  PPE  use  among  emergency  personnel  who  were  not
injured or ill was not collected, it was not possible to assess the effectiveness of PPE in
preventing  injuries  and  illness.  The  findings  in  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  two
limitations.  First,  information  bias  is  possible  because  exposure  and  symptom  status
were identified by self-report. However, no data were available to estimate individual
phosphine exposure. Personal air monitoring was not conducted, and air samples were
not  collected  inside  the  residence  before  remediation.  Second,  not  all  symptomatic
persons  sought  medical  treatment,  so  medical  records  were  insufficient  to  assess
health  outcomes.  Therefore,  self-report  was  the  most  comprehensive  source  of
information  on  exposure  and  health  outcomes.  This  incident  demonstrates  that,
although  important,  standard  emergency  responder  trainings  alone  might  not  ensure
correct PPE use during this type of incident response. Studies among health care, farm,
construction,  and  manufacturing  workers  have  found  that  individual  behavioral
interventions  (e.g.,  training  and  education)  alone  do  not  significantly  improve
respiratory  protection  use  (9).  Some  studies  have  found  that  interventions  targeting
social and organizational factors, such as safety climate, do positively impact PPE use
(6). However, few studies of PPE-related behavioral interventions have been conducted
among emergency responders, so methods for improving compliance with existing PPE
guidance  and  regulations  among  responders  are  not  well  understood.  Additional
evaluation  is  needed  to  identify  targeted  individual  and  organizational  interventions
that  effectively  increase  appropriate  PPE  use  among  emergency  responders  during
incidents involving unknown hazards. Top National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, CDC. Top 
 No  conflicts  of  interest  were  reported.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Emily  M.  Hall,
emily.hall@dshs.texas.gov,  512-776-2652.  Top  1Texas  Department  of  State  Health
Services;  2Emergency  Preparedness  and  Response  Office,  National  Institute  for
Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  CDC;  3World  Trade  Center  Health  Program,  National
Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  CDC.   Top  *  Pesticide  registration  and
classification procedures, 40 C.F.R. Sect. 152.160-152.175 (2018). † Responders might
not have been required to take trainings listed as a condition of employment. § Worker
protection, 40 C.F.R. Sect. 311.1 and 311.2 (2018). Top Top Abbreviation: HAZMAT =
hazardous materials.* Counts <5 suppressed to protect confidentiality.† Categories are
not mutually exclusive.§ n = 50.¶ Fifteen (37.5%) of the 40 emergency responders who
did  not  use  respiratory  protection  received  medical  care  for  symptoms  or  as  a
precaution  after  the  incident.  Seven  (17.5%)  of  these  40  reported  new  or  worsening
symptoms  within  24  hours  of  the  response.  None  of  the  11  who  used  respiratory
protection  reported  symptoms  or  having  received  medical  care.  Top  Abbreviation:
HAZWOPER  =  hazardous  waste  operations  and  emergency  response.*  Counts  <5
suppressed to protect confidentiality.† Categories are not mutually exclusive.§ Includes
animal control, animal cruelty training (levels 1, 2, 3); National Incident Management
Incident  Command  System  100,  200,  300,  400,  700  and  800;  and  police  academy
training.¶  Responders  might  not  have  been  required  to  take  trainings  listed  as  a
condition  of  employment.  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Hall  EM,  Patel  K,
Victory KR, Calvert GM, Nogueira LM, Bojes HK. Phosphine Exposure Among Emergency
Responders  —  Amarillo,  Texas,  January  2017.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep
2018;67:387–389. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6713a2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6713a2.htm
