Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Adriana Lopez, MHS; Theresa Harrington, MD, MPH&TM; and
Mona  Marin,  MD  The  14th  edition  of  the  “Pink  Book”  was  published  August  2021.
Vaccine-specific recommendations may be outdated. Refer to the Advisory Committee
on  Immunization  Practices  Vaccine  Recommendations  and  Guidelines  for  the  most
updated vaccine-specific recommendations. Printer friendly version [20 pages] Varicella
is an acute infectious disease caused by varicella-zoster virus (VZV). Primary varicella
infection (chickenpox) was not reliably distinguished from smallpox until the end of the
19th century. In 1875, Rudolf Steiner demonstrated that chickenpox was caused by an
infectious agent by inoculating volunteers with the vesicular fluid from a patient with
acute varicella. In 1954, Thomas Weller used cell culture to isolate VZV from vesicular
fluid  of  patients  with  varicella  or  zoster.  A  live,  attenuated  varicella  vaccine  was
developed in Japan in the 1970s. The vaccine virus was developed from virus isolated
by Michiaki Takahashi from vesicular fluid from an otherwise healthy child with varicella
disease. Varicella vaccine was licensed for general use in Japan and Korea in 1988, and
in the United States in 1995 for persons age 12 months or older. In 2005, a combination
measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella  (MMRV)  vaccine  was  licensed  in  the  United
States  for  persons  age  12  months  through  12  years.  VZV  is  a  DNA  virus  and  is  a
member of the herpesvirus group. Like other herpesviruses, VZV persists in the body as
a  latent  infection  after  the  primary  (first)  infection;  VZV  persists  in  sensory  nerve
ganglia. Primary infection with VZV results in varicella. Latent infection can reactivate
resulting  in  herpes  zoster  (shingles).  The  virus  has  a  short  survival  time  in  the
environment.  VZV  enters  the  host  through  the  respiratory  tract  and  conjunctiva.  It
replicates  at  the  site  of  entry  in  the  nasopharynx  and  in  regional  lymph  nodes.  A
primary viremia occurs 4 to 6 days after infection and disseminates the virus to other
organs, such as the liver, spleen, and sensory ganglia. Further replication occurs in the
viscera, followed by a secondary viremia, with viral infection of the skin. Virus can be
cultured from mononuclear cells of an infected person from 5 days before to 1 to 2 days
after the appearance of the rash. The incubation period is 14 to 16 days after exposure,
with a range of 10 to 21 days. The incubation period may be prolonged (e.g., up to 28
days  or  more)  in  those  who  have  received  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  varicella
specific  immune  globulin.  A  mild  prodrome  may  precede  the  onset  of  a  rash.  Adults
may have 1 to 2 days of fever and malaise prior to rash onset, but in children the rash
is often the first sign of disease. In individuals who have not received varicella vaccine,
the  rash  is  generalized  and  pruritic  and  progresses  rapidly  (within  24  hours)  from
macules to papules to vesicular lesions before crusting. The rash usually appears first
on  the  scalp,  face  or  trunk,  and  then  spreads  to  the  extremities;  the  highest
concentration of lesions is on the trunk. Lesions also can occur on mucous membranes
of  the  oropharynx,  respiratory  tract,  vagina,  conjunctiva,  and  the  cornea.  Lesions  are
usually  1  to  4  mm  in  diameter.  The  vesicles  are  superficial  and  delicate  and  contain
clear fluid on an erythematous base. Vesicles may rupture or become purulent before
they dry and crust. Successive crops appear over several days, with lesions present in
all  stages  of  development  at  the  same  time.  For  example,  macular  lesions  may  be
observed  in  the  same  area  of  skin  as  mature  vesicles.  Healthy  children  usually  have
250 to 500 lesions in 2 to 4 successive crops. The clinical course in healthy children is
generally  mild,  fever  (up  to  102°F)  and  other  systemic  symptoms  (e.g.,  malaise,
headache) usually resolve within 2 to 4 days after onset of the rash. Adults may have
more
 severe
 disease
 and
 have
 a
 higher
 incidence
 of
 complications.
Immunocompromised  children  may  develop  a  severe  progressive  form  of  varicella
characterized by high fever, extensive vesicular eruption, and high complication rates.
Persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are also at risk for severe,
prolonged  illness.  Recovery  from  primary  varicella  infection  usually  results  in  lifetime
immunity. In otherwise healthy persons, a second occurrence of varicella is uncommon;
it  is  more  common  in  immunocompromised  persons.  As  with  other  viral  diseases,
re-exposure  to  natural  (wild)  varicella  may  lead  to  reinfection  that  boosts  antibody
titers  without  causing  clinical  illness  or  detectable  viremia.  Breakthrough  varicella  is
defined as varicella due to infection with wild-type VZV occurring more than 42 days
after  varicella  vaccination;  breakthrough  infection  can  occur  after  1  or  2  doses  of
vaccine.  With  decreasing  incidence  of  varicella  overall  and  increasing  varicella
vaccination  coverage,  more  than  half  of  varicella  cases  reported  during  the  mature
phase  of  the  vaccination  program  are  breakthrough  varicella  cases.  Breakthrough
varicella is less severe than varicella in unvaccinated persons, with the median number
of  skin  lesions  commonly  less  than  50;  vesicular  lesions  are  less  common  and  the
lesions are commonly papules that do not progress to vesicles. Varicella in vaccinated
persons  is  typically  shorter  in  duration  and  has  a  lower  incidence  of  fever  than  in
unvaccinated persons. However, about 25% to 30% of breakthrough varicella cases in
vaccinees  who  received  one  dose  have  clinical  features  more  similar  to  those  in
unvaccinated children, and complications with visceral dissemination, hospitalizations,
or  death,  although  uncommon,  have  been  reported.  Acute  varicella  is  generally  mild
and  self-limited,  but  it  may  be  associated  with  complications.  Secondary  bacterial
infections  of  skin  lesions  with  Staphylococcus  or  Streptococcus  (primarily  invasive
group A) are the most common cause of hospitalization and outpatient medical visits
and  can  lead  to  death.  Pneumonia  following  varicella  is  usually  viral  but  may  be
bacterial. Primary viral pneumonia is uncommon among immunocompetent children but
is  the  most  common  complication  in  adults.  Secondary  bacterial  pneumonia  is  more
common in children younger than age 1 year. Central nervous system manifestations of
varicella  range  from  aseptic  meningitis  to  encephalitis.  Encephalitis  is  an  infrequent
complication of varicella (1 per 50,000 cases of varicella in unvaccinated children) and
may lead to seizures and coma. Diffuse cerebral involvement is more common in adults
than in children. Involvement of the cerebellum, with resulting cerebellar ataxia, is the
most common central nervous system manifestation (1 per 4,000 cases of varicella in
unvaccinated children) and generally has a good outcome. Reye syndrome may follow
varicella, although this outcome has become very rare with the recommendation to not
use  aspirin  or  other  salicylates  to  reduce  fever  in  children  with  varicella.  Rare
complications of varicella include aseptic meningitis, transverse myelitis, Guillain-Barré
syndrome,
 thrombocytopenia,
 hemorrhagic
 varicella,
 purpura
 fulminans,
glomerulonephritis, myocarditis, arthritis, orchitis, uveitis, iritis, and hepatitis. The risk
of  complications  from  varicella  varies  with  age.  Complications  are  infrequent  among
healthy children. They occur much more frequently in persons older than age 15 years
and  infants  younger  than  age  1  year.  In  the  prevaccine  era,  approximately  10,500
persons  with  varicella  required  hospitalization  each  year.  Hospitalization  rates  were
approximately 1 to 2 per 1,000 cases among healthy children and 14 per 1,000 cases
among  adults.  The  fatality  rate  for  varicella  was  approximately  1  per  100,000  cases
among children age 1 through 14 years, 6 per 100,000 cases among persons age 15
through  19  years,  and  21  per  100,000  cases  among  adults.  Most  deaths  occur  in
immunocompetent  children  and  adults.  Since  1995,  when  the  varicella  vaccination
program was implemented, hospitalizations and deaths from varicella have declined in
the  United  States  93%  and  94%,  respectively.  Immunocompromised  persons  have  a
high risk of disseminated disease (up to 36% in one report). These persons may have
multiple  organ  system  involvement,  and  the  disease  may  become  fulminant  and
hemorrhagic.  The  most  frequent  complications  in  immunocompromised  persons  are
pneumonia  and  encephalitis.  Children  with  HIV  infection  are  at  increased  risk  for
morbidity from varicella and herpes zoster.  Severe and even fatal varicella has been
reported in otherwise healthy children on high-dose corticosteroids (e.g., 2 milligrams
per kilogram per day or more of prednisone or equivalent) for treatment of asthma and
other  illnesses.  The  onset  of  maternal  varicella  from  5  days  before  to  2  days  after
delivery  may  result  in  overwhelming  infection  of  the  neonate,  with  a  fatality  ratio  as
high  as  30%  if  antivirals  are  not  given.  This  severe  disease  is  the  result  of  fetal
exposure to VZV without the benefit of passive maternal antibody. The usual interval
from onset of rash in a mother to onset in her neonate is 9 to 15 days but it can be as
short as 2 days. Infants born to mothers with onset of maternal varicella more than 5
days  prior  to  delivery  usually  have  a  benign  course,  attributed  to  passive  transfer  of
maternal antibody across the placenta. Primary maternal varicella infection in the first
20  weeks  of  gestation  is  occasionally  associated  with  abnormalities  in  the  newborn,
including  hypoplasia  of  an  extremity,  skin  scarring,  localized  muscular  atrophy,
encephalitis, cortical atrophy, chorioretinitis, microcephaly, and low birth weight. This
constellation of abnormalities, collectively known as congenital varicella syndrome, was
first  recognized  in  1947.  The  risk  of  congenital  abnormalities  from  primary  maternal
varicella infection is very low (less than 2%). Children infected with VZV in utero may
develop  herpes  zoster  early  in  life  without  having  had  extrauterine  varicella.  Isolated
case-reports  of  congenital  varicella  syndrome  have  been  reported  in  women  infected
after  20  weeks  of  gestation  with  the  latest  occurring  at  28  weeks  of  gestation.  Rare
reports  of  congenital  birth  defects  following  maternal  zoster  exist,  but  whether  they
represent  congenital  varicella  syndrome  is  unclear.  Laboratory  testing,  whenever
possible,  or  epidemiological  linkage  to  a  typical  case  or  laboratory-confirmed  case,
should be sought to confirm or rule out varicella. Rapid VZV identification techniques
are  indicated  for  a  case  with  severe  or  unusual  disease  to  initiate  specific  antiviral
therapy.  Laboratory  techniques  in  use  allow  differentiation  of  wild-type  and  vaccine
strains of VZV. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the method of choice for laboratory
diagnosis  of  varicella.  Real-time  PCR  methods  are  widely  available  and  are  the  most
sensitive and specific of the available tests. Results are available within several hours. If
real-time PCR is unavailable, the direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) method can be used,
although it is less sensitive than PCR and requires more meticulous specimen collection
and  handling.  Skin  lesions  are  the  preferred  sample  for  laboratory  confirmation  of
varicella.  Specimens  are  best  collected  by  unroofing  a  vesicle,  preferably  a  fresh
fluid-filled  vesicle,  and  then  rubbing  the  base  of  a  skin  lesion  with  a  polyester  swab.
Crusts from lesions are also excellent specimens for PCR. Because viral proteins persist
after cessation of viral replication, PCR and DFA may be positive when viral cultures are
negative. PCR testing that discriminates between vaccine and wild-type VZV is available
free of charge through the specialized reference laboratories at CDC and the American
Public Health Laboratory Association Vaccine Preventable Diseases Reference Centers.
For diagnosis of acute varicella infection, serologic confirmation includes a significant
rise in varicella immune globulin class G (IgG) by any standard serologic assay. Testing
using  commercial  kits  for  IgM  antibody  is  not  recommended  since  available  methods
lack sensitivity and specificity; false-positive IgM results are common in the presence of
high  IgG  levels.  A  variety  of  serologic  tests  for  varicella  antibody  are  available
commercially
 to
 assess
 disease-induced
 immunity.
 Commercial
 enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) are recommended for the purpose of screening. There
is evidence to suggest that the latex agglutination method, another method to test for
serologic  IgG,  may  give  false-positive  results  that  could  mistakenly  categorize  a
susceptible person as immune. Antibody resulting from vaccination is generally of lower
titer than antibody resulting from varicella disease and commercially available serologic
IgG  tests  are  not  sufficiently  sensitive  to  detect  low  levels  of  antibody  following
vaccination.  Therefore,  routine  testing  for  varicella  immunity  following  vaccination  is
not recommended. Varicella occurs worldwide. In countries in temperate climates, it is
primarily a childhood disease, with most children infected by age 10 years. In tropical
areas,  children  acquire  varicella  at  older  ages  and  therefore  a  higher  proportion  of
young  adults  remain  susceptible,  resulting  in  a  higher  proportion  of  cases  occurring
among adults.  The reason(s) for this difference in age distribution are not known with
certainty. VZV, the virus that causes both varicella (chickenpox) and zoster (shingles),
is  an  exclusively  human  pathogen.  No  animal  or  insect  source  or  vector  is  known  to
exist. VZV transmission occurs person-to-person by direct contact with vesicular fluid or
by inhalation of aerosols from vesicular fluid of skin lesions of acute varicella or zoster.
Transmission may also occur from infected respiratory tract secretions of patients with
varicella that might also be aerosolized. Skin lesions are considered the major source of
transmissible  VZV.  Transmission  of  VZV  would  cause  varicella,  not  zoster,  in  a
VZV-naïve person. In temperate areas, varicella has a distinct seasonal fluctuation, with
the  highest  incidence  occurring  in  winter  and  early  spring.  High  rates  of  vaccination
coverage in the United States have eliminated discernible seasonality of varicella. Less
seasonality  is  also  reported  in  tropical  areas.  The  period  of  communicability  extends
from 1 to 2 days before the onset of rash until all lesions have formed crusts. The virus
has not been isolated from crusted lesions. Vaccinated persons who contract varicella
may develop lesions that do not crust (macules and papules only). Isolation guidance
for these persons is to restrict contact with others until no new lesions appear within a
24-hour  period.  Varicella  is  highly  contagious.  Secondary  attack  rates  among
susceptible household contacts of persons with varicella are between 61% and 100%.
Zoster is much less infectious as varicella, i.e., about 1/5 as infectious as varicella. In
the prevaccine era, varicella was endemic in the United States, and virtually all persons
acquired  varicella  by  adulthood.  As  a  result,  the  number  of  cases  occurring  annually
was  estimated  to  approximate  the  birth  cohort,  or  about  4  million  per  year.  The
majority of cases (approximately 90%) occurred among children younger than age 15
years. In the 1990s, the highest age-specific incidence of varicella was among children
age  1  to  4  years,  who  accounted  for  39%  of  all  cases.  This  age  distribution  was
probably a result of earlier exposure to VZV in preschool and child care settings. Adults
age 20 years or older accounted for only 7% of cases. The incidence of varicella, as well
as  varicella-related  hospitalizations,  has  decreased  significantly  since  implementation
of  the  national  varicella  vaccination  program  in  1995.  Overall,  varicella  incidence
declined  an  average  of  97%  from  prevaccine  years  (from  1993–1995  to  2013–2014)
based on data from four states that have been continuously reporting varicella to the
National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS)  since  before  the  varicella
vaccination  program.  Cases  declined  in  all  age  groups,  including  infants  who  are  not
eligible  for  vaccination  and  adults  whose  rates  of  vaccination  are  low,  indicating
community protection benefits of the vaccination program. The second dose of varicella
vaccine was added to the national program in 2007. During the 2-dose era, data from
40  states  that  reported  varicella  cases  to  NNDSS  have  shown  an  85%  decline  in
varicella  incidence  from  2005–2006  to  2013–2014,  with  the  greatest  declines  among
children age 5 to 14 years (85% to 89%). One-dose varicella vaccine coverage among
children  age  19  through  35  months  has  been  90%  to  91%  since  2007;  varicella
vaccination coverage of at least 2 doses among adolescents age 13 through 17 years
without  a  history  of  varicella  has  been  greater  than  85%  since  2016.  Two  live,
attenuated VZV-containing vaccines for the prevention of varicella are licensed for use
in  the  United  States.  VAR  (Varivax)  vaccine  is  single-antigen  varicella  vaccine  and
MMRV  (ProQuad)  vaccine  is  a  combination  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella
vaccine. VAR vaccine is derived from the Oka strain of VZV. The virus was attenuated
by  sequential  passage  in  human  embryonic  lung  cell  culture,  embryonic  guinea  pig
fibroblasts,  and  in  WI-38  human  diploid  cells.  The  Oka/Merck  vaccine  has  undergone
further passage through MRC-5 human diploid cell cultures for a total of 31 passages.
The  vaccine  is  reconstituted  with  sterile  water  and  contains  gelatin.  VAR  vaccine  is
administered by the subcutaneous route. Each dose of VAR vaccine contains neomycin
as  an  antibiotic.  It  contains  no  adjuvant  or  preservative.  MMRV  vaccine  contains
measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  virus  of  equal  titer  and  identical  to  those  in  the  MMR
vaccine. The titer of Oka varicella zoster virus is higher in MMRV vaccine than in VAR, a
minimum  of  9,772  plaque-forming  units  (PFU)  versus  1,350  PFU,  respectively.  The
vaccine  is  reconstituted  with  sterile  water  and  contains  gelatin.  MMRV  vaccine  is
administered  by  the  subcutaneous  route.  Each  dose  of  MMRV  vaccine  contains
neomycin as an antibiotic. It contains no adjuvant or preservative. VAR or MMRV can be
used  to  implement  the  vaccination  recommendations  for  prevention  of  varicella.  VAR
vaccine  (Varivax)  is  licensed  for  use  in  persons  age  12  months  or  older.  MMRV
(ProQuad) is licensed for use in children age 12 months through 12 years. VAR vaccine
is licensed for use in persons age 12 months or older. It is administered as a 2-dose
series.  Dose  1  is  recommended  for  children  age  12  through  15  months.  Dose  2  is
recommended at age 4 through 6 years at the same visit as the second dose of MMR
vaccine, but may be given as early as 3 months after dose 1 (the minimum interval for
children  younger  than  age  13  years).  However,  if  dose  2  is  administered  at  least  4
weeks after dose 1, it does not need to be repeated. For persons age 13 years or older,
the  minimum  interval  between  doses  is  4  weeks.  Testing  for  varicella  immunity
following 2 doses of vaccine is not necessary because 99% of persons are seropositive
after the second dose. Moreover, available commercial assays are not sensitive enough
to detect antibody following vaccination in all instances. VAR vaccine has been shown
to  be  safe  and  effective  in  healthy  children  when  administered  at  the  same  time  as
MMR  vaccine  at  separate  sites  and  with  separate  syringes.  If  varicella  and  MMR
vaccines are not administered at the same visit, they should be separated by at least 4
weeks. Varicella vaccine may be administered simultaneously with all other childhood
vaccines. Children with a clinician-diagnosed or verified history of typical varicella can
be assumed to be immune to varicella. Serologic testing of children prior to vaccination
is not warranted because the majority of children between age 12 months and 12 years
without a clinical history of varicella are not immune. Prior history of varicella is not a
contraindication  to  varicella  vaccination,  so  when  in  doubt  as  to  history,  varicella
vaccine should be administered.  Because serologic evidence of VZV infection has been
documented in 96%-97% of U.S.-born adults age 20-29 years and in 97%-99% of adults
age  30  years  or  older  tested  during  1998—1999,  individuals  who  were  born  in  the
United  States  before  1980  are  considered  to  have  evidence  of  immunity  except  for
health-care  personnel  (risk  of  spreading  VZV  to  high-risk  patients),  pregnant  women
(risk of transmission to fetus which might result in congenital varicella syndrome), and
immunocompromised  persons  (risk  of  severe  disease).  Varicella  vaccine  should  be
administered  to  all  adolescents  and  adults  age  13  years  or  older  who  do  not  have
evidence of varicella immunity. Persons age 13 years or older should receive two doses
of VAR vaccine separated by at least 4 weeks. If there is a lapse of more than 4 weeks
after  the  first  dose,  the  second  dose  may  be  administered  at  any  time  without
repeating  the  first  dose.  All  health  care  personnel  should  be  immune  to  varicella.  In
health  care  settings,  serologic  screening  of  personnel  who  are  uncertain  of  their
varicella history, or who claim not to have had the disease, is likely to be cost-effective.
Testing  for  immunity  following  vaccination  is  not  necessary.  Seroconversion  does  not
always result in full protection against disease, although no data regarding correlates of
protection  are  available  for  adults.  Vaccinated  healthcare  personnel  exposed  to  VZV
should be monitored daily from day 8 to 21 after exposure through the employee health
or infection control program to screen for fever, skin lesions, and systemic symptoms.
In  addition,  health  care  personnel  should  be  instructed  to  immediately  report  fever,
headache, or other constitutional symptoms and any skin lesions that may be atypical.
The person should be placed on sick leave immediately if symptoms occur. The risk of
transmission of vaccine virus from a vaccinated person to a susceptible contact is very
low, and the benefits of vaccinating susceptible health care personnel clearly outweigh
this potential risk. MMRV vaccine is licensed for use in children age 12 months through
12 years. MMRV vaccine may be used for both dose 1 and dose 2 of measles, mumps,
and rubella vaccination and varicella vaccination in children younger than age 13 years.
The  minimum  interval  between  doses  of  MMRV  is  3  months.  However,  if  dose  2  is
administered at least 4 weeks following dose 1, it does not need to be repeated. For the
first  dose  of  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella  vaccines  at  age  12  through  47
months, either separate MMR and varicella (VAR) vaccines, or MMRV vaccine, may be
used. However, the risk of febrile seizures is about twice as high for children receiving
MMRV vaccine versus separate MMR and VAR vaccines. Providers who are considering
administering MMRV should discuss the benefits and risks of both vaccination options
with  the  parents.  Unless  the  parent  or  caregiver  expresses  a  preference  for  MMRV,
separate MMR vaccine and VAR vaccine should be administered for the first dose in this
age group. For the second dose of measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella vaccines at
any age and for the first dose at age 48 months or older, the use of MMRV generally is
preferred  over  separate  injections  of  its  equivalent  component  vaccines  (i.e.,  MMR
vaccine  and  VAR  vaccine).  After  one  dose  of  VAR  vaccine,  97%  of  children  age  12
months through 12 years develop detectable antibody titers. More than 90% of vaccine
responders maintain antibody for at least 6 years. In Japanese studies, 97% of children
had  antibody  7  to  10  years  after  vaccination.  Among  healthy  adolescents  and  adults
age  13  years  or  older,  an  average  of  78%  develop  antibody  after  dose  1,  and  99%
develop antibody after a second dose given 4 to 8 weeks later. Antibody persisted for at
least  1  year  in  97%  of  recipients  after  the  second  dose.  Immunity  appears  to  be
long-lasting,  and  is  probably  permanent  in  the  majority  of  vaccine  recipients.
Breakthrough  infection  is  significantly  milder  than  infection  among  unvaccinated
persons,  with  fewer  lesions  (generally  fewer  than  50),  many  of  which  are
maculopapular rather than vesicular. Most persons with breakthrough infection do not
have  fever.  Although  findings  of  some  studies  have  suggested  otherwise,  most
investigations  have  not  identified  time  since  vaccination  as  a  risk  factor  for
breakthrough  varicella.  Some  investigations  have  identified  asthma,  use  of  steroids,
and  vaccination  at  younger  than  age  15  months  as  risk  factors  for  breakthrough
varicella,  but  other  investigations  did  not.  Interference  from  live  viral  vaccine  could
reduce vaccine effectiveness. A study of 115,000 children in two health maintenance
organizations during 1995 to 1999 found that children who received varicella vaccine
less than 30 days after MMR vaccination had a 2.5-fold increased risk of breakthrough
varicella  compared  with  those  who  received  varicella  vaccine  before,  simultaneously
with, or more than 30 days after MMR vaccine. Studies have shown that a second dose
of varicella vaccine boosts immunity and reduces the risk of breakthrough disease in
children. A meta-analysis of postlicensure estimates found the effectiveness of 1 dose
of  varicella  vaccine  to  be  82%  against  any  clinical  varicella  and  98%  against  severe
disease.  Two  doses  of  vaccine  demonstrated  92%  effectiveness  against  any  clinical
varicella. MMRV vaccine was licensed on the basis of non-inferiority of immunogenicity
of the antigenic components rather than the clinical efficacy. Clinical studies involving
healthy children age 12 through 23 months indicated that those who received a single
dose of MMRV vaccine developed similar levels of antibody to measles, mumps, rubella,
and varicella as children who received MMR vaccine and VAR vaccine concomitantly at
separate injection sites. Evidence of immunity to varicella includes any of the following:
Data  from  the  United  States  and  Japan  in  a  variety  of  settings  indicate  that  varicella
vaccine  is  70%  to  100%  effective  in  preventing  illness  or  modifying  the  severity  of
illness  if  used  within  3  days,  and  possibly  up  to  5  days,  after  exposure.  ACIP
recommends  the  vaccine  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  within  3  through  5  days  after
exposure  for  persons  age  12  months  or  older  who  do  not  have  evidence  of  varicella
immunity and who do not have contraindications to vaccination. If exposure to varicella
does  not  cause  infection,  postexposure  vaccination  should  induce  protection  against
subsequent  exposure.  If  the  exposure  results  in  infection,  there  is  no  evidence  that
administration of varicella vaccine during the incubation period or prodromal stage of
illness  increases  the  risk  for  vaccine-associated  adverse  reactions.  Although
postexposure  use  of  varicella  vaccine  has  potential  applications  in  hospital  settings,
preexposure  vaccination  of  all  health  care  personnel  without  evidence  of  varicella
immunity is the recommended and preferred method for preventing varicella in health
care settings. Varicella outbreaks in some settings (e.g., childcare facilities and schools)
can  persist  up  to  6  months.  Varicella  vaccine  has  been  used  successfully  to  control
these outbreaks. During a varicella outbreak, persons who have received one dose of
varicella  vaccine  should  receive  a  second  dose,  provided  the  appropriate  vaccination
interval has elapsed since the first dose (3 months for persons age 12 months through
12  years  and  at  least  4  weeks  for  persons  age  13  years  or  older).  A  Varicella-Zoster
Immune  Globulin  (VZIG  [VariZIG])  is  licensed  for  use  in  the  United  States  for
postexposure prophylaxis for persons who do not have evidence of varicella immunity
and  who  have  contraindications  for  varicella  vaccine.  VariZIG  is  a  purified  human
immune globulin preparation made from plasma containing high levels of anti-varicella
antibodies  (IgG)  that  is  lyophilized.  When  properly  reconstituted,  VariZIG  is
approximately a 5% solution of IgG that can be administered intramuscularly. Patient
groups recommended by ACIP to receive VariZIG for postexposure prophylaxis include
the following:  *Contraindicated  for  MMRV;  contraindicated  for  VAR  depending  on  CD4
count As with other vaccines, a history of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to a
vaccine  component  or  following  a  prior  dose  is  a  contraindication  to  further  doses.
Moderate  or  severe  acute  illness  (with  or  without  fever)  in  a  patient  is  considered  a
precaution  to  vaccination,  although  persons  with  minor  illness  may  be  vaccinated.
Contraindications  and  precautions  are  similar  for  both  varicella-containing  vaccines.
VAR vaccine and MMRV vaccine both contain minute amounts of neomycin and gelatin
but do not contain egg protein. Persons with alpha-gal allergy may wish to consult their
physician  before  receiving  a  vaccine  that  contains  gelatin.  Persons  who  are
immunosuppressed  due  to  leukemia,  lymphoma,  generalized  malignancy,  immune
deficiency  disease,  or  immunosuppressive  therapy  should  not  be  vaccinated  with  a
varicella-containing  vaccine.  However,  treatment  with  low-dose  (e.g.,  less  than  2
milligrams per kilogram of body weight per day), alternate-day, topical, replacement, or
aerosolized  steroid  preparations  is  not  a  contraindication  to  vaccination.  The  interval
until immune reconstruction varies with the intensity and type of immunosuppressive
therapy,  radiation  therapy,  underlying  disease,  and  other  factors,  complicating  the
ability  to  make  a  definitive  recommendation  for  an  interval  after  cessation  of
immunosuppressive  therapy  when  live-virus  vaccines  can  be  administered  safely  and
effectively.  Current  recommendations  are  for  patients  to  be  vaccinated  with  varicella
vaccine when in remission and at least three months after cancer chemotherapy, with
evidence  of  restored  immunocompetence.  Varicella  vaccine  (as  a  2-dose  regimen  if
there is sufficient time) should be administered to immunocompetent patients without
evidence  of  varicella  immunity,  if  it  can  be  administered  at  least  4  weeks  before
initiating  immunosuppressive  therapy.  Other  immunosuppressive  medications  include
human immune mediators such as interleukins and colony-stimulating factors, immune
modulators,  and  medicines  such  as  tumor  necrosis  factor-alpha  inhibitors  and  anti-B
cell  antibodies.  Live  vaccines  should  be  withheld  3  months  following  such  therapies,
and  withheld  at  least  6  months  following  therapy  with  anti-B  cell  antibodies.  Some
experts  recommend  longer  than  6  months  following  anti-B  cell  antibodies.  A  family
history  of  congenital  or  hereditary  immunodeficiency  in  first-degree  relatives  (i.e.,
parents and siblings), unless the immune competence of the potential vaccine recipient
has  been  substantiated  clinically  or  verified  by  a  laboratory,  is  a  contraindication  for
MMR or MMRV, or VAR vaccine. Persons with severe cellular immunodeficiency resulting
from infection with HIV, including persons diagnosed with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) should not receive varicella vaccine. HIV-infected children with CD4+
T-lymphocyte percentage of 15% or higher, and older children and adults with a CD4+
count of 200 per microliter or higher may be considered for vaccination. These persons
may receive MMR vaccine and VAR vaccine, but should not receive MMRV vaccine. The
effect  of  the  administration  of  antibody-containing  blood  products  (e.g.,  immune
globulin, whole blood or packed red blood cells, or intravenous immune globulin) on the
response to varicella vaccine virus is unknown. Because of the potential inhibition of the
response  to  vaccination  by  passively  transferred  antibodies,  neither  VAR  vaccine  nor
MMRV  vaccine  (nor  MMR  vaccine)  should  be  administered  for  3  to  11  months  after
receipt
 of
 antibody-containing
 blood
 products.
 The
 interval
 between
 the
antibody-containing  blood  product  and  receipt  of  VAR,  MMR,  or  MMRV  vaccine  is
determined by the type of product administered.  Antibody-containing products should
not be given for 2 weeks following vaccination unless the benefits exceed those of the
vaccine.  In  such  cases,  vaccine  recipients  should  either  be  revaccinated  later  at  the
appropriate intervals (ranging 3 to 11 months), or tested for immunity and revaccinated
if  seronegative.  Varicella-containing  vaccines  may  be  administered  a  minimum  of  24
months  after  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplant  to  patients  who  do  not  have  graft
versus  host  disease,  are  considered  immunocompetent,  and  whose  last  dose  of
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was 8 to 11 months previously. Nonimmune family
members, close contacts, and health care personnel associated with the patient should
be vaccinated before that time. *MMRV only A personal or family (i.e., sibling or parent)
history  of  seizures  of  any  etiology  is  a  precaution  for  MMRV  vaccine.  Children  with  a
personal or family history of seizures of any etiology should ideally be vaccinated with
separate MMR and VAR vaccines because the risks for using MMRV vaccine in this group
of  children  generally  outweigh  the  benefits.  Receipt  of  specific  antiviral  drugs
(acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir) 24 hours before vaccination is a precaution for
VAR  or  MMRV  vaccination.  These  antiviral  drugs  should  be  avoided  for  14  days  after
vaccination if possible. Although there is no evidence that either varicella or varicella
vaccine exacerbates tuberculosis, vaccination is not recommended for persons known
to  have  untreated  active  tuberculosis.  Tuberculosis  testing  is  not  a  prerequisite  for
varicella  vaccination.  Simultaneous  use  of  aspirin  or  aspirin-containing  products  is  a
precaution  for  VAR  or  MMRV  vaccine.  The  manufacturer  recommends  that  vaccine
recipients avoid the use of salicylates for 6 weeks after receiving VAR or MMRV vaccine
because of the association between aspirin use and Reye syndrome following varicella.
The need for tuberculin skin testing or interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) testing is
a  precaution  for  MMRV  vaccine.  Prior  history  of  varicella  is  not  a  contraindication  to
varicella  vaccination,  so  when  in  doubt  as  to  history,  varicella  vaccine  should  be
administered. Women known to be pregnant or attempting to become pregnant should
not  receive  a  varicella-containing  vaccine.  Wild-type  varicella  poses  a  low  risk  to  the
fetus.  Because  the  virulence  of  the  attenuated  virus  used  in  the  vaccine  is  less  than
that  of  the  wild-type  virus,  the  risk  to  the  fetus,  if  any,  should  be  even  lower  from
vaccine  virus.  Because  the  effects  of  the  varicella  virus  on  the  fetus  are  unknown,
pregnant  women  should  not  be  vaccinated.  Nonpregnant  women  who  are  vaccinated
should avoid becoming pregnant for 1 month after each injection. For persons without
evidence of immunity, having a pregnant household member is not a contraindication
for  vaccination.  Routine  pregnancy  testing  of  women  of  childbearing  age  before
administering  a  live-virus  vaccine  is  not  recommended.  If  a  pregnant  woman  is
inadvertently  vaccinated  or  becomes  pregnant  within  4  weeks  after  varicella
vaccination,  she  should  be  counseled  about  the  theoretical  basis  of  concern  for  the
fetus;  however,  varicella  vaccination  during  pregnancy  should  not  be  considered  a
reason  to  terminate  pregnancy.  To  monitor  the  pregnancy  outcomes  of  women
inadvertently  vaccinated  with  VZV-containing  vaccines  immediately  before  or  during
pregnancy,  Merck  and  CDC  established  the  Merck/CDC  Pregnancy  Registry  for
VZV-Containing Vaccines. From inception of the registry in 1995 through March 2012,
no cases of congenital varicella syndrome and no increased prevalence of other birth
defects  have  been  detected  among  women  vaccinated  within  3  months  before  or
during  pregnancy.  Although  a  small  risk  for  congenital  varicella  syndrome  cannot  be
ruled out, the low number of exposures being registered each year in addition to the
rarity  of  the  outcome,  were  too  low  to  improve  on  the  estimate  of  the  risk  within  a
reasonable  timeframe.  Therefore,  new  patient  enrollment  was  discontinued  as  of
October  16,  2013.  Merck  continues  to  monitor  pregnancy  outcomes  after  inadvertent
exposures  to  VZV-containing  vaccines  during  pregnancy  or  within  3  months  before
conception.  CDC  and  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  continue  to  monitor  adverse
events  after  vaccination  with  VZV-containing  vaccines  through  the  Vaccine  Adverse
Event Reporting System (VAERS). New cases of exposure immediately before or during
pregnancy or other adverse events after vaccination with VAR vaccine or MMRV vaccine
should  be  reported  to  Merck  (telephone,  1-877-888-4231)  and  to  VAERS.  Postpartum
vaccination of women without evidence of immunity need not be delayed because of
breastfeeding.  Single-antigen  varicella  vaccine  should  be  administered  to  nursing
mothers without evidence of immunity. The most common adverse reactions following
varicella  vaccine  are  local  reactions,  such  as  pain,  soreness,  erythema,  and  swelling.
Based on information from the manufacturer’s clinical trials of varicella vaccine, local
reactions are reported by 19% of children and by 24% of adolescents and adults (33%
following  the  second  dose).  These  local  adverse  reactions  are  generally  mild  and
self-limited. A varicella-like rash at injection site is reported by 3% of children and by
1%  of  adolescents  and  adults  following  the  second  dose.  In  both  circumstances,  a
median of two lesions have been present. These lesions generally occur within 2 weeks
and  may  be  maculopapular  rather  than  vesicular.  A  generalized  varicella-like  rash  is
reported by 4% to 6% of recipients of varicella vaccine (1% after the second dose in
adolescents  and  adults),  with  an  average  of  five  lesions.  Most  of  these  generalized
rashes occur within 3 weeks and may be mainly maculopapular. Systemic reactions are
not common. Fever within 42 days of vaccination is reported by 15% of children and
10%  of  adolescents  and  adults.  The  majority  of  these  episodes  of  fever  have  been
attributed  to  concurrent  illness  rather  than  to  the  vaccine.  Varicella  vaccine  is  a  live
virus  vaccine  and  may  result  in  a  latent  infection,  similar  to  that  caused  by  wild
varicella  virus.  Consequently,  zoster  caused  by  the  vaccine  virus  has  been  reported.
Not all these cases have been confirmed as having been caused by vaccine virus. The
risk  of  zoster  following  vaccination  was  assessed  among  children  and  is  much  lower
(~79% lower) than that following infection with wild-type virus. The majority of cases of
zoster  following  vaccine  have  been  mild  and  have  not  been  associated  with
complications  such  as  postherpetic  neuralgia;  however,  in  children  cases  of  herpes
zoster  with  meningitis  have  been  reported.  In  MMRV  vaccine  prelicensure  studies
conducted  among  children  age  12  to  23  months,  fever  (reported  as  abnormal  or
elevated  greater  than  or  equal  to  102°F  oral  equivalent)  was  observed  5  to  12  days
after  vaccination  in  21.5%  of  MMRV  vaccine  recipients  compared  with  14.9%  of  MMR
vaccine and VAR vaccine recipients. Measles-like rash was observed in 3.0% of MMRV
vaccine  recipients  compared  with  2.1%  of  those  receiving  MMR  vaccine  and  VAR
vaccine.  Two  postlicensure  studies  indicated  that  one  additional  febrile  seizure  per
2,300 to 2,600 children age 12 through 23 months occurred 5 to 12 days after the first
dose of MMRV vaccine, compared with children who had received the first dose of MMR
vaccine  and  VAR  vaccine  administered  as  separate  injections  at  the  same  visit.  Data
from postlicensure studies do not suggest that this increased risk exists for children age
4  to  6  years  receiving  the  second  dose  of  MMRV  vaccine.  Accumulated  evidence
supports  that  healthy,  vaccinated  persons  have  minimal  risk  for  transmitting  the
varicella  vaccine  virus  to  contacts;  through  2018  only  13  cases  from  11
immunocompetent vaccine recipients have been documented, most commonly among
household  contacts.  Transmission  of  vaccine  virus  was  reported  only  from  vaccine
recipients  who  developed  a  varicella-like  or  herpes  zoster  rash  after  vaccination.
Secondary cases of varicella caused by the vaccine virus have been typically mild. In
studies of household contacts, several instances of asymptomatic seroconversion have
been observed. If a vaccinated person develops a rash, it is recommended that close
contact with persons who do not have evidence of varicella immunity and who are at
high  risk  of  complications  of  varicella,  such  as  immunocompromised  persons,  be
avoided until the rash has resolved. As a safeguard, medical facilities should consider
precautions for personnel in whom rash occurs after vaccination. Health care personnel
in  whom  a  vaccine-related  rash  occurs  should  avoid  contact  with  persons  without
evidence  of  immunity  who  are  at  high  risk  of  serious  complications  until  all  lesions
resolve  or  no  new  lesions  appear  within  a  24-hour  period.  For  storage  and  handling
specifics, please refer to the manufacturer. For complete information on best practices
and recommendations, please refer to CDC’s Vaccine Storage and Handling Toolkit [3
MB, 65 pages]. Varicella was removed from the list of nationally notifiable conditions in
1981, but some states continued to report cases to CDC. Varicella was added back to
the  list  of  nationally  notifiable  conditions  in  2003.  As  of  2019,  40  states  have  been
conducting case-based varicella surveillance. For information on guidance for state and
local  health  department  staff  who  are  involved  in  surveillance  activities  for
vaccine-preventable  diseases,  please  consult  the  Manual  for  the  Surveillance  of
Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  The  editors  would  like  to  acknowledge  Valerie  Morelli,
Ginger Redmon, Cindy Weinbaum, and Skip Wolfe for their contributions to this chapter.
Bialek S, Perella D, Zhang J, et al.  Impact of a routine two-dose varicella vaccination
program  on  varicella  epidemiology.  Pediatrics  2013;132(5):e1134-40.  CDC.  FDA
Approval of an Extended Period for Administering VariZIG for Postexposure Prophylaxis
of  Varicella.  MMWR  2012;61(12):212.  CDC.  Immunization  of  health-care  personnel.
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR
2011;60(RR-7):1–45.  CDC.  Prevention  of  varicella:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  MMWR  2007;56(No.  RR-4):1–40.  CDC.
Updated
 Recommendations
 for
 Use
 of
 VariZIG-United
 States,
 2013.
 MMWR
2013;62(28):574–6.  CDC.  Use  of  combination  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella
vaccine:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP). MMWR 2010;59(No. RR-3):1–12. Galil K, Brown C, Lin F, et al. Hospitalizations for
varicella in the United States, 1988 to 1999. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2002 Oct;21(10):931–5.
Leung J, Broder K, Marin M. Severe varicella in persons vaccinated with varicella vaccine
(breakthrough
 varicella):
 a
 systematic
 review.
 Expert
 Rev
 Vaccines
2017;16(4):391–400. Leung J, Marin M.  Update on trends in varicella mortality during
the
 varicella
 vaccine
 era,
 United
 States
 1990-2016.
 
 Human
 vaccines
 &
Immunotherapeutics 2018;14:10, 2460–63. Lopez A, Zhang J, Marin M. Epidemiology of
varicella during the 2-dose varicella vaccination program – United States, 2005-2014.
MMWR  2016;65:902–5.  Leung  J  and  Harpaz  R.  Impact  of  the  Maturing  Varicella
Vaccination  Program  on  Varicella  and  Related  Outcomes  in  the  United  States:
1994-2012. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 2016 Dec;5(4):395–402. doi: 10.1093/jpids/piv044.
Kuter  B,  Matthews  H,  Shinefield  H,  et  al.  Ten  year  follow-up  of  healthy  children  who
received one or two injections of varicella vaccine. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004;23:132–7.
Marin M, Marti M, Kambhampati A, et al. Varicella vaccine effectiveness worldwide: a
systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.  Pediatrics  2016;137:1–10.  Marin  M,  Zhang  J,
Seward  J.   Near  elimination  of  varicella  deaths  in  the  United  States  following
implementation  of  the  childhood  vaccination.  Pediatrics  2011;128:214–20.  Marin  M,
Leung J, Gershon A. Transmission of vaccine strain varicella-zoster virus: a systematic
review.   Pediatrics  2019;144(3):e20191305  Seward  J,  Watson  B,  Peterson  C,  et  al.
Varicella disease after introduction of varicella vaccine in the United States, 1995–2000.
JAMA 2002;287:606–11. Seward J, Zhang J, Maupin T, et al. Contagiousness of varicella
in vaccinated cases: a household contact study. JAMA 2004;292:704–8.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/varicella.html
