Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Fiona  P.  Havers,  MD,  MHS;  Pedro  L.  Moro,  MD,  MPH;  Susan
Hariri,  PhD;  and  Tami  Skoff,  MS  The  14th  edition  of  the  “Pink  Book”  was  published
August  2021.  Vaccine-specific  recommendations  may  be  outdated.  Refer  to  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  Vaccine  Recommendations  and
Guidelines  for  the  most  updated  vaccine-specific  recommendations.  Printer  friendly
version [16 pages] Pertussis, or whooping cough, is an acute infectious disease caused
by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis. Outbreaks of pertussis were first described in the
16th century by Guillaume de Baillou. The organism was first isolated by Jules Bordet
and  Octave  Gengou  in  1906.  In  the  20th  century,  pertussis  was  one  of  the  most
common  childhood  diseases  and  a  major  cause  of  childhood  mortality  in  the  United
States.  Before  the  availability  of  pertussis  vaccine  in  the  1940s,  more  than  200,000
cases of pertussis were reported annually. Since widespread use of the vaccine began,
incidence has decreased more than 75% compared with the prevaccine era. Pertussis
remains  a  major  health  problem  among  children  worldwide.  Data  from  a  recent
modeling  study  suggest  that  more  than  24  million  new  pertussis  cases  occurred
globally  among  children  younger  than  age  5  years  in  2014  and  caused  an  estimated
160,700 deaths. B. pertussis is a small, aerobic gram-negative rod. It requires special
media  for  isolation.  B.  pertussis  produces  multiple  antigenic  and  biologically  active
products,
 including
 pertussis
 toxin
 (PT),
 filamentous
 hemagglutinin
 (FHA),
agglutinogens, adenylate cyclase, pertactin, and tracheal cytotoxin. These products are
responsible for the clinical features of pertussis disease. An immune response to one or
more  of  these  products  produces  immunity  following  infection.  Immunity  following  B.
pertussis  infection  is  not  permanent.  Pertussis  is  primarily  a  toxin-mediated  disease.
The  bacteria  attach  to  the  cilia  of  the  respiratory  epithelial  cells,  produce  toxins  that
paralyze the cilia, and cause inflammation of the respiratory tract, which interferes with
the clearing of pulmonary secretions. Pertussis antigens appear to allow the organism
to evade host defenses in that lymphocytosis is promoted but chemotaxis is impaired.
Previously it was thought that B. pertussis did not invade the tissues. However, studies
have shown the bacteria to be present in alveolar macrophages. The incubation period
of pertussis is commonly 7 through 10 days, with a range of 4 through 21 days. The
clinical  course  of  the  illness  is  divided  into  three  stages:  catarrhal,  paroxysmal,  and
convalescent.  The  first  stage,  the  catarrhal  stage,  is  characterized  by  the  insidious
onset of coryza (runny nose), sneezing, low-grade fever, and a mild, occasional cough
similar to the common cold. The cough gradually becomes more severe and after 1 to 2
weeks, the second, or paroxysmal, stage, begins. Fever is generally minimal throughout
the  course  of  the  illness.  It  is  during  the  paroxysmal  stage  that  the  diagnosis  of
pertussis  is  usually  suspected.  Characteristically,  the  patient  might  have  bursts,  or
paroxysms,  of  numerous,  rapid  coughs,  apparently  due  to  difficulty  expelling  thick
mucus from the tracheobronchial tree. At the end of the paroxysm, a long inspiratory
effort is usually accompanied by a characteristic high-pitched whoop. During such an
attack, the patient may become cyanotic. Children and young infants, especially, might
appear very ill and distressed. Vomiting and exhaustion might follow the episode. The
person does not appear to be ill between attacks. Paroxysmal attacks generally occur
more frequently at night, with an average of 15 attacks per 24 hours. During the first 1
or 2 weeks of this paroxysmal stage, the attacks might increase in frequency, remain at
the same level for 2 to 3 weeks, and then gradually decrease. The paroxysmal stage
usually lasts 1 to 6 weeks but may persist for up to 10 weeks. Infants younger than age
6 months may not have the strength to have a whoop, but they can have paroxysms of
coughing. Additionally, the classic whoop might not be present in persons with milder
disease.  In  the  convalescent  stage,  recovery  is  gradual.  The  cough  becomes  less
paroxysmal  and  disappears  in  2  to  3  weeks.  However,  paroxysms  often  recur  with
subsequent  respiratory  infections  for  many  months  after  the  onset  of  pertussis.
Adolescents, adults, and children who were previously vaccinated may become infected
with  B.  pertussis  but  may  have  milder  disease  than  infants  and  young  children.
Pertussis infection in these persons may be asymptomatic or present as illness ranging
from a mild cough illness to classic pertussis with persistent cough (i.e., lasting more
than 7 days). Inspiratory whoop is not common. Even though the disease may be milder
in  older  persons,  those  who  are  infected  may  still  transmit  the  disease  to  other
susceptible  persons,  including  unimmunized  or  incompletely  immunized  infants.  An
adult,  adolescent,  or  older  school-age  child  is  often  found  to  be  the  first  case  in  a
household with multiple pertussis cases and is often the source of infection for young
infants.  The  most  common  complication,  and  the  cause  of  most  pertussis-related
deaths,  is  secondary  bacterial  pneumonia.  Young  infants  are  at  highest  risk  for
developing  pertussis-associated  complications.  Data  from  2000–2017  indicate  that
pneumonia  occurred  in  13.2%  of  all  reported  pertussis  cases,  and  among  18.6%  of
infants  younger  than  age  6  months.  Neurologic  complications  such  as  seizures  and
encephalopathy  may  occur  as  a  result  of  hypoxia  from  coughing,  or  possibly  from
pertussis toxin. Neurologic complications of pertussis are more common among infants.
Other  less  serious  complications  of  pertussis  include  otitis  media,  anorexia,  and
dehydration. Complications resulting from pressure effects of severe paroxysms include
pneumothorax, epistaxis, subdural hematomas, hernias, and rectal prolapse. Between
2000 and 2017, 307 deaths from pertussis were reported to CDC; children younger than
age  2  months  accounted  for  84.0%  of  these  deaths.  During  the  same  time  period,
among  infants,  the  annual  mean  number  of  pertussis  cases,  hospitalizations,  and
deaths were 2,957 (range 1,803 to 4,994), 1,122 (range 544 to 1,938), and 15 (range 3
to  35),  respectively.  Adolescents  and  adults  may  also  develop  complications  of
pertussis,  such  as  difficulty  sleeping,  urinary  incontinence,  pneumonia,  rib  fracture,
syncope,  and  weight  loss.  The  diagnosis  of  pertussis  is  based  on  a  clinical  history  of
signs and symptoms, as well as a variety of laboratory tests (e.g., culture, polymerase
chain reaction [PCR], and serology). Culture is considered the gold standard laboratory
test and is the most specific of the laboratory tests for pertussis. However, fastidious
growth requirements make B. pertussis difficult to culture. The yield of culture can be
affected  by  specimen  collection,  transportation,  and  isolation  techniques.  Specimens
from  the  posterior  nasopharynx,  not  the  throat,  should  be  obtained  using  polyester,
rayon, nylon, or calcium alginate (not cotton) swabs. Isolation rates are highest during
the first 2 weeks of illness (catarrhal and early paroxysmal stages). Cultures are less
likely to be positive if performed later in the course of illness (more than 2 weeks after
cough onset) or on specimens from persons who have received antibiotics or who have
been  vaccinated.  Since  adolescents  and  adults  have  often  been  coughing  for  several
weeks before they seek medical attention, it is often too late for culture to be useful.
PCR  is  a  rapid  test  and  has  excellent  sensitivity.  PCR  tests  vary  in  specificity,  so
obtaining  culture  confirmation  of  pertussis  for  at  least  one  possible  case  is
recommended  any  time  there  is  suspicion  of  a  pertussis  outbreak.  Results  should  be
interpreted  along  with  the  clinical  symptoms  and  epidemiological  information.  PCR
should  be  performed  on  nasopharyngeal  specimens  taken  at  0  to  3  weeks  following
cough onset but may provide accurate results for up to 4 weeks of cough in infants or
unvaccinated  persons.  After  the  fourth  week  of  cough,  the  amount  of  bacterial  DNA
rapidly  diminishes,  which  increases  the  risk  of  obtaining  false  negative  results.  PCR
assay  protocols  that  include  multiple  targets  allow  for  Bordetella  speciation.  False
positive results may be obtained because of contamination in the laboratory or during
specimen collection. Direct comparison with culture is necessary for validation, and the
use of multiple targets is recommended to distinguish B. pertussis from other Bordetella
species. Serologic testing is generally more useful for diagnosing pertussis during the
later  phase  of  disease  when  both  culture  and  PCR  are  likely  to  be  negative.  For  the
CDC/FDA single-point serologic assay, the optimal timing for specimen collection is 2 to
8 weeks following cough onset, when the antibody titers are at their highest. However,
serology  may  be  performed  on  specimens  collected  up  to  12  weeks  following  cough
onset. Many state public health labs have included this assay as part of their testing
regimen  for  pertussis.  Commercially,  there  are  many  different  serologic  tests  used  in
the United States with unproven or unknown clinical accuracy. CDC is actively engaged
in better understanding the usefulness of these commercially available assays. Because
direct
 fluorescent
 antibody
 testing
 of
 nasopharyngeal
 secretions
 has
 been
demonstrated  in  some  studies  to  have  low  sensitivity  and  variable  specificity,  such
testing should not be relied on as a criterion for laboratory confirmation. An elevated
white  blood  cell  count  with  a  lymphocytosis  is  usually  present  in  classical  pertussis
among  infants.  The  absolute  lymphocyte  count  often  reaches  20,000  or  greater.
However,  there  may  be  no  lymphocytosis  in  some  infants  and  children  or  in  persons
with mild or modified cases of pertussis. The medical management of pertussis patients
is  primarily  supportive,  although  antibiotics  are  of  some  value  if  administered  early.
This
 therapy
 eradicates
 the
 organism
 from
 secretions,
 thereby
 decreasing
communicability and may modify the course of the illness if initiated early (i.e., during
the  first  1  to  2  weeks  of  cough  before  coughing  paroxysms  begin).  Recommended
antibiotics
 are
 azithromycin,
 clarithromycin,
 and
 erythromycin.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  can  also  be  used.  Immunity  following  pertussis  is  not
permanent. Unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated persons recovering from pertussis
should  begin  or  complete  active  immunization  with  DTaP  or  Tdap  as  indicated.
Vaccination history of close contacts of pertussis patients should also be assessed. An
antibiotic  effective  against  pertussis  should  be  administered  to  all  close  contacts  of
persons  with  pertussis,  regardless  of  age  and  vaccination  status.  All  close  contacts
younger  than  age  7  years  who  have  not  completed  the  3-dose  primary  vaccination
series of a pertussis-containing vaccine and the first booster dose usually given at age
15 through 18 months should complete the series according to the minimum intervals.
Close  contacts  who  are  age  4  through  6  years  and  who  have  not  yet  received  the
second  booster  dose  of  pertussis-containing  vaccine  (usually  the  fifth  dose  of  DTaP
[diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine]) should be vaccinated.
Pertussis occurs worldwide. Pertussis is a human disease. No animal or insect source or
vector  is  known  to  exist.  Adolescents,  adults,  and  older  school-age  children  are  an
important  reservoir  for  B.  pertussis  and  are  often  the  source  of  infection  for  infants.
Transmission most commonly occurs person-to-person through contact with respiratory
droplets,  or  by  contact  with  airborne  droplets  of  respiratory  secretions.  Transmission
occurs  less  frequently  by  contact  with  an  infected  person’s  freshly  contaminated
articles. Pertussis has no distinct seasonal pattern, but it may increase in the summer
and fall. Pertussis is highly communicable, as evidenced by secondary attack rates of
80% among susceptible household contacts. Persons with pertussis are infectious from
the  beginning  of  the  catarrhal  stage  through  the  third  week  after  the  onset  of
paroxysms or until 5 days after the start of effective antimicrobial treatment. Before the
availability  of  vaccine,  pertussis  was  a  common  cause  of  morbidity  and  mortality
among children. During the 6-year period from 1940 through 1945, more than 1 million
cases of pertussis were reported, an average of 175,000 cases per year (approximately
150  cases  per  100,000  population).  Following  introduction  of  whole-cell  pertussis
vaccine in the 1940s, pertussis incidence gradually declined, reaching 15,000 reported
cases  in  1960  (approximately  8  per  100,000  population).  By  1970,  annual  incidence
was fewer than 5,000 cases per year and, between 1980 and 1990, an average of 2,900
cases  per  year  were  reported  (approximately  1  per  100,000  population).  Reported
pertussis  incidence  has  been  gradually  increasing  in  the  United  States  since  the  late
1980s and early 1990s, and large epidemic peaks in disease have been observed since
the  mid-2000s.  A  total  of  48,277  pertussis  cases  were  reported  in  2012,  the  largest
number reported since the mid-1950s. There are likely many factors contributing to the
observed  increase  in  reported  disease.  These  include  changes  in  diagnostic  testing,
heightened recognition and reporting of pertussis cases, and molecular changes in the
organism. However, waning of vaccine-induced immunity is thought to play a key role
in countries, including the United States, that have transitioned to acellular vaccines in
the  1990s.  Infants  younger  than  age  1  year  continue  to  have  the  highest  rates  of
pertussis.  In  2018,  pertussis  incidence  per  100,000  was  72.3  in  infants  younger  than
age 6 months and 32.7 in infants age 6 to 12 months, compared to 1.4 in persons age
20 years or older. However, the epidemiology of pertussis has changed since the late
1980s, and an increasing burden of reported cases in the United States is now occurring
among  fully  vaccinated  children  and  adolescents.  Between  2000–2006,  the  second
highest average annual incidence rate was reported among adolescents age 11 through
18  years  (13.1  per  100,000  population).  Between  2007  and  2014,  children  age  7
through 10 years had the second highest average annual incidence rate (28.3 cases per
100,000  population).  While  the  incidence  of  pertussis  in  children  age  7  through  10
years and 11 through 18 years was comparable between 2015 and 2016, the rate of
disease  in  adolescents  age  11  through  18  years  once  again  surpassed  the  rates  of
disease  among  children  age  7  through  10  years  during  this  period.  The  observed
changes  in  pertussis  epidemiology  in  recent  years  coincide  with  the  transition  to
acellular vaccines in the United States and the aging of the first acellular-primed birth
cohorts,  suggesting  a  key  role  of  waning  immunity.  Among  children  born  during
2016–2017, 93.3% had received at least 3 doses of DTaP vaccine by age 24 months,
and 80.6% had received at least 4 doses of DTaP vaccine by age 24 months. Although
Tdap  coverage  among  adolescents  age  13  through  17  years  reached  90.2%  in  2019,
coverage  remains  low  among  adults  (31.7%  in  2017).  Whole-cell  pertussis  vaccines
were  first  licensed  in  the  United  States  in  1914  and  were  available  as  a  combined
vaccine  with  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  (as  DTP)  in  1948.  Based  on  controlled
efficacy trials conducted in the 1940s and on subsequent observational efficacy studies,
a series of 4 doses of whole-cell DTP vaccine was 70% to 90% effective in preventing
serious  pertussis  disease.  Local  reactions  such  as  redness,  swelling,  and  pain  at  the
injection site occurred following up to 50% of doses of whole-cell DTP vaccines. Fever
and other mild systemic events were also common. Concerns about safety led to the
development of more purified (acellular) pertussis vaccines, which are associated with a
lower  frequency  of  adverse  reactions.  No  DTP  vaccines  are  currently  licensed  in  the
United  States.  Acellular  pertussis  vaccine  is  combined  with  tetanus  toxoid  and
diphtheria toxoid as DTaP (Infanrix and Daptacel) or Tdap (Boostrix and Adacel). DTaP
and  Tdap  contain  the  same  pertussis  components,  but  Tdap  contains  a  reduced
quantity of some pertussis antigens and diphtheria toxoid. Boostrix contains a reduced
quantity  of  tetanus  toxoid  compared  to  Infanrix.  Children  younger  than  age  7  years
should receive DTaP vaccine or DT vaccine (in instances where the pertussis vaccine
component is contraindicated or where the physician decides that pertussis vaccine is
not to be administered). Persons age 7 years or older should receive the Td vaccine or
Tdap  vaccine  (Tdap  would  be  off-label  for  children  age  7  through  9  years,  but  is  still
recommended by ACIP), even if they have not completed a series of DTaP or DT. Tdap
(Boostrix) is approved for persons age 10 years or older; Tdap (Adacel) is approved for
persons  age  10  through  64  years.  There  are  five  combination  vaccines  that  contain
DTaP  vaccine.  DTaP-HepB-IPV  (Pediarix)  is  licensed  for  the  first  3  doses  of  the  DTaP
series among children age 6 weeks through 6 years. DTaP-IPV/Hib (Pentacel) is licensed
for the first 4 doses of the component vaccines among children age 6 weeks through 4
years. DTaP-IPV (Kinrix) is licensed only for the fifth dose of DTaP and fourth dose of IPV
among  children  age  4  through  6  years.  DTaP-IPV  (Quadracel)  is  licensed  only  for  the
fifth dose of DTaP and fourth or fifth dose of IPV among children age 4 through 6 years.
DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB  (Vaxelis)  is  licensed  for  use  in  children  age  6  weeks  through  4
years.  Pertussis  vaccines  are  administered  by  intramuscular  injection.  Each  dose  of
pertussis-containing  vaccine  contains  aluminum  as  an  adjuvant  but  no  preservative.
DTaP-HepB-IPV  (Pediarix),  DTaP-IPV/Hib  (Pentacel),  DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB  (Vaxelis),
DTaP-IPV  (Kinrix),  and  DTaP-IPV  (Quadracel)  contain  neomycin  and  polymyxin  B  as
antibiotics.  DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB  (Vaxelis)  contains  streptomycin  as  an  antibiotic.
DTaP-HepB-IPV  (Pediarix)  and  DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB  (Vaxelis)  vaccines  contain  yeast
protein. Presentations of some pertussis-containing vaccines contain latex rubber. DTaP
(diphtheria,  tetanus  toxoids,  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccine)  is  recommended  for
children  age  6  weeks  through  6  years.  The  routine  schedule  is  a  primary  series  of  3
doses at age 2, 4, and 6 months, a booster dose between age 15 through 18 months,
and another booster dose between age 4 through 6 years (total of 5 doses). The first 3
doses should be given at 4- to 8-week intervals (minimum of 4 weeks). Dose 4 should
follow dose 3 by no less than 6 months and should not be administered before age 12
months. Dose 4 of both brands of DTaP is recommended to be administered at age 15
through 18 months (15 through 20 months for Daptacel). Dose 4 may be given as early
as age 12 months if at least 6 months have elapsed since dose 3 and, in the opinion of
the vaccine provider, the child is unlikely to return for an additional visit between age
15  through  18  months.  Children  who  received  4  doses  before  their  fourth  birthday
should  receive  a  fifth  dose  of  DTaP  before  entering  school.  The  fifth  dose  is  not
necessary (but may be given) if dose 4 in the series was given on or after the fourth
birthday. Administering the fifth dose increases antibody levels and may decrease the
risk of school-age children transmitting the disease to younger siblings who are not fully
vaccinated.  If  a  child  has  a  valid  contraindication  to  pertussis  vaccine,  DT  should  be
used to complete the vaccination series. If the child was younger than age 12 months
when  the  first  dose  of  DT  was  administered  (as  DTP,  DTaP,  or  DT),  the  child  should
receive a total of 4 DT doses. If the child was age 12 months or older at the time the
first  dose  of  DT  was  administered,  3  doses  (with  dose  3  administered  6  through  12
months after dose 2) will complete the primary DT series. If dose 4 of DTP, DTaP, or DT
is  administered  before  the  fourth  birthday,  a  fifth  dose  is  recommended  at  age  4
through  6  years.  DTaP-HepB-IPV  vaccine  is  approved  for  use  as  a  3-dose  series  for
children age 6 weeks through 6 years. It is administered to infants at age 2, 4, and 6
months. The minimum intervals for DTaP-HepB-IPV vaccine are determined by the DTaP
component.  The  3  doses  must  be  separated  by  at  least  4  weeks  between  doses.
Because the minimum age for the first dose of DTaP-HepB-IPV vaccine is 6 weeks, this
vaccine cannot be used for the birth dose of hepatitis B (HepB) vaccine. The final dose
of  DTaP-HepB-IPV  vaccine  should  be  administered  at  age  24  weeks  or  older,  the
minimum  age  for  completion  of  the  hepatitis  B  vaccine  series.  When  DTaP-HepB-IPV
vaccine is used to provide 3 doses at age 2, 4, and 6 months (based on the DTaP and
IPV  schedules),  this  will  result  in  a  4-dose  HepB  vaccine  series,  which  is  acceptable.
DTaP-IPV/Hib vaccine is approved for use as a 4-dose series for children age 6 weeks
through 4 years. It is administered to infants at age 2, 4, 6, and 15 through 18 months.
The  minimum  intervals  for  DTaP-IPV/Hib  vaccine  are  determined  by  the  DTaP
component. The first 3 doses must be separated by at least 4 weeks between doses.
Dose  4  must  be  separated  from  dose  3  by  at  least  6  months,  and  should  not  be
administered before age 12 months. When DTaP-IPV/Hib vaccine is used to provide 4
doses at age 2, 4, 6, and between 15 through 18 months (based on the DTaP and Hib
schedules), an additional booster dose with IPV-stand alone or DTaP-IPV vaccine should
be administered at age 4 through 6 years. This will result in a 5-dose IPV vaccine series,
which  is  acceptable.  DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB  is  approved  for  use  as  a  3-dose  series  for
children age 6 weeks through 4 years. It is administered to infants at age 2, 4, and 6
months. The minimum intervals for DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB vaccine are determined by the
DTaP component. The 3 doses must be separated by at least 4 weeks between doses.
Because the minimum age for the first dose of DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB vaccine is 6 weeks,
this vaccine cannot be used for the birth dose of hepatitis B (HepB) vaccine. The final
dose of DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB vaccine should be administered at age 24 weeks or older,
the  minimum  age  for  completion  of  the  hepatitis  B  vaccine  series.  When
DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB vaccine is used to provide 3 doses at age 2, 4, and 6 months (based
on the DTaP and IPV schedules), this will result in a 4-dose HepB vaccine series, which
is acceptable. DTaP-IPV (Kinrix) vaccine is approved only for dose 5 of DTaP vaccine and
dose 4 of IPV vaccine in children age 4 through 6 years whose previous DTaP vaccine
doses have been with Infanrix and/or Pediarix for dose 1, 2, and 3 and Infanrix for dose
4.  However,  if  DTaP-IPV  (Kinrix)  vaccine  is  administered  to  children  who  received
another brand of DTaP vaccine for prior DTaP vaccine doses, or if administered as dose
1, 2, 3, or 4 of the DTaP vaccine series or dose 1, 2, or 3 of the IPV vaccine series, the
dose of DTaP-IPV (Kinrix) does not need to be repeated. DTaP-IPV (Quadracel) vaccine is
approved only for dose 5 of DTaP vaccine and dose 4 or 5 of IPV vaccine in children age
4  through  6  years  who  have  received  4  doses  of  Pentacel  and/or  Daptacel  vaccine.
However,  if  DTaP-IPV  (Quadracel)  vaccine  is  administered  to  children  who  received
another brand of DTaP vaccine for prior DTaP vaccines doses, or if administered as dose
1, 2, 3, or 4 of the DTaP vaccine series or dose 1, 2, or 3 of the IPV series, the dose of
DTaP-IPV (Quadracel) does not need to be repeated. Both Tdap vaccines are approved
by  the  FDA  for  a  booster  dose  for  persons  who  have  completed  the  recommended
childhood DTP/DTaP vaccination series. Boostrix is approved for persons age 10 years
or older. Adacel is approved for a single dose in persons age 10 through 64 years. A
second dose of Adacel is also licensed for administration 8 or more years after the first
Tdap dose and for use for tetanus prophylaxis when indicated for wound management if
at  least  5  years  have  elapsed  since  the  previous  receipt  of  any  tetanus
toxoid-containing vaccine. A single Tdap dose is recommended for adolescents age 11
through  18  years  who  have  completed  the  recommended  childhood  DTP/DTaP
vaccination series, preferably at age 11 through 12 years. Adults age 19 years or older
who have not previously received Tdap should receive a single dose of Tdap. To reduce
the burden of pertussis in infants, a dose of Tdap has been recommended during each
pregnancy  since  2012,  although  this  practice  is  an  off-label  use.  All  adolescents  and
adults should have received a primary series of at least 3 documented doses of tetanus
and  diphtheria  toxoids-containing  vaccine  (i.e.,  DTaP,  DTP,  DT,  or  Td)  during  their
lifetime.  A  person  without  such  documentation  should  receive  a  series  of  3  doses  of
tetanus-  and  diphtheria-containing  vaccine.  One  of  these  doses,  preferably  the  first,
should be Tdap. The remaining 2 doses should be either Td or Tdap. For persons age 7
to  9  years  who  receive  a  dose  of  Tdap  as  part  of  the  catch-up  series,  an  adolescent
Tdap  dose  should  be  administered  at  age  11  through  12  years.  If  a  Tdap  dose  is
administered at age 10 years or older, the Tdap dose may count as the adolescent Tdap
dose. Either brand of Tdap may be used. Adults age 19 years or older who previously
have  not  received  Tdap  should  receive  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  to  protect  against
pertussis and reduce the likelihood of transmission. For adults age 19 through 64 years,
either brand of Tdap may be used. Adults age 65 years or older should be vaccinated
with  Boostrix,  if  feasible.  However,  either  vaccine  administered  to  a  person  age  65
years or older is immunogenic and would provide protection. A dose of either vaccine
would  be  considered  valid.  Adolescents  and  adults  who  have  not  previously  received
Tdap, and have or anticipate having close contact with an infant younger than age 12
months  (e.g.,  parents,  siblings,  grandparents,  child  care  providers,  and  health  care
personnel)  should  receive  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  to  protect  against  pertussis.  Ideally,
these persons should receive Tdap at least 2 weeks before beginning close contact with
the  infant.  Health  care  personnel  should  receive  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  as  soon  as
feasible  if  they  have  not  previously  received  Tdap,  regardless  of  the  time  since  their
most recent Td vaccination. When Tdap is indicated (e.g., routine vaccination, catch-up
vaccination, or pregnancy), it can be administered regardless of the interval since the
last  tetanus-  or  diphtheria-toxoid-containing  vaccine.  After  receipt  of  Tdap,  persons
should  continue  to  receive  a  dose  of  Td  or  Tdap  for  routine  booster  immunization
against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  every  10  years  unless  needed  sooner  for  tetanus
prophylaxis  as  part  of  wound  management.  To  reduce  the  burden  of  pertussis  in
infants, health care providers should administer a dose of Tdap during each pregnancy,
regardless of the mother’s prior Tdap vaccination history, although this is an off-label
use. To maximize the maternal antibody response and passive antibody transfer to the
infant, optimal timing for Tdap administration is between 27 and 36 weeks of gestation,
preferably during the earlier part of this period, although Tdap may be administered at
any time during pregnancy. For women not previously vaccinated with Tdap, if Tdap is
not  administered  during  pregnancy,  Tdap  should  be  administered  immediately
postpartum. Tdap should be administered during each pregnancy (preferred) or during
the  postpartum  period  regardless  of  the  interval  since  the  last  tetanus-  or  diphtheria
toxoid-containing vaccine. Since 1991, several studies conducted in Europe and Africa
have  evaluated  the  efficacy  of  DTaP  vaccines  administered  to  infants.  These  studies
varied in type and number of vaccines, design, case definition, and laboratory method
used to confirm the diagnosis of pertussis, so comparison among studies must be made
with caution. Point estimates of DTaP vaccine efficacy ranged from 80% to 85%, with
overlapping confidence intervals. Adolescent and adult formulation Tdap vaccines were
licensed  on  the  basis  of  noninferiority  of  the  serologic  response  to  the  various
components compared with each company’s pediatric DTaP formulation among persons
who had received pediatric DTaP or DTP in childhood. For both vaccines, the antibody
response  to  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  was  similar  to  that  following  3  doses  of  DTaP  in
infants. This type of study is known as “bridging.” The new vaccines are assumed to
have  similar  clinical  efficacy  as  DTaP  vaccine  since  a  similar  level  of  antibody  to  the
components  was  achieved.  Studies  on  the  persistence  of  antipertussis  antibodies
following  a  dose  of  Tdap  show  antibody  levels  in  healthy,  nonpregnant  adults  peak
during  the  first  month  after  vaccination,  with  antibody  levels  declining  after  1
year. Because antibody levels wane substantially during the first year after vaccination,
ACIP concluded a single dose of Tdap during one pregnancy would not be sufficient to
provide protection for subsequent pregnancies. As with other vaccines, a history of a
severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to a vaccine component or following a prior dose
is a contraindication to further doses. Moderate or severe acute illness (with or without
fever)  in  a  patient  is  considered  a  precaution  to  vaccination,  although  persons  with
minor  illness  may  be  vaccinated.  Contraindications  to  combination  vaccines  that
contain DTaP include the contraindications to the individual component vaccines (e.g.,
IPV, hepatitis B, Hib), but specific ingredients might differ. DTaP-HepB-IPV (Pediarix) and
DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB
 (Vaxelis)
 vaccines
 contain
 yeast.
 Presentations
 of
 some
pertussis-containing
 vaccines
 contain
 latex
 rubber.
 DTaP-HepB-IPV
 (Pediarix),
DTaP-IPV/Hib (Pentacel), DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB (Vaxelis), DTaP-IPV (Kinrix), and DTaP-IPV
(Quadracel) contain neomycin and polymyxin B. DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB (Vaxelis) contains
streptomycin. Encephalopathy not attributable to another identifiable cause occurring
within 7 days after vaccination with DTaP, DTP, or Tdap is a contraindication for DTaP
and  Tdap  vaccination.  A  progressive  or  unstable  neurological  disorder,  uncontrolled
seizures, or progressive encephalopathy is a precaution for DTaP and Tdap vaccination.
For persons with a known or suspected neurologic condition, vaccination with DTaP or
Tdap should be delayed until the condition has been evaluated, treatment initiated, and
the  condition  stabilized.  These  conditions  include  the  presence  of  an  evolving
neurologic  disorder  (e.g.,  uncontrolled  epilepsy,  infantile  spasms,  and  progressive
encephalopathy);  a  history  of  seizures  that  has  not  been  evaluated;  or  a  neurologic
event  that  occurs  between  doses  of  vaccine.  A  family  history  of  seizures  or  other
neurologic  diseases,  or  stable  or  resolved  neurologic  conditions  (e.g.,  controlled
idiopathic epilepsy, cerebral palsy, developmental delay), are neither contraindications
nor precautions to DTaP or Tdap vaccination. Guillain-Barré syndrome within 6 weeks
after  a  previous  dose  of  tetanus  toxoid-containing  vaccine  is  a  precaution  for  DTaP,
Tdap, DT, and Td vaccination. A history of Arthus-type hypersensitivity reactions after a
previous dose of diphtheria toxoid-containing or tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine is a
precaution for DTaP, Tdap, DT, and Td vaccination; vaccination should be deferred until
at least 10 years have elapsed since the last tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine. DTaP
Tdap, Td DTaP vaccine may cause local reactions, such as pain, redness, or swelling.
Local reactions have been reported in 20% to 40% of children after each of the first 3
doses. Local reactions appear to be more frequent after the fourth and/or fifth doses.
Mild systemic reactions such as drowsiness, fretfulness, and low-grade fever may also
occur.  Temperature  of  101°F  or  higher  is  reported  in  3%  to  5%  of  DTaP  recipients.
These reactions are self-limited and can be managed with symptomatic treatment with
acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Moderate or severe systemic reactions (such as fever of
105°F  or  higher,  febrile  seizures,  persistent  crying  lasting  3  hours  or  longer,  and
hypotonic-hyporesponsive episodes) have been reported after administration of DTaP,
but occur less frequently than among children who received whole-cell DTP. Rates of
these  moderate  or  severe  systemic  reactions  vary  by  symptom  and  vaccine  but
generally  occur  in  fewer  than  1  in  10,000  doses.  Exaggerated  local  (Arthus-type)
reactions  are  rarely  reported  but  may  occur  following  receipt  of  a  vaccine  containing
diphtheria or tetanus toxoids. The most common adverse reaction following vaccination
with both brands of Tdap is a local reaction, such as pain (66% to 75%), redness (25%),
or  swelling  (21%)  at  the  site  of  injection.  Temperature  of  100.4°F  or  higher  was
reported  by  1.4%  to  5%  of  Tdap  recipients  and  1.1%  to  5%  of  Td  recipients.  Tdap
recipients  also  reported  a  variety  of  nonspecific  systemic  events,  such  as  headache,
fatigue and gastrointestinal symptoms. The Institute of Medicine reported in 2011 that
the evidence was inadequate to accept or reject a causal relation between receipt of
diphtheria
 toxoid
 and
 tetanus
 toxoid–containing
 vaccine
 and
 encephalitis,
encephalopathy,  infantile  spasms,  seizures,  ataxia,  autism,  acute  disseminated
encephalomyelitis,  transverse  myelitis,  optic  neuritis,  onset  of  multiple  sclerosis  in
adults, relapse of multiple sclerosis in adults, relapse of multiple sclerosis in children,
Guillain-Barré
 syndrome,
 chronic
 inflammatory
 disseminated
 polyneuropathy,
opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome, or Bell’s palsy. The most frequently reported adverse
events after DTaP in the Vaccine Adverse Effect Reporting System (VAERS) and Vaccine
Safety  Datalink  (VSD),  two  post-licensure  surveillance  systems,  were  consistent  with
observations from pre-licensure studies of these vaccines. When VAERS DTaP reports
for each vaccine brand were compared individually with reports for all other inactivated
vaccines  in  the  VAERS  database,  no  concerning  patterns  of  adverse  events  were
observed. Routine VAERS surveillance for and VSD studies on adverse events following
receipt of Tdap vaccines in persons aged 10 through 64 years have provided reassuring
data  consistent  with  the  prelicensure  clinical  trial  safety  data  and  have  not
demonstrated  any  associations  between  Tdap  and  the  following  rare  adverse  events:
encephalopathy-encephalitis-meningitis,  paralytic  syndromes,  seizures,  cranial  nerve
disorders, and Guillain-Barré syndrome. DTaP and Tdap vaccines should be maintained
at  refrigerator  temperature  between  2°C  and  8°C  (36°F  and  46°F).  Manufacturer
package  inserts  contain  additional  information.  For  complete  information  on  best
practices  and  recommendations,  please  refer  to  CDC’s  Vaccine  Storage  and  Handling
Toolkit  [3  MB,  65  pages].  For  information  on  guidance  for  state  and  local  health
department  staff  who  are  involved  in  surveillance  activities  for  vaccine-preventable
diseases,  please  consult  the  Manual  for  the  Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable
Diseases.  The  editors  would  like  to  acknowledge  Jennifer  Liang,  Stacey  Martin,  and
Cindy  Weinbaum  for  their  contributions  to  this  chapter.  American  Academy  of
Pediatrics. Pertussis. In: Kimberlin D, Brady M, Jackson M, et al., eds. Red Book: 2018
Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. 31st ed. Itasca, IL: American Academy
of  Pediatrics;2018:620–34.  CDC.  Prevention  of  pertussis,  tetanus,  and  diphtheria  with
vaccines  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization
 Practices
 (ACIP).
 MMWR
 2018;67(RR-2):1–44.
 CDC.
 Updated
recommendations  for  use  of  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid  and  acellular
pertussis vaccine (Tdap) in pregnant women and persons who have or anticipate having
close contact with an infant <12 months of age – Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices  (ACIP).  MMWR  2011;60(41):1424–6.  CDC.  Use  of  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced
diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccines:  updated  recommendations  of  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  —  United  States,  2019.  MMWR
2020;69(3):77–83.  Cherry  J,  The  epidemiology  of  pertussis:  a  comparison  of  the
epidemiology  of  the  disease  pertussis  with  the  epidemiology  of  Bordetella  pertussis
infection. Pediatrics 2005;115(5):1422–7. Edwards K, Decker M. Pertussis Vaccines. In:
Plotkin
 S,
 Orenstein
 W,
 Offit
 P,
 et
 al.,
 eds.
 Plotkin’s
 Vaccines.
 7th
 ed.
Elsevier;2018:711–61.  Elam-Evans  L,  Yankey  D,  Singleton  J,  et  al.  National,  Regional,
State, and Selected Local Area Vaccination Coverage Among Adolescents Aged 13–17
Years — United States, 2019. MMWR 2020;69(33):1109–16. Greenberg D. Pertussis in
adolescents: increasing incidence brings attention to the need for booster immunization
of  adolescents.  Pediatr  Infect  Dis  J  2005;24(8):721–8.  Skoff  T,  Hadler  S,  Hariri  S.  The
epidemiology  of  nationally  reported  pertussis  in  the  United  States,  2000–2016.  Clin
Infect Dis 2019 68(10):1634–40. Skoff T, Kenyon C, Cocoros N, et al. Sources of infant
pertussis infection in the United States. Pediatrics  2015;136(4):635–41. Ward J, Cherry
J,  Chang  S,  et  al.  Efficacy  of  an  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  among  adolescents  and
adults. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1555–63. Woo E, Burwen D, Gatumu SN, et al. Extensive
limb  swelling  after  immunization:  Reports  to  the  Vaccine  Adverse  Event  Reporting
System. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37(3):351–8. Yeung K, Duclos P, Nelson E, et al. An update
of the global burden of pertussis in children younger than 5 years: a modelling study.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17(9):974–80.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/pert.html
