A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Inappropriate use of antibiotics is an important consideration. CDC advises healthcare
providers to prescribe and people to use antibiotics only when necessary. This can help
reduce  antibiotic  resistance  and  protect  against  potential  antibiotic  side  effects.  CDC
supports  providing  PEP  especially  to   Within  families,  studies  demonstrate  that
secondary  attack  rates  are  high,  even  when  household  contacts  are  current  with
pertussis  vaccinations.   Consideration  can  also  be  given  to  providing  PEP  to  other
contacts. The following groups of people are at high risk of developing severe pertussis
infection: Infants: Severe and sometimes fatal pertussis-related complications occur in
infants under 12 months of age. This especially occurs among infants under 4 months
of  age.  People  with  pre-existing  health  conditions  that  may  be  exacerbated  by
pertussis:
 These
 people
 include,
 but
 are
 not
 limited
 to,
 people
 with
immunocompromising  conditions  or  moderate  to  severe  medically  treated  asthma.   
Those  who  will  have  contact  with  people  at  high  risk  of  developing  severe  pertussis
infection include: Pregnant women in third trimester: Women in their third trimester of
pregnancy may be a source of pertussis to their newborn infant. All people in high-risk
settings: This is focused in particular on settings that include infants under 12 months
of age or women in their third trimester of pregnancy. These settings include: A broader
use  of  PEP  may  be  appropriate  in  limited  closed  settings  when  However,  when
continued  transmission  of  pertussis  is  evident,  multiple  rounds  of  antibiotics  wouldn't
be  recommended.  Instead,  healthcare  providers  should  monitor  people  exposed  to
pertussis  for  onset  of  pertussis  signs  and  symptoms  for  21  days.    Extensive  contact
tracing  and  widespread  use  of  PEP  among  contacts  may  not  be  an  effective  use  of
limited  public  health  resources.  Antibiotics  may  prevent  pertussis  if  given  prior  to
symptom  onset.  However,  there  are  no  data  to  suggest  widespread  PEP  use  among
contacts  effectively  controls  or  limits  outbreaks.    Pertussis,  also  known  as  whooping
cough, can cause serious illness in people of all ages but is most dangerous for babies.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/php/postexposure-prophylaxis/index.html
