Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  September  16,  2016  /  65(36);981-982  On
September 13, 2016, this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. Carolyn
Brent1,2; Angela Dunn, MD3; Harry Savage, PhD4; Ary Faraji, PhD5; Mike Rubin, MD6;
Ilene  Risk,  MPA1;  Wendy  Garcia7;  Margaret  Cortese,  MD8;  Shannon  Novosad,  MD9;
Elisabeth  Raquel  Krow-Lucal,  PhD4;  Jacqueline  Crain2,3;  Mary  Hill,  MPH1;  Annette
Atkinson,  MS10;  Dallin  Peterson3;  Kimberly  Christensen10;  Melissa  Dimond,  MPH3;  J.
Erin Staples, MD4; Allyn Nakashima, MD3 (View author affiliations) Views equals page
views plus PDF downloads On July 12, 2016, the Utah Department of Health (UDOH) was
notified by a clinician caring for an adult (patient A) who was evaluated for fever, rash,
and  conjunctivitis  that  began  on  July  1.  Patient  A  had  not  traveled  to  an  area  with
ongoing Zika virus transmission; had not had sexual contact with a person who recently
traveled; and had not received a blood transfusion, organ transplant, or mosquito bites
(1).  Patient  A  provided  care  over  several  days  to  an  elderly  male  family  contact  (the
index  patient)  who  contracted  Zika  virus  abroad.  The  index  patient  developed  septic
shock with multiple organ failure and died in the hospital on June 25, 2016. The index
patient’s  blood  specimen  obtained  2  days  before  his  death  had  a  level  of  viremia
approximately  100,000  times  higher  than  the  average  level  reported  in  persons
infected with Zika virus (2). Zika virus infection was diagnosed in patient A by real-time
reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) testing on a urine specimen
collected 7 days after symptom onset. In addition, a serum specimen collected 11 days
after  symptom  onset,  after  patient  A’s  symptoms  had  resolved,  was  positive  for
antibodies  to  Zika  virus  by  Zika  immunoglobulin  M  (IgM)  capture  enzyme-linked
immunosorbent  assay  (MAC-ELISA)  and  had  neutralizing  antibodies  detected  by
plaque-reduction  neutralization  testing  (PRNT).  Working  with  Salt  Lake  and  Davis
County  Health  Departments,  UDOH  requested  assistance  from  CDC  with  an
investigation to determine patient A’s exposures and determine a probable source of
infection.  The  investigation  consisted  of  four  components:  1)  an  epidemiologic
evaluation  of  family  contacts  of  the  index  patient,  2)  a  serosurvey  of  health  care
workers who provided direct care to the index patient before his death, 3) a community
serosurvey  around  the  locations  where  the  index  patient  had  resided,  and  4)  active
vector  surveillance  near  the  residences  of  the  index  patient  and  patient  A.  For  the
purpose of this investigation, a family contact was defined as a person who resided in
the same household as the index patient or had direct contact with his body fluids (i.e.,
tears, conjunctival discharge, saliva, vomitus, urine, or stool) during the period when he
was  most  likely  viremic,  including  a  few  days  before  his  illness  onset  and  until  his
death. Nineteen family contacts, including patient A, were identified and interviewed,
and  provided  blood  or  urine  specimens  for  testing.  Thirteen  family  contacts  reported
hugging  and  kissing  the  index  patient’s  face.  Five  family  contacts  reported  being
present while the index patient’s stool, urine, or vomitus was being cleaned. Patient A
reported  hugging  and  kissing  the  index  patient,  in  a  similar  fashion  to  other  family
contacts,  and  assisted  hospital  personnel  in  holding  the  index  patient  while  his  stool
was being cleaned, but did not have direct contact with stool. Other than patient A, all
family  contacts  were  negative  for  Zika  virus  infection  by  rRT-PCR  or  MAC-ELISA  on
specimens  obtained  roughly  2–3  weeks  after  last  exposure.  Health  care  workers  who
provided care to the index patient and residents living within a 200-meter radius of the
two  homes  where  the  index  patient  resided  before  becoming  hospitalized  were
interviewed  to  assess  risk  factors  for  Zika  virus  infection  and  were  offered  Zika  virus
testing.  As  of  August  22,  86  health  care  worker  contacts  have  been  identified  and
interviewed to assess types of patient interactions and to quantify level of exposure to
the  index  patient’s  body  fluids.  A  total  of  238  households  were  approached,  and  all
available  and  consenting  household  members  were  interviewed  using  a  standardized
questionnaire  about  risk  factors  for  mosquito-borne  transmission.  All  health  care
workers and community members who provided blood specimens are being tested for
Zika virus IgM antibodies using a MAC-ELISA. Urine specimens were also collected from
any  persons  who  reported  Zika  virus-like  symptoms  in  the  14  days  before  their
interview. Testing is incomplete, but as of August 22 it has not revealed any persons
with  Zika  virus  infections.  Local  mosquito  abatement  districts  worked  in  collaboration
with vector entomologists from CDC to conduct larval and adult mosquito surveillance
near  the  index  patient’s  and  patient  A’s  residences.  Door-to-door  surveys  around
neighborhood  homes  were  conducted  and  a  variety  of  mosquito  traps  (e.g.,  Biogents
Sentinel,  gravid,  light  traps  baited  with  carbon  dioxide,  and  ovitraps)  were  deployed.
Larval specimens obtained in the field were reared to the adult stage for identification.
Adult mosquitoes are in the process of being identified and tested for Zika virus RNA by
rRT-PCR, but no Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus mosquitoes have been identified as
part  of  this  investigation.  It  remains  unclear  how  patient  A  was  infected;  however
patient A was known to have had close contact (i.e. kissing and hugging) with the index
patient while the index patient’s viral load was found to be very high. Although it is not
certain  that  these  types  of  close  contact  were  the  source  of  transmission,  family
contacts should be aware that blood and body fluids of severely ill patients might be
infectious. Given recognition of high levels of viremia during illness, it is essential that
health care workers continue to apply standard precautions while caring for all patients,
including  those  who  might  have  Zika  virus  disease  (3).  Top  Jeanmarie  Mayer,  MD,
Sankar Swaminathan, MD, University of Utah Hospital; Dagmar Vitek, MD, Tara Brunatti,
MSN-PH,  Andrea  Price,  RN,  Andrew  Dibb,  MPH,  Salt  Lake  County  Health  Department,
Utah;  Bryan  Burk,  Utah  Public  Health  Laboratory;  Greg  White,  PhD,  Salt  Lake  City
Mosquito  Abatement  District,  Utah;  Ryan  Lusty,  Magna  Mosquito  Abatement  District,
Utah; Brian Hougaard, Eric Gardner, MSc, South Salt Lake Valley Mosquito Abatement
District, Utah; Gary Hatch, Mosquito Abatement District Davis, Utah; Bryan Christensen,
PhD, Scott Fridkin, MD, Marvin Godsey, Jr., MS, Susan Hills, MBBS, Nina Johnson, Amy
Lambert, PhD, Kathy Seiber, MS, Ian Williams, MD; the Emergency Operation Center’s
Zika Virus Response, CDC. Top Corresponding author: Carolyn Brent, cbrent@slco.org,
385-468-3918. Top 1Salt Lake County Health Department, Salt Lake City, Utah; 2Public
Health  Associates  Program  Office,  The  Office  for  State,  Tribal,  Local  and  Territorial
Support,  CDC;  3Utah  Department  of  Health;  4Division  of  Vector-Borne  Diseases,
National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  5Salt  Lake  City
Mosquito  Abatement  District,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah;  6University  of  Utah  Hospital,  Salt
Lake City, Utah; 7Davis County Health Department, Clearfield, Utah; 8Division Of Viral
Diseases, National Center For Immunization And Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 9Division
of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious
Diseases, CDC; 10Utah Public Health Laboratory, Taylorsville, Utah. Top Top Suggested
citation for this article: Brent C, Dunn A, Savage H, et al.  Preliminary Findings from an
Investigation  of  Zika  Virus  Infection  in  a  Patient  with  No  Known  Risk  Factors  —  Utah,
2016.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2016;65:981-982.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6536e4. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6536e4.htm
