Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Before  a  model  of  tight-fitting  respirator  can  be  used  in  the
workplace, a qualitative or quantitative fit test must be performed to confirm that the
respirator forms a tight seal against the user’s face, ensuring that the user will receive
the expected level of protection. A qualitative fit test (QLFT) is a pass/fail test to assess
respirator  fit  based  on  a  worker’s  response  to  a  test  agent.  More  information  on  fit
testing
 is
 provided
 at:
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/topics/respirators/disp_part/respsource3fittest.html
The  agents  used  in  qualitative  fit  testing  are  usually  available  commercially  in
convenient,  ready-to-use  packaging  that  contains  premade  dilutions  of  the  reagents.
This  will  often  include  all  the  consumables  needed  to  perform  the  test  (stirrer,
absorbent paper, nebulizer, etc.). When these ready-to-use packages are not available,
the QLFT can be performed by using the required solutions prepared from commercially
available
 reagents.
 The
 Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health
 Administration
(OSHA)-accepted fit test protocols require that United States Pharmacopeia (USP)-grade
reagents be used in the preparation of all of the required solutions. Instructions to make
the OSHA-approved fit test and threshold check solutions for Saccharin Solution Aerosol
Protocol, Bitrex® (Denatonium Benzoate) Solution Aerosol Qualitative Fit Test Protocol,
and Isoamyl Acetate Protocol are provided below. Information on irritant smoke is not
provided here. The OSHA-accepted fit test protocols provide complete instructions for
conducting QLFTs with these agents. Test agents are used in a similar way in each of
the protocols: a worker is initially tested without wearing the respirator to ensure that
they are able to detect the agent by smell or taste. This is performed using a threshold
check solution that is a dilution of the fit test solution. After ensuring the worker can
smell or taste the agent, the worker puts on the respirator and fit testing is performed
using the fit test solution. If the worker is able to smell or taste the agent while wearing
the  respirator,  the  fit  test  fails  and  the  respirator  may  need  to  be  redonned  or
repositioned and retested. If a fit test continues to fail, the worker will need to be fitted
with  a  different  respirator.  The  instructions  provided  below  will  produce  the  two
solutions needed to conduct qualitative respirator fit testing in accordance with OSHA’s
Respiratory  Protection  Standard.  The  “fit  test  solution”  developed  from  these
instructions uses saccharin sodium dihydrate, not sodium saccharin anhydrous, and is
equivalent to the “fit test solution” listed at step(b)(5) of the Saccharin Solution Aerosol
Protocol from OSHA. The “threshold check solution” developed from these instructions
is  equivalent  to  the  “threshold  check  solution”  listed  as  step(a)(5)  of  the  Saccharin
Solution  Aerosol  Protocol  from  OSHA.  The  instructions  make  about  100mL  of  fit  test
solution  and  100mL  of  threshold  check  solution.  This  is  expected  to  be  enough  to
complete about 30‒70 qualitative fit tests. The instructions provided below will produce
the two solutions needed to conduct qualitative respirator fit testing in accordance with
OSHA’s  Respiratory  Protection  Standard.  These  instructions  make  about  200mL  of  fit
test solution and 100mL of threshold check solution. This is expected to be enough to
complete about 30‒70 qualitative fit tests. The number of qualitative fit tests that can
be performed depends on a host of factors. Administering this fit test requires the use
of two nebulizers (one for the threshold check solution and one for the fit test solution)
with 1mL of solution in each. Several fit tests can be performed using these nebulizers,
but the nebulizers should be thoroughly rinsed with water, shaken dry, and refilled at
least  every  four  hours  as  listed  in  step(a)(14)  of  the  Bitrex®  (Denatonium  Benzoate)
Solution Aerosol Fit Test Protocol from OSHA. This chemical is considered hazardous by
the  2012  OSHA  Hazard  Communication  Standard  (29  CFR  1910.1200).  Creating  a
mixture of Denatonium Benzoate in a secondary container requires a Secondary Label
that  includes  the  identity  of  the  hazardous  chemical  within  the  container  and  the
hazards the components present. For convenience, Figure 1 provides suggested labels.
Do NOT use tap water, spring water, or mineral water. Preparation of 5% NaCl Solution
This solution is used as an intermediate solution for the preparation of the final fit test
solution and the final threshold check solution. Preparation of Fit Test Solution Stir well,
ensuring  that  all  of  the  solids  dissolve.  If  necessary,  apply  gentle  heat  (the  solution
should not exceed 45°C or 113°F) while stirring to help dissolve the solids. This your
final  fit  test  solution.  Preparation  of  Threshold  Check  Solution   Figure  1:  Denatonium
Benzoate  Solutions  Secondary  Labels.  The  label  on  the  left  should  be  printed  and
attached to container 2 for the Denatonium Benzoate fit test solution. The label on the
right  should  be  printed  and  attached  to  container  3  for  the  Denatonium  Benzoate
threshold check solution. Image NOTE: label originated from the Fisher Scientific SDS
for denatonium benzoate This is not to be used for filtering facepiece respirators such
as N95® or P100® The isoamyl acetate protocol, commonly referred to as banana oil,
is  not  appropriate  to  use  for  the  qualitative  fit  testing  of  particulate  respirators,
including  any  filtering  facepiece  respirators  (e.g.,  N95®,  P100®).  Elastomeric
respirators  fit  tested  with  the  IAA  protocol,  must  be  equipped  with  an  organic  vapor
filter/cartridge.  The  instructions  provided  below  will  produce  the  solutions  needed  to
conduct  qualitative  respirator  fit  testing  in  accordance  with  OSHA’s  Respiratory
Protection Standard. The solution used to determine the worker’s ability to detect the
odor of the IAA is named “odor test solution” and is made by diluting the pure reagents
as described below. The pure reagent (straight from its original container) is applied to
a paper towel (or similar porous material) during the qualitative fit test. This document
was prepared by Michelangelo Di Giuseppe, Jonisha Pollard, William King, and Evanly Vo
of  the  National  Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory,  National  Institute  for
Occupational  Safety  and  Health.  NIOSH  [2018].  Healthcare  respiratory  protection
resources. Pittsburgh, PA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,
National
 Personal
 Protective
 Technology
 Laboratory.
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/hospresptoolkit/fittesting.html  OSHA  [2004].  Appendix
A  to  §1910.134—Fit  testing  procedures  (mandatory).  Part  I.  OSHA―Accepted  fit  test
protocols.
 A.
 Fit
 testing
 procedures—general
 requirements.
 Washington,
 DC:
Department
 of
 Labor,
 Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health
 Administration.
https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134AppA  N95
is  a  certification  mark  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS)
registered  in  the  United  States  and  several  international  jurisdictions.  P100  is  a
certification  mark  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS)
registered in the United States. Bitrex is a registered trademark of Macfarlan Smith Ltd.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/QualitativeFitTesting.html
