A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Stay home and away from others (including people you live with who are not sick) if
you  have  respiratory  virus  symptoms  that  aren't  better  explained  by  another  cause.
These symptoms can include fever, chills, fatigue, cough, runny nose, and headache,
among others.* For illustrative purposes, not to scale  You may be contagious. For the
next  5  days:  take  added  precaution,  such  as  taking  additional  steps  for  cleaner  air,
hygiene,  masks,  physical  distancing,  and/or  testing  when  you  will  be  around  other
people indoors. This is especially important to protect people with factors that increase
their risk of severe illness from respiratory viruses. When you have a respiratory virus
infection, you can spread it to others. How long someone can spread the virus depends
on  different  factors,  including  how  sick  they  are  (severity)  and  how  long  their  illness
lasts (duration), This is not the same for everyone. When, for at least 24 hours, your
symptoms are getting better overall and you have not had a fever (and are not using
fever-reducing  medication),  you  are  typically  less  contagious,  but  it  still  takes  more
time for your body to fully get rid of the virus. During this time, you may still be able to
spread the virus to others. Using precautions for the next 5 days can help reduce this
risk.  After  this  5-day  period,  you  are  typically  much  less  likely  to  be  contagious.
However,  some  people,  especially  people  with  weakened  immune  systems,  can
continue  to  spread  the  virus  for  a  longer  period  of  time.  For  COVID-19,  taking  an
antigen test can help you know how likely you are to spread the virus. A positive test
tends to mean it is more likely that you can spread the virus to others. *Symptoms may
include  but  are  not  limited  to  chest  discomfort,  chills,  cough,  decrease  in  appetite,
diarrhea, fatigue (tiredness), fever or feeling feverish, headache, muscle or body aches,
new  loss  of  taste  or  smell,  runny  or  stuffy  nose,  sneezing,  sore  throat,  vomiting,
weakness, wheezing. Respiratory illnesses affect the lungs and airways. Get information
on common causes, prevention actions, and current levels of illness in your community.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/respiratory-viruses/prevention/precautions-when-sick.html
