Volume  10  —  July  03,  2013  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Winston  CP,  Sallis  JF,
Swartz MD, Hoelscher DM, Peskin MF. Consumer Nutrition Environments of Hospitals: An
Exploratory  Analysis  Using  the  Hospital  Nutrition  Environment  Scan  for  Cafeterias,
Vending Machines, and Gift Shops, 2012. Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:120335. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd10.120335. PEER REVIVEWED Introduction
Hospitals  are  the  primary  worksite  of  over  5  million  adults  in  the  United  States,  and
millions of meals are procured and consumed in this setting. Because many worksite
nutrition  initiatives  use  an  ecological  framework  to  improve  the  dietary  habits  of
employees,  the  nutrition  values  of  foods  served  in  hospitals  is  receiving  attention.
Methods
This  study  used  the  Hospital  Nutrition  Environment  Scan  for  Cafeterias,  Vending
Machines,  and  Gift  Shops  to  quantitatively  describe  the  consumer  nutrition
environments  of  39  hospitals  in  Southern  California.  Data  were  collected  by  visiting
each facility once from February 2012 through May 2012. Results
On average, hospitals achieved only 29%, 33%, and less than 1% of the total possible
points  for  their  cafeteria,  vending  machines,  and  gift  shops  sections,  respectively;
overall,  hospitals  scored  25%  of  the  total  possible  points.  Large  facility  size  and
contracted  food  service  operations  were  associated  with  some  healthy  practices  in
hospital  cafeterias,  but  we  found  no  association  between  these  variables  and  the
sectional or overall nutrition composite scores. Conclusion
The average consumer nutrition environment of hospitals in this sample was minimally
conducive to healthful eating. Nutrition-related interventions are warranted in hospital
settings. Top of Page Public health practitioners use science-based theoretical models
to  guide  the  development  of  behavior  change  interventions  (1–3).  When  crafting
interventions for complex behaviors such as dietary intake, individual-level models may
not  address  all  behavioral  antecedents  as  effectively  as  comprehensive,  multilevel
approaches (4). The ecological framework, a model recommended for nutrition-related
interventions,  is  one  comprehensive  approach,  and  it  posits  4  levels  of  influence  on
dietary behaviors: individual factors, social environments, physical environments, and
macro-level  environments  (5).  Over  the  past  decade,  one  of  the  4  levels  of  the
ecological  model,  the  physical  environment,  has  become  a  major  target  for
nutrition-related  interventions  (6,7).  Four  physical  environments  (consumer  nutrition
environment,  organizational  nutrition  environment,  community  nutrition  environment
and  information  environment)  have  been  described  (6)  that  align  with  Story  et  al’s
ecological  framework  (5).  These  4  environments  collectively  describe  the  greater
nutrition  environment.  Government  and  organizational  policies  influence  these  4
environments which, in turn, may also affect eating behaviors directly. The consumer
nutrition environment describes what a person encounters when visiting a food service
outlet.  The  consumer  nutrition  environment  can  be  captured  by  observing  what
healthful  food  choices  are  available,  comparing  price  differentials  between  healthful
and unhealthful foods, and describing the placement and promotion of healthful foods.
Consumer nutrition environments of commonly accessed food outlets have previously
been described by using tools such as the Nutrition Environment Measures Survey for
Restaurants (NEMS-R), for Stores (NEMS-S) and for Vending (NEMS-V); all of these tools
have  demonstrated  acceptable  psychometric  properties  (8–10).  Although  restaurants,
stores,  and  vending  machines  are  common  food  service  outlets  for  community
members,  worksite  cafeterias,  vending  machines,  and  snack  shops  are  common  food
service outlets for working adults. Because more than 5 million adults currently work in
US hospitals (11), the consumer nutrition environment of this setting could play a major
role in influencing the diets of a large population of US adults. The consumer nutrition
environment  of  hospitals  is  unique  in  that  it  is  typically  composed  of  multiple  food
outlets (eg, cafeteria, vending machines, gift shops), and in some hospitals, each outlet
may be managed by a different hospital department or contracted company. Each of
these  outlets  plays  a  critical  role  in  determining  the  overall  consumer  nutrition
environment,  and  each  operation  should  be  assessed  when  using  an  ecological
approach for workplace interventions related to the consumer nutrition environment. In
2011 our research team adapted a comprehensive measurement tool for assessing the
consumer nutrition environment of hospital settings. The outcome of this collaboration
was the Hospital Nutrition Environment Scan for Cafeterias, Vending Machines, and Gift
Shops (HNES). After rigorous scientific testing, this tool was found to have acceptable
reliability  metrics  (12).  Given  the  emerging  interest  in  improving  hospitals’  consumer
nutrition environments (13–18), HNES has several implications for public health, health
care systems, and worksite wellness. Our study used HNES to quantitatively describe
the current state of consumer nutrition environments (ie, cafeterias, vending machines,
and  gift  shops)  in  a  diverse  sample  of  39  Southern  California  hospitals.  Prevalence
estimates  were  used  to  determine  the  percentage  of  hospitals  engaging  in  healthful
nutrition  practices  and  to  specify  which  practices  were  most  and  least  commonly
implemented.  The  study  also  examined  associations  among  recommended  nutrition
practices,  hospital  facility  size,  and  the  type  of  management  used  in  food  service
operations  (ie,  internally  operated  vs  contracted  food  service  management).  We
hypothesized that larger facilities would have more financial and human resources to
assist with creating a good consumer nutrition environment. Likewise, we hypothesized
that  cafeterias  with  contracted  food  service  operations  would  have  higher  nutrition
composite  scores,  because  contracted  companies  have  more  regional  and  national
resources than smaller, internally managed food service departments. Also, contracts
with outside providers could possibly include specifications for better healthfulness or
nutrition  content  of  food  offerings.  Associations  between  hospital  nutrition  composite
scores  and  socioeconomic  characteristics  of  the  hospital  neighborhoods  were  also
explored in this study. Previous studies of nutrition environments have suggested a link
between neighborhood socioeconomic indicators and the availability of healthful foods
(19,20).  However,  such  associations  have  not  been  explored  between  hospital
neighborhoods and the hospital nutrition environment. We hypothesized that hospitals
in census tracts with high socioeconomic status would have higher nutrition composite
scores because they serve more affluent populations who may expect or demand more
healthful  foods.  Top  of  Page  This  study  was  a  cross-sectional,  descriptive  survey  of
acute-care  hospitals  in  Southern  California:  San  Diego,  Los  Angeles,  San  Bernadino,
Orange, and Riverside counties. A convenience sample of 39 hospitals was surveyed,
and hospitals were primarily selected on the basis of their proximity to research staff
and  other  hospitals  and  geographic  locale.  Only  hospitals  with  Joint  Commission
accreditation were included. Although the hospitals constituted a convenience sample,
they represented a variety of community locales (eg, suburban, urban, rural), hospital
types (eg, academic/teaching, community, tertiary), and hospital sizes (eg, licensed bed
count, number of employees). Adapted from NEMS and developed in collaboration with
multiple public health agencies and partners, HNES is a nutrition environment survey
that has demonstrated face and content validity. The scan includes sections that assess
3 common hospital food service outlets: cafeterias, vending machines, and gift shops.
HNES  demonstrated  good  inter-rater  reliability  with  74%  to  100%  interobserver
agreement,  κ  statistics  of  0.48  to  1.0  for  individual  questions,  and  an  intraclass
correlation  coefficient  of  0.961  for  the  overall  nutrition  composite  score  (12).  Each
section  of  HNES  asks  a  variety  of  environmental  questions  that  can  be  answered  by
single  observation.  Sections  begin  with  questions  pertaining  to  facilitators  of  and
barriers to healthful eating (eg, “Are there signs or displays that encourage healthful
eating?”).  Each  section  also  contains  questions  on  pricing  strategies  (eg,  pricing
differentials  for  healthful  vs  unhealthful  items)  and  on  advertising  promotions  for
healthful  foods  and  beverages.  HNES  also  assessed  the  healthfulness  of  foods  and
beverages at the point of purchase and calculated the percentages of shelf space for
healthful  items.  HNES  criteria  for  healthful  foods  and  beverages  are  congruent  with
criteria  used  in  other  NEMS  surveys  (8–10).  Questions  about  the  consumer  nutrition
environment  are  weighted  according  to  their  relevance  to  nutrition  environment
constructs  and  are  based  on  points  derived  from  the  observed  environments.  A
nutrition composite score is calculated for the 3 sections of HNES. The overall nutrition
composite  score  for  the  hospital  is  the  sum  of  scores  for  all  3  sections:  cafeteria,
vending machines, and gift shops. The maximum overall score is 177 points, and the
maximum section scores are 85, 60, and 32 points for the cafeteria, vending machines,
and gift shop sections, respectively. All hospitals were surveyed from February through
May 2012, and during the survey, data were collected by raters who were fully trained
on HNES. Rater training consisted of individual instruction, field practice, and review of
practice  observations.  Demographic  information  for  each  hospital  (eg,  licensed
bed-count,  facility  type,  number  of  employees)  was  gathered  from  credible  Internet
resources (eg, the Joint Commission’s website) or from personal communication with a
hospital administrator. All data analyses were conducted by using SPSS Statistics 18.0
(IBM Corp, Chicago, Illinois). For each section (cafeteria, vending machine, gift shop),
HNES  results  were  interpreted  by  descriptive  statistics  (ie,  mean,  standard  deviation,
minimum and maximum) for the continuous variables and by frequency distribution for
the  categorical  variables.  To  detect  differences  among  groups,  we  performed  t  tests,
χ2, and Fisher’s exact tests for continuous and categorical data to detect differences
among  the  3  sections  (cafeteria,  vending,  gift  shop).  To  evaluate  the  relationship
between nutrition composite scores and socioeconomic indicators of the census tract in
which the hospital is located, normality was assessed and Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficients  were  calculated.  Post  hoc  tests  were  performed  to  account  for  multiple
comparisons. All significance levels were set at P <.05. The University of Texas Health
Science Center Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects exempted this study
from internal review board approval given that no human subjects were involved and
that all data collected were observed in publicly available spaces. Top of Page About
half of the hospitals surveyed in this study were located in an urban area, and about
half  were  in  a  census  tract  in  which  median  annual  household  income  was  below
$60,000  per  year  (Table  1).  Two-thirds  of  the  facilities  were  considered  general  or
community  hospitals,  and  the  remainder  were  classified  as  tertiary  care,  specialty,
psychiatric or “other.” Two-thirds of the hospitals had 1,000 to 5,000 employees, and
most  hospitals  had  fewer  than  500  licensed  beds.  We  calculated  the  mean  nutrition
composite  scores  for  the  overall  hospital  and  for  the  individual  HNES  sections  (ie,
cafeteria, vending machines, and gift shops) in absolute numbers and in percentages of
the  total  possible  points  (Table  2).  The  overall  nutrition  composite  score  was  a
combination  of  the  3  individual  sections,  and  for  this  score,  hospitals  averaged  less
than 25% of the total possible points. On average, hospitals scored a higher percentage
on the vending machines section than on the cafeteria or gift shop sections. The mean
gift  shop  score  was  below  zero  because  of  the  numerous  deductions  made  for
unhealthful food and beverage options. No relationship was detected between hospital
bed size and the overall or individual-section nutrition composite scores. There was also
no  association  between  contracted  food  service  operations  and  the  overall  or
individual-section  nutrition  composite  scores.  No  significant  relationship  was  detected
between  overall  nutrition  composite  score  and  the  median  income  of  the  hospital
neighborhood.  In  addition,  there  was  no  significant  relationship  between  overall
nutrition  composite  score  and  the  education  status  of  people  living  in  the  hospital
neighborhood.  Our  assessment  of  the  prevalence  of  healthful  practices  in  hospital
cafeterias by facility size and by contracted operations (Table 3) showed that almost all
of  the  facilities  sold  fresh  fruit  in  their  cafeterias;  however,  only  about  half  of  the
facilities offered a nonfried vegetable on their hot entrée line. Fewer than half of the
cafeterias  designated  most  shelf  space  for  healthful  items  such  as  low-sugar  cereals,
baked chips, and 100% juice, and only 15% of cafeterias kept unhealthful items away
from  the  point  of  purchase.  Large  facility  size  (>300  licensed  beds)  was  significantly
associated with having icons indicating a healthful item on cafeteria menu items and
with identifying items on the menu or in stalls as being healthful or “light.” Having a
contracted  food  service  operation  in  the  cafeteria  was  significantly  associated  with
having  a  healthful  combination  meal  available  and  with  having  nutrition  information
posted in the cafeteria. There were no other significant differences detected between
healthful  cafeteria  practices  and  the  facility  size  or  having  a  contracted  food  service
operation;  however,  the  lack  of  significance  could  have  been  because  some  of  the
healthful practices were detected in only a small number of facilities. Top of Page This
study  is  the  first  to  use  a  reliable  research  instrument  to  quantitatively  describe  the
consumer  nutrition  environment  of  hospital  cafeterias,  vending  machines,  and  gift
shops. Overall, hospitals received a higher percentage score on the vending machine
section  than  on  the  cafeteria  or  gift  shop  section,  which  indicates  that  there  is  more
opportunity to improve promotion of health and nutrition in the cafeteria and gift shop
venues.  Hospitals  scored  less  than  1%  of  the  total  possible  points  in  the  gift  shop
section,  indicating  a  particularly  poor  consumer  nutrition  environment  that  warrants
better nutrition promotion. Some of the healthful practices observed in the cafeterias
were  associated  with  large  facility  size  and  with  having  a  contracted  food  service
operation; however, many healthful practices were present in only a small percentage
of  facilities  surveyed.  For  example,  only  7.7%  of  hospitals  surveyed  were  promoting
healthful  items  with  signage  in  the  cafeteria,  and  only  15.4%  of  cafeterias  had  no
unhealthful  items  near  the  point  of  purchase.  These  results  indicated  that  hospitals
have  many  opportunities  to  improve  their  consumer  nutrition  environments  and  that
interventions  targeting  the  consumer  nutrition  environments  of  hospital  settings  are
warranted. A recent study found similar consumer nutrition environments in children’s
hospitals  across  California  (21),  and  Lesser  et  al  concluded  that  much  nutrition
intervention  is  needed  to  improve  the  nutrition  environments  of  children’s-hospital
cafeterias. Our findings suggest that poor nutrition environments are not exclusive to
cafeterias  in  children’s  hospitals.  Our  study’s  findings  indicate  that  cafeterias  in
hospitals  that  serve  all  populations,  not  just  pediatric  populations,  are  in  need  of
interventions  to  improve  their  consumer  nutrition  environments.  In  addition,  hospital
vending  machines  and  hospital  gift  shops  also  warrant  nutrition-improvement
interventions.  The  lowest  sectional  nutrition  composite  scores  were  found  in  hospital
gift shops. Almost all gift shops surveyed in this study were staffed by volunteers and
were  managed  through  volunteer  service  departments.  Because  registered  dietitians
are  not  typically  staffed  in  volunteer  services  departments  and  because  these
departments  are  not  usually  involved  in  quantity  food  procurement  and  preparation,
the poor nutrition composite scores from this section were not entirely surprising. Gift
shops  often  serve  as  a  source  of  revenue  for  hospitals;  thus,  items  with  high  profit
margins, such as candy and soft drinks, are readily available. Some gift shops, however,
did  score  points  for  having  small  serving  sizes  available  (eg,  individually  wrapped
chocolates instead of large boxes of chocolates) and for limiting the unhealthful items
available  within  5  feet  of  the  point  of  purchase.  Several  hospitals  also  increased  the
price of unhealthful items to offset a lower price on more healthful items. Such pricing
differentials  were  also  observed  in  both  the  cafeteria  and  in  the  vending  machines
sections.  Large  hospital  cafeterias  displayed  healthful-choice  icons  on  their  cafeteria
menus  more  than  small  hospital  cafeterias,  and  this  may  be  because  large  hospitals
have more financial and human resources than small hospitals and are therefore able
to implement menu-labeling programs. Having contracted food service operations was
associated  with  having  nutrition  information  posted  in  hospital  cafeterias,  whereas
having internally managed food service operations was not. This could be explained by
the  fact  that  most  contract  food  service  companies  have  regional  or  national  offices
that  employ  dietitians  and  other  staff  members  to  develop,  analyze,  and  distribute
menu  and  nutrition  information  to  facilities  across  their  associated  territories.  In
contrast, internally operated hospital food service departments typically develop their
own cafeteria menus, and these departments may not have the human resources or the
sophisticated software programs to perform nutrient analyses on all items served. For
this reason, internally operated food service departments could consider using recipes
that have already been analyzed, or they could consider temporarily contracting with a
registered  dietitian  to  perform  recipe  analyses  for  their  commonly  served  items  to
ensure  that  nutrition  information  is  readily  available  to  the  consumer  at  the  point  of
purchase.  As  a  first  look  at  the  hospital  consumer  nutrition  environment,  this  study
provides  detailed  information  about  potential  areas  of  need  and  opportunities  for
improvement.  However,  the  study  was  underpowered  to  detect  minor  differences
between  nutrition  composite  scores  and  facility  size  or  food  service  operations
management.  As  such,  future  studies  should  consider  surveying  more  hospitals  to
stratify results and detect small-scale differences in consumer nutrition environments.
In addition, the HNES and its sections do not currently have specific cut-off points for
what  constitutes  a  minimally,  moderately,  or  highly  healthful  environment.  As  more
facilities implement nutrition strategies and conduct the scan to evaluate intervention
results, these cut-off points should be developed for interpretation purposes. Given the
gap in information about consumer nutrition environments in hospitals, the results of
our study are the first to give public health practitioners insight into the current state of
hospital  consumer  nutrition  environments.  Although  one  recent  study  did  use  an
adapted NEMS tool to analyze 14 children’s hospital cafeterias (20), the present study
was the first to use HNES to analyze a variety of food service operations (ie, cafeterias,
vending machines, and gift shops) in a large, diverse sample of hospitals. The results
from the current study can be used to inform initiatives aimed at nutrition promotion in
this setting and to help hospital managers and administrators identify ways to improve
their own facility’s consumer nutrition environment.  The study has several limitations.
Given that the sample of hospitals surveyed was a convenience sample from a limited
geographic  location,  the  findings  may  not  be  generalizable  to  hospitals  across  the
United  States.  California  is  home  to  a  wide  variety  of  produce  farms  (22),  and  many
California farmers are involved in local sourcing projects. As such, it is possible that the
hospitals surveyed in this study may have better access to fresh produce than hospitals
in other geographic locations. In addition, most of the hospitals surveyed in this study
were in urban or suburban areas. Because of their location, they had fairly easy access
to professional and business resources (eg, multiple food service distribution centers,
large  food  procurement  companies),  which  may  not  be  as  accessible  to  hospitals  in
rural  areas.  Ours  is  the  first  study  to  explore  and  quantitatively  analyze  multiple
consumer nutrition environments of hospitals by using a valid and reliable instrument,
HNES.  The  individual  section  and  overall  nutrition  composite  scores  reported  in  this
study  establish  a  baseline  of  data  against  which  other  hospitals  and  health  care
systems  can  compare  their  own  scores.  Overall,  hospitals  typically  scored  less  than
one-fourth  of  the  total  HNES  nutrition  composite  score  points;  they  also  scored  less
than  1%  of  possible  points  in  the  gift  shop  section  and  approximately  one-third  of
possible  points  on  the  vending  machine  section.  These  data  may  also  be  useful  in
establishing  a  national  database  so  that  ecology-based  initiatives  know  what  specific
environments should be targeted in the hospital setting. Our hope is that health care
systems will use the HNES tool and the data presented in this study to inform their own
food  service  operations  and  to  improve  the  consumer  nutrition  environments  of
hospitals across the United States. Top of Page The authors acknowledge the assistance
of  Anjali  Patel,  Kristin  Hirahtake,  Alejandra  Oceguara,  and  Helena  Machaj.  They  also
acknowledge  Brook  Belay,  MD,  MPH,  Medical  Officer,  Division  of  Nutrition,  Physical
Activity, and Obesity, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, for his assistance in
providing  public  health  expertise.  Top  of  Page  Corresponding  Author:  Courtney  P.
Winston,  DrPH,  RD,  LD,  CDE,  6300  Stevenson  Ave,  #1005,  Alexandria,  VA  22304.
Telephone: 619-325-9414. E-mail: 
courtneywinston@hotmail.com.  Author  Affiliations:  James  F.  Sallis,  Division  of
Behavioral  Medicine,  University  of  California,  San  Diego,  and  Active  Living  Research,
San Diego, California; Michael D. Swartz, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at  Houston,  Houston,  Texas;  Deanna  M.  Hoelscher,  Michael  &  Susan  Dell  Center  for
Healthy Living and University of Texas School of Public Health, Austin, Texas; Melissa F.
Peskin, University of Texas Prevention Research Center and University of Texas Health
Science Center School of Public Health, Houston, Texas. Top of Page Top of Page   a
High nutrition composite scores indicate a favorable consumer nutrition environment.  
a P < .05. Significance was set at P < .05.b P < .01. Significance was set at P < .05. Top
of  Page  The  opinions  expressed  by  authors  contributing  to  this  journal  do  not
necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the  Public  Health  Service,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  or  the
authors' affiliated institutions.
 How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2013/12_0335.htm
