Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Illicit  fentanyl  and  its  analogues  (for  the  purpose  of  this
document, referred to as illicit fentanyl) pose a potential hazard to healthcare personnel
who could come into contact with these drugs in the course of their work in hospital and
clinic settings. This potential risk, which is related to external sources of fentanyl (i.e.,
originating  in  the  community),  is  distinct  from  the  hazards  posed  by  diversion  of
pharmaceutical fentanyl (which is used in many healthcare settings as part of routine
patient care; see for information related to drug diversion). Healthcare personnel who
could  potentially  be  exposed  to  illicit  fentanyl  include  nurses,  nursing  assistants,
physicians, technicians, therapists, phlebotomists, pharmacists, students, and trainees.
Healthcare personnel not directly involved in patient care, but who could be potentially
be  exposed  to  illicit  fentanyl  in  the  healthcare  setting,  include  clerical,  dietary,
environmental  services,  laundry,  security,  engineering  and  facilities  management,
administrative,  billing,  and  volunteer  personnel.  Possible  exposure  routes  to  illicit
fentanyl vary based on the source and form of the drug. Healthcare personnel might be
exposed when the patient or their personal items are contaminated with illicit fentanyl,
which may be present in powder, tablet, or liquid forms. While the clinical findings for a
person  presenting  with  fentanyl  (or  other  opioid  overdose)  may  be  wide-ranging,
respiratory  depression  or  arrest,  disorientation  or  stupor,  and  pinpoint  pupils  (miosis)
generally suggest severe opioid toxicity. Potential exposure routes of greatest concern
include  inhalation  of  powders  or  aerosols,  mucous  membrane  contact,  ingestion,  or
exposure  secondary  to  a  break  in  the  skin  (for  example  a  needlestick).  Any  of  these
exposure  routes  can  potentially  result  in  a  variety  of  symptoms  that  can  include  the
rapid  onset  of  life-threatening  respiratory  depression.  Skin  contact  is  also  a  potential
exposure route, but is not likely to lead to overdose unless exposures are to liquid or to
a powder over an extended period of time. Brief skin contact with illicit fentanyl is not
expected to lead to toxic effects if any visible contamination is promptly removed. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has no occupational exposure data
on illicit fentanyl for workers potentially exposed in the course of their job duties. There
are no established federal or consensus occupational exposure limits for illicit fentanyl.
These  recommendations  are  based  on  the  reported  toxicity  and  the  chemical  and
physical  properties  of  illicit  fentanyl;  CDC’s  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety
and  Health  (NIOSH)  guidance  for  other  similar  chemicals  (or  in  the  same  family);
recommendations  from  previous  NIOSH  health  hazard  evaluation  reports  about  law
enforcement  personnel  exposures  to  other  drugs  and  chemicals;  and  the  basic
principles  of  industrial  hygiene.  As  new  research  becomes  available,  these
recommendations will be updated. The following work practices should be established
and followed when illicit fentanyl is known or potentially present on patients presenting
for healthcare with or without symptoms of opioid exposure.  These work practices are
recommended along with decontamination procedures and use of personal protective
equipment (PPE) noted below. Personnel in healthcare facilities who perform jobs where
illicit fentanyl is reasonably anticipated to be present should receive special training in
how to conduct a risk assessment and demonstrate an understanding of the following
elements. Whether as part of a formal or informal triage process, healthcare personnel
should  incorporate  the  following  training  elements  into  the  initial  part  of  the  patient
assessment  process  to  help  guide  subsequent  actions  related  to  minimizing  potential
exposure to illicit fentanyl: Healthcare personnel may be at increased risk of exposure
to  illicit  fentanyl  if  small  amounts  of  fentanyl  products  are  visible  on  the  patient,
clothing, or possessions. In this case, healthcare personnel would use the following PPE:
It is important to recognize that the healthcare personnel’s potential for exposure may
change during the patient encounter or stay in a healthcare facility, and PPE for these
purposes should be adjusted accordingly. For situations in which no fentanyl products
are visible on the patient, clothing, or possessions, the PPE noted above would not be
recommended. Additionally, the PPE noted above would no longer be recommended if
decontamination was performed as recommended below. In all cases, employers should
identify  hazards  to  which  their  personnel  might  be  exposed  and  provide  appropriate
PPE to protect them. All PPE should be used in accordance with the Occupational Safety
and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  PPE  standard  (29  CFR  1910.132).  When  required,
respirator  use  should  be  in  the  context  of  a  comprehensive  respiratory  protection
program  in  accordance  with  the  OSHA  Respiratory  Protection  Standard  (29  CFR
1910.134) and other requirements. Healthcare personnel who need to wear respirators
should  be  medically  cleared,  trained,  and  fit-tested  for  respirator  use.  Detailed
information on respiratory protection programs, including fit-testing procedures, can be
accessed
 in
 OSHA’s
 Respiratory
 Protection
 eTool
 .
 Patients
 who
 may
 be
contaminated5  and  healthcare  personnel  who  come  into  contact  with  illicit  fentanyl
should immediately remove clothing and use soap and water to thoroughly wash and
rinse  potentially  contaminated  skin.  They  should  avoid  breaking  the  skin  during  the
decontamination  process  and  they  should  cover  all  open  wounds.  Do  not  use
alcohol-based  hand  rubs  or  bleach  solutions  to  clean  contaminated  skin.  All
contaminated  clothing  should  be  removed,  segregated  from  other  laundry,  and
laundered  at  the  healthcare  facility  when  possible,  being  careful  not  to  disturb  any
areas of contamination. Employers should establish policies and staffing to ensure that
healthcare  personnel  shower  and  change  clothing  immediately  after  a  potential
exposure. Decontamination of reusable PPE and equipment should be done according
to  the  manufacturer’s  recommendations.  Contaminated  single  use  PPE  should  be
placed  in  labeled  durable  6  mil  polyethylene  bags  and  disposed  of  appropriately.
Laundering  (laundry  may  include  bed  sheets  and  blankets,  towels,  personal  clothing,
patient  apparel,  uniforms,  scrubs,  and  gowns)  should  be  done  in  a  manner  that
minimizes  disturbance  of  any  areas  of  contamination  and  segregates  contaminated
laundry, allowing it to be handled safely. Laundering in a healthcare facility should be
done  in  accordance  with  the  Laundry  and  Bedding  section  in  the  CDC  Guidelines  for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities.  Routine  cleaning  of  work
surfaces  and  rooms  in  healthcare  facilities  should  be  done  in  accordance  with  the
Principles  of  Cleaning  and  Disinfecting  Environmental  Surfaces  section  of  the  CDC
Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities.  Surfaces
suspected or know to be contaminated with illicit fentanyl that are able to be cleaned
(such  as  hard,  non-porous  surfaces)  should  first  be  washed  with  soap  and  water  as
outlined  in  the  Cleaning  Housekeeping  Surfaces  section  before  using  a  disinfectant
(such  as  bleach).  Any  activity  which  could  result  in  making  an  unknown  contaminant
airborne (such as dry sweeping or vacuuming with a standard vacuum) should not be
performed. A high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter vacuum should be used when
sweeping  or  vacuuming  is  required.  [1]  Standard  precautions  are  used  for  all  patient
care  (https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/basics/standard-precautions.html).  Standard
precautions  are  intended  to  protect  healthcare  personnel  from  infection  and  prevent
the spread of infection from patient to patient. [2] N: not resistant to oil, P: oil proof, R:
resistant to oil. [3] Faceshields are recommended when additional protection is needed
to  protect  against  possible  body  fluid  splashes  when  wearing  filtering  facemasks.  [4]
Powder-free nitrile gloves should be worn with a minimum thickness of 5 +/- 2 mil (i.e.
0.127 +/- 0.051 millimeters; 1 mil=0.0254 millimeters), unless manufacturer provides
performance breakthrough data for thinner gloves. [5] If patient is incapacitated, this
should  be  done  for  the  patient  by  the  healthcare  personnel.  Click  here  to  visit  the
Opioids topic page for more information.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/fentanyl/healthcareprevention.html
