Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Summary  Group B streptococcus
is a leading cause of serious neonatal
infection. Most neonatal GBS infections can be prevented through
the use of intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis in women who are
at increased risk for transmitting the infection to their newborns.
However, despite clinical trials that demonstrate the effectiveness
of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis, prevention strategies have
not been implemented widely or consistently, and the incidence of
neonatal GBS disease has not declined. To promote a coordinated
approach to prevention among obstetric- and pediatric-care
practitioners and among supporting clinical microbiology laboratory
personnel, CDC has developed prevention guidelines in conjunction
with experts from relevant disciplines and with representatives of
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the
American Academy of Pediatrics, and other professional
organizations. This report provides the epidemiologic basis for
prevention protocols, summarizes results of clinical trials
demonstrating the efficacy of intrapartum antimicrobial agents,
examines limitations of different approaches to prevention, and
presents guidelines for the prevention of GBS disease. CDC
recommends use of one of two prevention strategies. In the first
strategy, intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis is offered to women
identified as GBS carriers through prenatal screening cultures
collected at 35-37 weeks' gestation and to women who develop
premature onset of labor or rupture of membranes at less than 37
weeks' gestation. In the second strategy, intrapartum antibiotic
prophylaxis is provided to women who develop one or more risk
conditions at the time of labor or membrane rupture. Issues
addressed by these prevention guidelines include the following: the
appropriate clinical and laboratory methods required for prenatal
screening programs designed to identify GBS carriers; risk
conditions that indicate the need for intrapartum antibiotics;
management of newborns whose mothers receive intrapartum antibiotic
prophylaxis for GBS disease; and education of prenatal patients
regarding GBS disease and the available prevention policy. These
guidelines are intended for the following groups: a) providers of
prenatal, obstetric, and pediatric care; b) supporting microbiology
laboratories, hospital administrators, and managed-care
organizations; c) childbirth educators; d) public health
authorities; e) expectant parents; and f) advocacy groups for
expectant  parents.   INTRODUCTION   Since  its  emergence  in  the  1970s,  group  B
streptococcal (GBS)
disease has been the leading bacterial infection associated with
illness and death among newborns in the United States. Newborns at
increased risk for GBS disease are those born to women who are
colonized with GBS in the genital or rectal areas. Colonized women
who experience either a long duration of membrane rupture,
premature delivery, or intrapartum fever are at particularly high
risk for transmitting GBS infection to their infants during labor
and delivery. Infants who have GBS disease can require prolonged
hospitalization and expensive supportive therapy, and survivors may
suffer permanent disability (e.g., hearing or visual loss or mental
retardation).  Many perinatal GBS infections can be prevented through
intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis. GBS disease prevention
programs require coordinated efforts among numerous specialties
(e.g., providers of prenatal, obstetric, and pediatric care;
supporting microbiology laboratories; managed-care organizations;
quality assurance personnel; childbirth educators; and public
health authorities).  CDC developed these GBS disease prevention guidelines through
critical analysis of clinical trial data and subsequent review of
guidelines by consultants representing numerous disciplines. In
December 1994, a draft version of the guidelines was published in
the Federal Register. On March 10, 1995, CDC convened a meeting of
clinical experts, public health authorities, representatives from
professional organizations, and patient advocates to further
consider these guidelines. The guidelines published in this report
have been reviewed by both the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics. In
addition, this document provides the epidemiologic basis for
prevention protocols, summarizes results of clinical trials,
examines limitations of various approaches to prevention, and
presents  prevention  guidelines.   BACKGROUND   Group  B  streptococcus,  or
Streptococcus agalactiae, is a
gram-positive coccus that causes invasive disease primarily in
newborns, pregnant women, and adults with underlying medical
conditions (e.g., diabetes mellitus). In infants, GBS disease is
characterized as either early-onset (i.e., occurring in infants
less than 7 days of age) or late-onset (i.e., occurring in infants
greater than or equal to 7 days of age). Disease in infants usually
occurs as bacteremia, pneumonia, or meningitis (1). Other syndromes
(e.g., cellulitis and osteomyelitis) also can occur. Approximately
25% of the cases of neonatal GBS disease occurs in premature
infants (2).  In pregnant women, GBS infection causes urinary tract
infection, amnionitis, endometritis, and wound infection;
stillbirths and premature delivery also have been attributed to GBS
(1). In nonpregnant adults, skin or soft tissue infection,
bacteremia, genitourinary infection, and pneumonia are the most
common  manifestations  of  disease  (2,3).   The  case-fatality  rate  for  GBS  disease  is
estimated to be 5%-
20% for newborns (1,2,4) and 15%-32% (2,3,5) for adults. A recent
multistate, active surveillance system in a population of 10
million persons (2) demonstrated that 6% of early-onset GBS
infections resulted in death. This case-fatality rate is lower than
those reported previously (1,6), particularly the rates of 15%-50%
observed in studies from the 1970s (7-9). This reduction in deaths
most likely has resulted from improvements in neonatal care
(10,11).   EPIDEMIOLOGY   Colonization   The  gastrointestinal  tract  is  the  most  likely
human reservoir
of GBS, with the genitourinary tract the most common site of
secondary spread (1). Colonization rates can differ among ethnic
groups, geographic locales, and by age; however, rates are similar
for pregnant and nonpregnant women (1,12-14). In most populations
studied, from 10% to 30% of pregnant women were colonized with GBS
in the vaginal or rectal area (12,13,15,16). Of all infants born to
colonized parturients, approximately 1%-2% will develop early-onset
invasive disease (1).  The isolation rate of GBS from clinical specimens depends on
several factors. Culturing specimens from both the anorectum and
the vaginal introitus increases the likelihood of GBS isolation by
5%-27% over vaginal culture alone (15-17). The use of selective
media (i.e., broths containing antimicrobial agents to inhibit
competing organisms) is essential because they can increase the
yield of screening cultures by as much as 50% (18,19). Appropriate
selective broth media -- either SBM broth or Lim broth -- are
commercially  available.   Incidence  of  Neonatal  Disease   Multistate,  population-based
methods of case-finding have been
used to estimate the incidence of neonatal GBS disease in the
United States. Age- and race-adjusted projections from multistate
surveillance suggested that, in 1990, 7,600 episodes (i.e.,
incidence rate of 1.8 per 1,000 live births) and 310 deaths in the
United States resulted from GBS disease among infants less than or
equal to 90 days of age (2). Early-onset infections accounted for
approximately 80% of neonatal GBS infections (2). Based on data
from early case-series, long-term neurologic sequelae have been
estimated to occur in 15%-30% of meningitis survivors (1); more
recent estimates of the incidence and costs of sequelae from
neonatal GBS disease are not available.  Risk Factors for Perinatal GBS Disease  Results
of studies indicate that several obstetric, maternal,
and neonatal factors increase the likelihood that early-onset GBS
disease will occur in a newborn (Table_1). Infants born to
 women
who were identified prenatally as GBS carriers had 29 times the
risk of early-onset disease than did infants born to women whose
prenatal cultures were negative (20). In the same study population,
deliveries in which prematurity, longer duration of membrane
rupture, or intrapartum fever occurred were approximately seven
times more likely to be complicated by early-onset GBS disease
(20).  The incidence of GBS disease also is higher among infants born
to mothers who are less than 20 years of age (21,22) or of black
race (2,21). Other women with increased likelihood of delivering an
infant who has invasive GBS disease are those with heavy
colonization of GBS in genital cultures (8) or with low levels of
anti-GBS capsular antibody (23) and women who previously delivered
an infant who had GBS disease (24-26). Women with GBS bacteriuria
during pregnancy usually are heavily colonized with GBS and appear
to be at increased risk for perinatal transmission (27-30).
Although multiple gestation has been suggested as a risk factor for
GBS disease (31,32), only one study indicated increased risk
independent of prematurity (31). Recent large studies failed to
detect increased risk associated with multiple gestation (21,22).
Risk factors identified for neonates include low birth weight and
heavy  surface  colonization  with  GBS  (8,33).   Determinants  of  late-onset  GBS  disease
are not well
documented; however, some evidence suggests that late-onset disease
can be acquired through either vertical or nosocomial transmission
(6,34,35), although acquisition of disease from community sources
also is possible (14).  The role of GBS colonization in maternal infections was
recently investigated (36). Factors that independently increased
the risk for clinical amnionitis included GBS colonization,
duration of membrane rupture (i.e., greater than 6 hours), duration
of internal monitoring (i.e., greater than 12 hours), and number of
vaginal examinations (i.e., more than six) (36).  PREVENTION STRATEGIES  Almost half
the cases of invasive GBS disease occurs in
newborns (2); therefore, efforts to prevent GBS disease have been
concentrated on this group. Research has focused on either inducing
protective immunity in the newborn (active and passive
immunization) or eradicating colonization from the mother and/or
newborn  (chemoprophylaxis).   Immunization   Several  studies  have  indicated  that
susceptibility to neonatal
GBS disease is caused by a deficiency of maternal anticapsular
antibody (23,37). Active maternal immunization may prevent
peripartum maternal disease and neonatal disease by transplacental
transfer  of  protective  IgG  antibodies  (38).   Several  vaccines  designed  to  induce
antibodies against the
polysaccharide capsule of GBS are being developed (39). These
vaccines can potentially be used to prevent GBS disease in
nonpregnant adults as well. The potential impact of effective
vaccines may be limited because of reduced transplacental transport
of protective antibody before 32-34 weeks' gestation and because of
possible difficulty in making the vaccine available to pregnant
women.   Chemoprophylaxis   Efficacy  Studies   Administering  antimicrobial  agents  to
pregnant women before
the onset of labor or rupture of membranes is not likely to prevent
neonatal GBS disease; however, some early studies have indicated
that maternal colonization might be reduced by this method (40,41).
In one study, asymptomatic pregnant women colonized with GBS were
given oral antimicrobial drugs for 1 week during the third
trimester; more than 30% of those treated were still colonized at
delivery, and no substantial difference was observed in carriage of
the organism at delivery between treated and untreated groups (42).
Another study indicated that nearly 70% of colonized women who were
treated for 12-14 days during the third trimester were colonized 3
weeks later and again at delivery even when their sex partners also
had been treated (43).  Postnatal chemoprophylaxis with intramuscular penicillin
administered to infants just after birth also has been studied.
Only one prospective, randomized, controlled study has been
published in which blood cultures were collected from all newborns
before chemoprophylaxis was conducted (44). In this study, in which
only low-birth-weight infants were observed, no differences were
observed between treated and untreated groups in either the
incidence of early- or late-onset GBS disease or in mortality.
Another study suggested that postnatal chemoprophylaxis with
penicillin may decrease neonatal illness caused by GBS (45,46).
However, no significant effect on overall mortality was observed,
and mortality associated with penicillin-resistant pathogens was
higher in the penicillin-treated group than in the control group
(1.0 versus 0.4 deaths per 1,000 live births, p=0.06) (46). Because
the majority of neonatal GBS infections are acquired in utero,
antimicrobial agents administered to neonates, although useful for
treatment,  are  unlikely  to  prevent  the  majority  of  GBS  disease.   Intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis (i.e., administration of
antimicrobial agents after onset of labor or membrane rupture but
before delivery) is the most likely method of preventing both
early-onset disease and maternal illness resulting from GBS;
several antimicrobial regimens have been used for intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis (Table_2). Several studies have indicated that
intrapartum chemoprophylaxis decreases neonatal colonization (47-
51) and early-onset invasive disease (50-53) when administered to
unselected  pregnant  women  colonized  with  GBS  (Table_3).   Other  studies  have
examined the use of intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis for selected women colonized with GBS who were at
increased risk for delivering an infant who had GBS disease. The
only prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial in which
this approach was used focused on pregnant women colonized with GBS
who experienced either preterm labor or membrane rupture (at less
than 37 weeks' gestation) or prolonged rupture of membranes
(greater than 12 hours before delivery) (54). In a preliminary
study of the obstetric population in the same community, the
incidence of early-onset GBS disease in this high-risk group was
eightfold greater than among colonized women without any of these
risk factors and 45-fold greater than among women with these risk
factors
 who
 were
 not
 colonized
 (Table_1)
 (20,55,56).
 
 In
 the
 intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis trial, colonized mothers
with preterm labor or whose membranes ruptured greater than 12
hours before delivery were randomly selected to receive either
intravenous ampicillin or no chemoprophylaxis. Infants born to
mothers in the treatment (85 infants) and control groups (79
infants) differed substantially with respect to neonatal
colonization (9% versus 51%, p less than 0.001) and early-onset
invasive disease (0% versus 6%, p less than 0.02). Postpartum
maternal febrile illness also was substantially reduced in the
treatment group (p less than 0.04). Researchers estimated that this
strategy could prevent at least 50% of the early-onset GBS
infections  in  their  patient  population  (54).   Other  studies  also  have  documented  the
protective efficacy of
intrapartum chemoprophylaxis administered to GBS carriers in
certain high-risk groups (e.g., women with heavy genital
colonization {57,58} and with rupture of membranes at less than or
equal to 34 weeks' gestation and greater than 12 hours before labor
onset {59}). The published studies of the efficacy of intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis are summarized (Table_3). A recent
 meta-analysis
of seven trials, which included studies of carriers with and
without risk factors, estimated a 30-fold reduction in early-onset
GBS disease with intrapartum chemoprophylaxis (60). Other
investigators have argued that, because of the heterogeneity of
therapeutic interventions and flaws in trial methods, combining
results of GBS chemoprophylaxis trials is inappropriate (61).  Identification of Carriers 
Most of the studies of intrapartum chemoprophylaxis have been
used to evaluate its impact on subsets of women who had been
identified as GBS carriers. Although the GBS carriage rate in
pregnancy does not change with trimester (12,14), the duration of
carriage is unpredictable (14), and prenatal screening cultures
will not correctly identify all women with intrapartum GBS
carriage. The later in pregnancy that cultures are performed, the
closer the correlation with intrapartum culture results. However,
scheduling routine cultures late in pregnancy means that some women
who deliver prematurely will not be screened for GBS. In one study,
when selective (antimicrobial-containing) broth medium was used and
cultures were obtained from both the vagina and anorectum, only
7.4% of women with a negative culture at 26-28 weeks were found to
carry GBS at delivery (16). The same study indicated that a single
positive GBS culture during pregnancy was 67% predictive of a
positive culture at delivery; the estimated sensitivity and
specificity were 70.0% and 90.4%, respectively (16). Among 26 women
whose prenatal cultures were obtained less than or equal to 5 weeks
before delivery, there was 100% concordance with intrapartum
culture status (i.e., no false-negative or false-positive prenatal
cultures) (16). Data from follow-up of more than 5,000 deliveries
by women who had had prenatal cultures for GBS indicated that 14
(88%) of the 16 infants who developed early-onset GBS disease were
born to mothers who were detected prenatally as carriers (56).  Optimal identification of
GBS carriers is dependent on
technique. The correlation of prenatal culture results with
intrapartum GBS carriage is likely to be reduced substantially when
screening does not incorporate appropriate culture sites (i.e.,
rectum and vaginal introitus), timing (as close to delivery as
feasible), and culture medium (selective broth). Because cultures
of specimens from the vagina and rectum are more sensitive than
specimens from the cervix, (13), pelvic examination or
visualization of the cervix by speculum examination should not be
performed for collection of screening cultures. Appropriate broth
media are commercially available (e.g., SBM broth or Lim broth).
When a transport medium (e.g., Amies' medium) is used, group B
streptococci from rectovaginal swabs will survive at room
temperatures for up to 96 hours, permitting shipment from satellite
clinics to a central microbiology laboratory.  Selection Criteria  Because of the findings
of a randomized clinical trial,
investigators recommended intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for those
women identified through prenatal cultures as GBS carriers who
subsequently develop one of the following signs: rupture of
membranes greater than 12 hours before delivery, onset of labor or
membrane rupture at less than 37 weeks' gestation, or intrapartum
fever (temperature greater than 99.5 F {greater than 37.5 C}) (54).
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) supports the use of this
strategy and added the following indications for intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis: previous delivery of an infant with GBS disease
and multiple-gestation pregnancy in a GBS carrier (62).  In another report, investigators
proposed an approach to GBS
prevention that focused on prevention of disease associated with
premature birth (63). That proposal suggested administering
intrapartum antimicrobial agents to women with preterm labor or
preterm rupture of membranes who were either colonized with GBS or
whose colonization status was unknown. However, strategies designed
to prevent infection only in preterm deliveries would have limited
impact nationwide because less than 30% of all infants with GBS
disease  are  preterm  (2).   A  pragmatic  approach  to  determining  the  need  for
antimicrobial
prophylaxis was advocated by the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (64,65). This strategy consists of using
intrapartum antimicrobial agents for all women with one or more of
the following conditions: preterm labor (at less than 37 weeks'
gestation), premature rupture of membranes (at less than 37 weeks'
gestation), prolonged rupture of membranes (i.e., greater than 18
hours before delivery), previous child affected by symptomatic GBS
infection, or maternal fever during labor (65). This approach is
less complex than protocols requiring either prenatal or
intrapartum identification of GBS carriage; however, its efficacy
against disease has not been evaluated in the controlled clinical
trial setting, nor has the impact of the strategy on disease been
measured  in  routine  clinical  practice.   In  Australia,  researchers  evaluated  a  strategy
that
recommended intrapartum penicillin prophylaxis for all women
identified as GBS carriers through prenatal cultures collected at
32 weeks' gestation (53). Although the study was not a randomized
trial, data from the study indicated a substantially lower
incidence of early-onset GBS disease among the 30,197 women in the
screened population compared with the 26,915 deliveries in the
population that had no prenatal screening (p=0.04) (53).  Clinical trials have not been
conducted that directly compare
the efficacy of the suggested prevention strategies. Conducting a
study designed to find a statistically significant difference in
efficacy may not be feasible; a recent article estimated that
100,000 women would be required for each study group of a
randomized prospective trial comparing the efficacy of universal
screening and selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis with treatment
based on risk factors alone (66). This limitation is reflected in
a recent national consensus statement by the Society of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada and the Canadian
Paediatric Society, which recommended use of either universal
screening and selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis or prophylaxis
based on risk factors alone; the statement underscored the need for
further prevention research (67).  A combination of the features of a screening-based
strategy
and a strategy focused on prematurity offers a comprehensive
approach to perinatal GBS prevention. This combination strategy
relies on detection of GBS by rectovaginal cultures collected at
35-37 weeks' gestation; because some preterm deliveries will occur
before culture results are available, the strategy also provides
for intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for women who begin labor and/or
membrane rupture before 37 completed weeks' gestation (i.e., unless
results of the GBS culture are already available and are negative).
Antibiotics would be offered intrapartum to all GBS carriers and to
women at less than 37 weeks' gestation whose culture status is
unknown. For women with rupture of membranes at less than 37 weeks
who are not in labor, obstetric-care providers may choose either to
begin antimicrobial prophylaxis until cultures are completed and
negative or to delay beginning antimicrobial prophylaxis until a
positive culture is identified. Data regarding which of these
approaches is the most effective are not available. For women at
greater than or equal to 37 weeks' gestation, if antenatal GBS
culture status is unknown, antibiotics would be given if
intrapartum fever is present or if membrane rupture has been
greater than 18 hours. This precise strategy has not been directly
evaluated in clinical trials, although treatment of all GBS
carriers identified through screening at 32 weeks' gestation was
evaluated in a trial in Australia (53). Data from another study
demonstrated that the closer to delivery screening cultures are
collected, the higher the predictive value of the test (16). In
addition, this combination strategy and 18 other strategies have
been evaluated by decision analysis (68); results indicate that the
combination strategy would require intrapartum antimicrobial
prophylaxis in 26.7% of deliveries and would prevent approximately
86% of the cases of early-onset disease. Comparative estimates for
other  strategies  also  are  provided  (Table_4).   Adverse  Effects   Because  a  substantial
proportion of pregnant women are
colonized with GBS, administration of intrapartum chemoprophylaxis
to all GBS carriers may cause an unacceptably high number of
adverse reactions. Administering intrapartum antimicrobial agents
to all women who are GBS carriers could result in approximately 10
deaths per year from anaphylaxis, assuming a GBS colonization rate
of 25%, 4 million deliveries in the United States annually, and a
rate of fatal anaphylaxis to penicillin of 0.001% (69). Another
0.7%-10% of women to whom prophylaxis is administered is expected
to have less severe reactions (70). Severe complications can occur
in the fetus even when maternal anaphylaxis is not life threatening
(71).  Widespread antimicrobial use also increases the risk for
emergence of antimicrobial-resistant organisms. Infections with
penicillin-tolerant GBS have been described (72-74), but GBS
isolates have not developed clinically important resistance to
penicillin. Development of antimicrobial resistance in other
peripartum pathogens is a greater threat. In one study,
investigators reported four episodes of adverse perinatal outcome
caused by antimicrobial-resistant Enterobacteriaceae among women
treated with ampicillin or amoxicillin for premature rupture of
membranes (75).  Restricting antimicrobial agents to selected populations at
increased risk for delivering a newborn with GBS disease would
decrease the likelihood of adverse reactions and
antimicrobial-resistant infections. Administering intrapartum
ampicillin to women identified prenatally as GBS carriers who have
rupture of membranes for greater than 12 hours, labor or membrane
rupture at less than 37 weeks' gestation, or intrapartum fever
(temperature greater than 99.5 F {greater than 37.5 C}) would have
required administering antimicrobial agents to 4.6% of the
obstetric population served by one urban hospital (54). In another
approach, administering antimicrobial agents to women with either
labor or membrane rupture at less than 37 weeks' gestation who are
intrapartum carriers of GBS or whose GBS status is unknown was
estimated to require prophylaxis for 8.9% of parturients (63).
Strategies that treat all GBS carriers (53) or all women with
obstetric risk factors (e.g., prolonged membrane rupture and
prematurity) (64) are estimated to require administering
antimicrobial agents in a substantially higher proportion of
deliveries.  Penicillin G may be preferable to ampicillin for routine
prophylaxis (76). Ampicillin and penicillin G have similar activity
against GBS, and both cross the placenta and achieve bactericidal
levels in fetal tissues. However, ampicillin has a broader spectrum
of antimicrobial activity than penicillin; thus, widespread
prophylaxis with ampicillin may be more likely to lead to selection
of resistant organisms than would widespread use of penicillin
(76).  Implementation of Chemoprophylaxis  Despite the encouraging results of efficacy
studies, routine
GBS screening and selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis have not
been widely adopted in the obstetric community (65,77). Practical
problems include logistic concerns related to screening for GBS
colonization and concern about the cost-effectiveness of
implementing  chemoprophylaxis.   A  strategy  based  on  detecting  colonization  by
prenatal
screening and using these results to guide selective intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis would not be effective for women who are not
receiving prenatal care or whose prenatal records are not available
to health-care providers at the time of delivery. Ideally, GBS
carriage would be determined at the time of labor onset or at
rupture of membranes. However, because identification of GBS by
culture takes 24-48 hours, intrapartum culture results would not be
available in time for intervention in most deliveries. Rapid
detection of GBS antigen from vaginal specimens may identify GBS
carriers when prenatal screening is not available (78). Although
rapid tests for detection of GBS are specific and many recently
developed tests can be performed in less than 1 hour, the
sensitivity of rapid-detection tests has been variable and, often,
unacceptably low (15%-74%) (78). Some rapid-detection kits are
sensitive for detecting women who are heavily colonized. Three
studies have confirmed the efficacy of intrapartum chemoprophylaxis
administered to women identified by rapid-detection techniques as
GBS carriers (57-59). However, because many infants with neonatal
GBS disease are born to women who are lightly colonized (59,79),
using currently available rapid-detection techniques to identify
women for prophylaxis would probably prevent only a minority of GBS
cases.  The cost-effectiveness of selective intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis for the prevention of GBS disease has been studied
by using population-based rates of disease (80). The approach
evaluated by two investigators (54) and later endorsed by AAP (62)
was demonstrated to be cost-effective at the current rates of
disease (80). The cost per case prevented (less than $35,000) was
similar to that associated with maternal screening and intervention
programs for other perinatal diseases (e.g., congenital syphilis)
(81). Data from four other studies also have suggested that
selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis is cost-effective for the
prevention of neonatal GBS disease (56,68,82,83). In particular,
one study evaluated the combination strategy (i.e., prophylaxis for
all women with preterm membrane rupture or labor whose culture
status is unknown and for all GBS carriers identified through
cultures obtained late in the pregnancy); this combination strategy
was cost saving and was among the least expensive of 18 potential
preventive strategies (68).  Implementation of chemoprophylaxis is limited by two
additional problems. First, clinicians have been concerned about
adopting a strategy that inevitably will have failures (64). This
concern may be influenced by the complexity of communicating risk
information regarding GBS to women during pregnancy or by
medicolegal considerations. Previous efforts to promote use of
intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for only those GBS carriers who
develop intrapartum complications (e.g., longer duration of
membrane rupture, fever, or less than 37 weeks' gestation) appear
to have been poorly accepted by both clinicians and patients. Some
clinicians and patient groups have advocated informed consent for
women who are GBS carriers. For example, women colonized with GBS
would be informed of their risk for early-onset GBS disease
(approximately 1 in 200). Also, the potential risks of intrapartum
penicillin would be described (mild allergic reaction:
approximately 1 in 10; anaphylaxis: approximately 1 in 10,000; and
fatal anaphylaxis: approximately 1 in 100,000). Thus, patients
could make an informed decision regarding intrapartum antibiotics.
In instances in which this approach has been applied, few women
choose  not  to  receive  antibiotics  during  labor.   A  second  problem  is  that  increasing
intrapartum antimicrobial
use may have a substantial impact on clinical management of the
newborn (84,85). Some pediatricians routinely perform additional
diagnostic tests on all infants whose mothers received intrapartum
antimicrobial agents or observe these infants longer, leading to
prolonged hospital stays for many newborns who are low risk for GBS
disease (84). The decision of how to manage newborns whose mothers
received intrapartum antimicrobial agents can be based on clinical
manifestations, the infant's estimated gestational age, and the
adequacy of intrapartum antibiotics (62). An algorithm for
evaluating and managing infants after administration of maternal
antibiotics has been developed as an empiric guide; however,
clinical evaluation of alternative approaches remains appropriate
at this time.  Some of the challenges of instituting a prevention strategy
are illustrated in two recent reports. In the first report,
investigators initiated selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis in
their hospital in response to an increased rate of early-onset GBS
disease (85). They enrolled 2,040 women, 332 (16.3%) of whom were
colonized with GBS. Among women colonized at delivery, 122 (37%)
had at least one obstetric risk factor and, according to the
hospital's protocol, should have received intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis. The circumstances of 16 (13%) women who did not
receive intrapartum chemoprophylaxis illustrate some limitations of
this strategy; these women did not receive intrapartum
antimicrobial drugs because they either delivered less than 1 hour
after arriving at the hospital (n=9), had had no prenatal care
(n=3), or had had a negative prenatal culture but had a positive
culture at delivery (n=4). Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis was not
administered to an additional 17 (14%) women because protocol was
not followed. Eleven infants had early-onset GBS disease; two had
received one dose of intrapartum chemoprophylaxis and were
asymptomatic; and nine were born to carriers with risk factors who
did not receive intrapartum chemoprophylaxis. No affected infants
were born to colonized women without risk factors or to women whose
prenatal screening cultures were negative for GBS. One woman who
received intrapartum chemoprophylaxis developed a rash and
transient hypotension and was delivered by cesarean section because
of transient fetal bradycardia. The study suggested that selective
intrapartum chemoprophylaxis was effective in preventing
early-onset GBS disease, that the infants of colonized women
without labor complications are at low risk for disease, and that
administering intrapartum antimicrobial agents is not without
risks.  The second report illustrates that a prevention strategy
employing selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis is not easily
implemented (86). In this study, which was conducted in an academic
setting, 114 (80.3%) of 142 women who had positive GBS screening
cultures and who developed risk factors at delivery received
intrapartum antimicrobial drugs. Reasons for failing to receive
appropriate treatment included failure to follow protocol, marginal
indications for chemoprophylaxis, or patient refusal. Early results
of the study suggest that institution of the protocol was
associated  with  a  downward  trend  in  the  rate  of  disease.   DISCUSSION   Group  B
streptococcal disease continues to be a major cause of
illness and death among newborns despite clinical advances in the
last two decades. Major risk factors for early-onset neonatal GBS
disease include maternal GBS colonization, longer duration of
membrane rupture, intrapartum fever, less than 37 weeks' gestation,
GBS bacteriuria during pregnancy, and previous delivery of an
infant who had GBS disease (6,21,25,27). A substantial number of
cases of early-onset neonatal GBS disease can be prevented by
administering prophylactic antimicrobial agents during labor (56).
Furthermore, obtaining specimens from the lower vagina and rectum
during the third trimester for culture in selective broth media
will identify the vast majority of women who are colonized with GBS
at delivery. Increasing evidence suggests that treating
GBS-infected newborns is more costly than preventing the infection
and that well-implemented prevention programs can substantially
reduce illness and death resulting from GBS disease
(56,68,80,82,83). Any prevention program for GBS must be
implemented carefully. For example, failure to use optimal culture
methods can compromise the effectiveness of screening strategies.
A recent survey of obstetric-care providers in Georgia identified
several barriers to effective prevention activities. For example,
only 9% of providers who obtained screening cultures followed
recommended procedures and 32% administered antimicrobial agents
prenatally when carriage was detected even though 93% of providers
stated they knew such treatment to be ineffective (87).  An optimal prevention strategy
currently is a combination of
routine prenatal screening for GBS colonization late in pregnancy
and empiric management of those preterm deliveries that occur
before the GBS culture is available. This approach includes
collecting rectovaginal cultures at 35-37 weeks' gestation and
offering intrapartum treatment to all carriers. Because some
preterm deliveries occur before culture results are available, the
strategy also provides for intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for women
who begin labor and/or membrane rupture before 37 completed weeks'
gestation (unless results of the GBS culture are already available
and are negative).  Criticism of previous screening-based strategies has included
concerns regarding the predictive value of prenatal cultures, the
ethical and legal difficulties inherent in withholding intrapartum
antibiotics from GBS carriers without risk factors, and the
pressure experienced by clinicians to respond to antenatal GBS
carriage results by treating with oral antimicrobial agents remote
from delivery. Critics of empiric approaches have been concerned
that despite use of intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis in a
substantial proportion of deliveries, the strategy does not prevent
the 25% of all early-onset GBS cases that occur in GBS carriers
without risk factors. Further, empiric approaches do not address
the strong preference of some patients and providers for prenatal
screening  cultures.   Rationale  for  Screening-Based  Approach  to  Prevention   The
combination of late prenatal-screening cultures and
empiric management offers several potential advantages over
exclusive reliance on either a screening-based approach or an
empiric approach. Because the combination strategy schedules
collection of a GBS culture at 35-37 weeks' gestation, the
concordance of prenatal and intrapartum GBS carriage status will be
high. Thus, false-negative prenatal culture results will be
minimized (i.e., few women with negative cultures at 35-37 weeks'
gestation will become colonized with GBS by the time of delivery),
and nearly all women identified antenatally as carriers will still
be carrying the organism at delivery, potentially justifying
exposing this group to adverse effects associated with antibiotics.
Even women who begin prenatal care late in gestation should be
eligible for late screening. By avoiding collection of cultures
earlier in gestation, this strategy should reduce pressure on
clinicians to treat GBS carriage antenatally. Because all GBS
carriers will be offered intrapartum chemoprophylaxis, clinicians
will not need to wait for the development of intrapartum risk
factors in a GBS carrier (e.g., duration of membrane rupture
greater than 18 hours or intrapartum fever). Intrapartum
prophylaxis for most women can therefore begin earlier, so that
most GBS carriers will be administered antimicrobial agents greater
than 4 hours before delivery or in time for adequate antibiotic
levels to be reached in amniotic fluid. In one analysis, the
combination of late prenatal screening and intrapartum prophylaxis
of carriers and preterm deliveries was estimated to prevent
approximately 86% of early-onset disease, was cost-saving compared
with no intervention, and was among the least expensive of 18
potential  preventive  strategies  (68).   Large-scale  clinical  experience  with  the
combination approach
previously described is not yet available, although the strategy
has been applied in several institutions. The theoretical
advantages of this approach address most concerns that have been
raised regarding the prevention strategies previously considered.
Although antimicrobial prophylaxis will be used in a high
proportion of deliveries, some clinicians and patients have found
selective approaches (e.g., treating only carriers with risk
factors) unacceptable, because treatment is withheld from a group
of women with moderately increased risk of GBS disease -- GBS
carriers without intrapartum risk factors. Assessment of the
current situation suggests that any prevention program that is
acceptable to both clinicians and their patients will involve using
antimicrobial prophylaxis in a substantial proportion of
deliveries; thus, the strategy that directs use of these
antimicrobial agents to women at the highest risk for GBS disease
seems reasonable. Communication mechanisms and information systems
should be developed and monitored to ensure that prenatal culture
results  are  available  at  the  time  and  place  of  delivery.   Research  into  Enhancing
Prevention  A program combining late prenatal screening for GBS with
empiric treatment of women with preterm deliveries is not a
permanent solution to the problem of neonatal GBS disease, although
it may be a reasonable option that is available now. A more
sensitive rapid-screening test for GBS that could accurately detect
women who carry GBS at the time of delivery would obviate the need
for prenatal screening. Sensitive intrapartum testing also would
permit detection of GBS carriage among women who did not receive
adequate prenatal care. Because an intrapartum test might detect a
higher proportion of women who carry the organism at delivery and
will not detect women who only carry the organism earlier in
pregnancy, intrapartum use of a sensitive rapid-detection test
could make a prevention program simpler and more efficient. An
adequate rapid-detection test must be a) sensitive (e.g., 85%-90%
compared with culture in selective broth media); b) rapid (results
available to clinicians in time for antibiotics to be given before
delivery); and c) convenient (for integration into routine
laboratory use). Even a highly sensitive rapid-detection test would
not be adequate if results were not available to clinicians 24
hours a day, 7 days a week. Development of a vaccine against GBS
that is highly immunogenic in women and permits transplacental
transfer of protection to the fetus also would eliminate the need
for prenatal screening and could potentially address the problem of
late-onset GBS disease, which intrapartum antimicrobial agents do
not prevent.  Surveillance and Evaluation  Because incidence may vary widely, state or
local health
departments or groups of affiliated hospitals should consider
either establishing surveillance systems for neonatal GBS disease
or reviewing data from existing systems to identify the current
magnitude of disease and gain further information for evaluating
the effectiveness of prevention measures. In hospital settings,
prevention programs should monitor the occurrence of adverse
reactions to chemoprophylaxis, the emergence of perinatal
infections caused by antimicrobial-resistant organisms, and the
impact of obstetric antimicrobial use on pediatric management
protocols.  RECOMMENDATIONS  Enhanced communication among personnel in multiple
disciplines
is needed to ensure that programs for prevention of GBS disease
succeed. Open communication between clinicians and patients is a
critical component of GBS disease prevention. An informational
brochure for pregnant women on GBS is available through CDC
(Childhood and Respiratory Diseases Branch, Division of Bacterial
and Mycotic Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases,
Mailstop C09, Atlanta, GA 30333; Internet address:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/bacter/strep_b.htm. The
following recommendations for the prevention of GBS disease will
need periodic reappraisal to incorporate advances in technology or
other refinements in prevention strategies.  
    Obstetric-care practitioners, in conjunction with supporting
    laboratories and labor and delivery facilities, should adopt a
 strategy
    for the prevention of early-onset GBS disease. Patients should
 be
    informed regarding the GBS prevention strategy.  
    Regardless of which preventive strategy is used, a) women with
    symptomatic or asymptomatic GBS bacteriuria detected during
 pregnancy
    should be treated at the time of diagnosis; because such women
 are
    usually heavily colonized with GBS, they should also receive
    intrapartum chemoprophylaxis; and b) women who previously have
 given
    birth to an infant with GBS disease should receive intrapartum
    chemoprophylaxis; prenatal screening is not necessary for these
 women.  
    Until further data become available to define the most
 effective
    strategy, the following two approaches are appropriate:  Screening-Based Approach.
All pregnant women should be screened
 at
35-37 weeks' gestation for anogenital GBS colonization
 (Figure_1).
Patients should be informed of screening results and of
 potential
benefits and risks of intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis for
 GBS
carriers. Information systems should be developed and monitored
 to
ensure that prenatal culture results are available at the time
 and
place of delivery. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis should be
 offered to
all pregnant women identified as GBS carriers by culture at
 35-37
weeks' gestation.  
    If the result of GBS culture is not known at the time of
 labor,
    intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis should be
 administered if one
    of the following risk factors is present: less than 37
 weeks'
    gestation, duration of membrane rupture greater than or
 equal to 18
    hours, or temperature greater than or equal to 100.4 F
 (greater
    than or equal to 38.0 C).  
    Culture techniques that maximize the likelihood of GBS
 recovery
    should be used. Because lower vaginal and rectal cultures
 are
    recommended, cultures should not be collected by speculum
    examination. The optimal method for GBS screening is
 collection of
    a single standard culture swab or two separate swabs of the
 distal
    vagina and anorectum. Swabs may be placed in a transport
 medium
    (e.g., Amies') if the microbiology laboratory is offsite.
 The
    sample should be identified for the laboratory as
 specifically for
    GBS culture. Specimens should be inoculated into selective
 broth
    medium (either SBM broth or Lim broth), followed by
 overnight
    incubation and then subcultured onto solid blood agar
 medium. In
    this screening culture, there is no need for the laboratory
 to
    culture for other organisms. A laboratory procedure to
 maximize
    recovery of GBS is detailed (Box 1 Table_B1).  
    Laboratories should report results (both positive and
 negative) to
    both the anticipated site of delivery and the health-care
 provider
    who ordered the test. Ideally, laboratories that perform
 GBS
    cultures will ensure that clinicians have continuous access
 (i.e.,
    24 hours a day, 7 days a week) to culture results.  
    Oral antimicrobial agents should not be used to treat women
 who are
    found to be colonized with GBS during prenatal screening.
 Such
    treatment is not effective in eliminating carriage or
 preventing
    neonatal disease.  Risk-Factor Approach. A prophylaxis strategy based on the
 presence of
    intrapartum risk factors alone (e.g., less than 37 weeks'
 gestation,
    duration of membrane rupture greater than or equal to 18 hours,
 or
    temperature greater than or equal to 100.4 F {greater than or
 equal to
    38.0 C}) is an acceptable alternative (Figure_2).  For intrapartum chemoprophylaxis,
intravenous penicillin G (5
 mU
initially and then 2.5 mU every 4 hours) should be administered
 until
delivery (Box 2 Table_B2). Intravenous ampicillin (2 g
 initially
and then 1 g every 4 hours until delivery) is an acceptable
 alternative
to penicillin G, but penicillin G is preferred because it has a
 narrow
spectrum and thus is less likely to select for antibiotic
 resistant
organisms. Clindamycin or erythromycin may be used for women
 allergic
to penicillin, although the efficacy of these drugs for GBS
 disease
prevention has not been measured in controlled trials. (Note:
Penicillin G does not need to be administered to women who have
clinical diagnoses of amnionitis and who are receiving other
 treatment
regimens that include agents active against streptococci {e.g.,
ampicillin  or  clindamycin}.)   5.   Routine  use  of  prophylactic  antimicrobial  agents  for
infants
 born to  mothers who received intrapartum prophylaxis is not
 recommended.
However, therapeutic use of these agents is appropriate for
 those
infants suspected clinically of having sepsis. Additional
 research is
needed to determine algorithms for management of infants born
 to
mothers who receive intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis. One
algorithm for empiric management of these newborns is provided
(Figure_3). Other management approaches, developed by
 individual
physicians or institutions, may be appropriate alternatives.  6.  Local and state public
health agencies, in conjunction with
 appropriate  groups of hospitals, should consider establishing surveillance
 to
monitor the incidence of neonatal GBS disease, occurrence of
 adverse
reactions to antimicrobial prophylaxis, and the emergence of
 perinatal
infections caused by penicillin-resistant organisms.  Investigations designed to evaluate
and compare these two
strategies and others are needed. Such studies will require the
participation of multiple institutions and should evaluate multiple
outcomes (e.g., perinatal GBS infections, adverse reactions to
antimicrobial prophylaxis, and perinatal infections caused by
penicillin-resistant organisms). Characterization of protocol
failures may contribute to improvement of future prevention
strategies.  References 
    Baker CJ, Edwards MS. Group B streptococcal infections. In:
    Remington J, Klein JO, eds. Infectious diseases of the fetus
 and
    newborn infant. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
 1995:980-1054. 
    Zangwill KM, Schuchat A, Wenger JD. Group B streptococcal
    disease in the United States, 1990: report from a multistate
 active
    surveillance system. In: CDC surveillance summaries (November
 20).
    MMWR 1992;41(No. SS-6):25-32. 
    Farley MM, Harvey RC, Stull T, et al. A population-based
    assessment of invasive disease due to group B streptococcus in
    nonpregnant adults. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1807-11. 
    Weisman LE, Stoll BJ, Cruess DF, et al. Early-onset group B
    streptococcal sepsis: a current assessment. J Pediatr
 1992;121:428-33. 
    Schwartz B, Schuchat A, Oxtoby MJ, Cochi SL, Hightower A,
 Broome
    CV. Invasive group B streptococcal disease in adults: a
    population-based study in metropolitan Atlanta. JAMA
 1991;266:1112-4. 
    Dillon HC, Khare S, Gray BM. Group B streptococcal carriage and
    disease: a 6-year prospective study. J Pediatr 1987;110:31-6. 
    Opal SM, Cross A, Palmer M, Almazan R. Group B streptococcal
    sepsis in adults and infants. Contrasts and comparisons. Arch
    Intern Med 1988;148:641-5. 
    Pass MA, Gray BM, Khare S, Dillon HC. Prospective studies of
    group B streptococcal infections in infants. J Pediatr
 1979;95:431-43. 
    Ancona RJ, Ferrieri P, Williams PP. Maternal factors that
    enhance the acquisition of group B streptococci by newborn
 infants.
    J Med Microbiol 1980;3:273-80. 
    Lannering B, Larsson LE, Rojas J, Stahlman MT. Early onset
    group B streptococcal disease. Seven year experience and
 clinical
    scoring system. Acta Paediatr Scand 1983;72:597-602. 
    Gladstone IM, Ehrenkranz RA, Edberg SC, Baltimore RS. A
    ten-year review of neonatal sepsis and comparison with the
 previous
    fifty-year experience. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1990;9:819-25. 
    Anthony BF, Okada DM, Hobel CJ. Epidemiology of group B
    Streptococcus: longitudinal observations during pregnancy. J
 Infect
    Dis 1978;137:524-30. 
    Regan JA, Klebanoff MA, Nugent RP, Vaginal infections and
    prematurity study group. The epidemiology of group B
 streptococcal
    colonization in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1991;77:604-10. 
    Yow MD, Leeds LJ, Mason EO, Clark DJ, Beachler CW. The natural
    history of group B streptococcal colonization in the pregnant
 woman
    and her offspring. I. Colonization studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol
    1980;137:34-8. 
    Dillon HC, Gray E, Pass MA, Gray BM. Anorectal and vaginal
    carriage of group B streptococci during pregnancy. J Infect Dis
    1982;145:794-9. 
    Boyer KM, Gadzala CA, Kelly PD, Burd LI, Gotoff SP. Selective
    intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of neonatal group B streptococcal
    early-onset disease. II. Predictive value of prenatal cultures.
 J
    Infect Dis 1983;148:802-9. 
    Badri MS, Zawaneh S, Cruz AC, et al. Rectal colonization with
    group B streptococcus: relation to vaginal colonization of
 pregnant
    women. J Infect Dis 1977;135:308-12. 
    Baker CJ, Goroff DK, Alpert S, et al. Vaginal colonization with
    group B streptococcus: a study of college women. J Infect Dis
    1977;135:392-7. 
    Ferrieri P, Blair LL. Pharyngeal carriage of group B
    streptococci: detection by three methods. J Clin Microbiol
    1977;6:136-9. 
    Boyer KM, Gotoff SP. Strategies for chemoprophylaxis of GBS
    early-onset infections. Antibiot Chemother 1985;35:267-80. 
    Schuchat A, Oxtoby M, Cochi S, et al. Population-based risk
    factors for neonatal group B streptococcal disease: results of
 a
    cohort study in metropolitan Atlanta. J Infect Dis
 1990;162:672-7. 
    Schuchat A, Deaver-Robinson K, Plikaytis BD, Zangwill K,
    Mohle-Boetani J, Wenger JD. Multistate case-control study of
    maternal risk factors for neonatal group B streptococcal
 disease.
    Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:623-9. 
    Baker CJ, Kasper DL. Correlation of maternal antibody
    deficiency with susceptibility to neonatal group B
 streptococcal
    infection. N Engl J Med 1976;294:753-6. 
    Carstensen H, Christensen KK, Grennert L, Persson K, Polberger
    S. Early-onset neonatal group B streptococcal septicaemia in
    siblings. J Infect 1988;17:201-4. 
    Faxelius G, Bremme K, Christensen KK, Christensen P, Ringertz
    S. Neonatal septicemia due to group B streptococci -- perinatal
 risk
    factors and outcome of subsequent pregnancies. J Perinat Med
    1988;16:423-30. 
    Christensen KK, Dahlander K, Linden V, Svenningsen N,
    Christensen P. Obstetrical care in future pregnancies after
 fetal
    loss in group B streptococcal septicemia. A prevention program
    based on bacteriological and immunological follow-up. Eur J
 Obstet
    Gynecol Reprod Biol 1981;12:143-50. 
    Wood EG, Dillon HC. A prospective study of group B
    streptococcal bacteriuria in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
    1981;140:515-20. 
    Moller M, Thomsen AC, Borch K, Dinesen K, Zdravkovic M. Rupture
    of fetal membranes and premature delivery associated with group
 B
    streptococci in urine of pregnant women. Lancet 1984;ii:69-70. 
    Liston TE, Harris RE, Foshee S, Null DM. Relationship of
    neonatal pneumonia to maternal urinary and neonatal isolates of
    group B streptococci. South Med J 1979;72:1410-2. 
    Persson K, Christensen KK, Christensen P, Forsgren A, Jorgensen
    C, Persson P. Asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy with
    special reference to group B streptococci. Scand J Infect Dis
    1985;17:195-9. 
    Pass MA, Khare S, Dillon HC. Twin pregnancies: incidence of
    group B streptococcal colonization and disease. J Pediatr
    1980;97:635-7. 
    Edwards MS, Jackson CV, Baker CJ. Increased risk of group B
    streptococcal disease in twins. JAMA 1981;245:2044-6. 
    Cochi SL, Feldman RA. Estimating national incidence of group B
    streptococcal disease: the effect of adjusting for birth
 weight.
    Pediatr Infect Dis J 1983;2:414-5. 
    Easmon CSF, Hastings MJG, Clare AJ, et al. Nosocomial
    transmission of group B streptococci. Br Med J 1981;283:459-61.
 
    Anthony BF, Okada DM, Hobel CJ. Epidemiology of the group B
    streptococcus: maternal and nosocomial sources for infant
    acquisitions. J Pediatr 1979;95:431-6. 
    Yancey MK, Duff P, Clark P, Kurtzer T, Frentzen BH, Kubilis P.
    Peripartum infection associated with vaginal group B
 streptococcal
    colonization. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:816-9. 
    Baker CJ, Edwards MS, Kasper DL. Role of antibody to native
    type III polysaccharide of group B streptococcus in infant
    infection. Pediatrics 1981;68:544-9. 
    Baker CJ, Rench MA, Edwards MS, Carpenter RJ, Hays BM, Kasper
    DL. Immunization of pregnant women with a polysaccharide
 vaccine of
    group B streptococcus. N Engl J Med 1988; 319:1180-5. 
    Schuchat A, Wenger JD. Epidemiology of group B streptococcal
    disease: risk factors, prevention strategies and vaccine
    development. Epidemiol Rev 1994;16:374-402. 
    Lewin EB, Amstey MS. Natural history of group B streptococcus
    colonization and its therapy during pregnancy. Am J Obstet
 Gynecol
    1981;139:512-5. 
    Merenstein GB, Todd WA, Brown G, et al. Group B beta-hemolytic
    streptococcus: randomized controlled treatment study at term.
    Obstet Gynecol 1980;55:315-8. 
    Hall RT, Barnes W, Krishnan L, et al. Antibiotic treatment of
    parturient women colonized with group B streptococci. Am J
 Obstet
    Gynecol 1976;124:630-4. 
    Gardner SE, Yow MD, Leeds LJ, Thompson PK, Mason EO, Clark DJ.
    Failure of penicillin to eradicate group B streptococcal
    colonization in the pregnant woman: a couple study. Am J Obstet
    Gynecol 1979;135:1062-5. 
    Pyati SP, Pildes RS, Jacobs NM, et al. Penicillin in infants
    weighing two kilograms or less with early-onset group B
    streptococcal disease. N Engl J Med 1983;308:1383-9. 
    Siegel JD, McCracken GHJ, Threlkeld N, Milvenan B, Rosenfeld
    CR. Single dose penicillin prophylaxis against neonatal group B
    streptococcal infections: a controlled trial in 18,738 newborn
    infants. N Engl J Med 1980;303:769-75. 
    Siegel JD, McCracken GHJ, Threlkeld N, DePasse BM, Rosenfeld
    CR. Single-dose penicillin prophylaxis of neonatal group B
    streptococcal disease. Lancet 1982;i:1426-30. 
    Yow MD, Mason EO, Leeds LJ, Thompson PK, Clark DJ, Gardner SE.
    Ampicillin prevents intrapartum transmission of group B
    streptococcus. JAMA 1979;241:1245-7. 
    Easmon CSF, Hastings MJG, Deeley J, Bloxham B, Rivers RPA,
    Marwood R. The effect of intrapartum chemoprophylaxis on the
    vertical transmission of group B streptococci. Br J Obstet
 Gynaecol
    1983;90:633-5. 
    Boyer KM, Gadzala CA, Kelly PD, Gotoff SP. Selective
    intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of neonatal group B streptococcal
    early-onset disease. III. Interruption of mother-to-infant
    transmission. J Infect Dis 1983;148:810-6. 
    Matorras R, Garcia-Perea A, Omenaca F, Diez-Enciso M, Madero R,
    Usandizaga JA. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of early-onset
 group B
    streptococcal disease. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
 1991;40:57-62. 
    Lim DV, Morales WJ, Walsh AF, Kazanis D. Reduction of morbidity
    and mortality rates for neonatal group B streptococcal disease
    through early diagnosis and chemoprophylaxis. J Clin Microbiol
    1986;23:489-92. 
    Allardice JG, Baskett TF, Seshia MMK, Bowman N, Malazdrewicz R.
    Perinatal group B streptococcal colonization and infection. Am
 J
    Obstet Gynecol 1982;142:617-20. 
    Garland SM, Fliegner JR. Group B streptococcus and neonatal
    infections: the case for intrapartum chemoprophylaxis. Aust N Z
 J
    Obstet Gynaecol 1991;31:119-22. 
    Boyer KM, Gotoff SP. Prevention of early-onset neonatal group
    B streptococcal disease with selective intrapartum
    chemoprophylaxis. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1665-9. 
    Boyer KM, Gadzala CA, Burd LI, Fisher DE, Paton JB, Gotoff SP.
    Selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of neonatal group B
    streptococcal early-onset disease. I. Epidemiologic rationale.
 J
    Infect Dis 1983;148:795-801. 
    Boyer KM, Gotoff SP. Antimicrobial prophylaxis of neonatal
    group B streptococcal sepsis. Clin Perinatol 1988;15:831-50. 
    Morales WJ, Lim DV, Walsh AF. Prevention of neonatal group B
    streptococcal sepsis by the use of a rapid screening test and
    selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
    1986;155:979-83. 
    Tuppurainen N, Hallman M. Prevention of neonatal group B
    streptococcal disease: intrapartum detection and
 chemoprophylaxis
    of heavily colonized parturients. Obstet Gynecol 1989;
 73:583-7. 
    Morales WJ, Lim D. Reduction of group B streptococcal maternal
    and neonatal infections in preterm pregnancies with premature
    rupture of membranes through a rapid identification test. Am J
    Obstet Gynecol 1987;157:13-6. 
    Allen UD, Navas L, King SM. Effectiveness of intrapartum
    penicillin prophylaxis in preventing early-onset group B
    streptococcal infection: results of a meta-analysis. Can Med
 Assoc
    J 1993; 149:1659-65. 
    Ohlsson A, Myhr TL. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of perinatal
    group B streptococcal infections: a critical review of
 randomized
    controlled trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:910-7. 
    American Academy of Pediatrics. Guidelines for prevention of
    group B streptococcal infection by chemoprophylaxis. Pediatrics
    1992;90:775-8. 
    Minkoff H, Mead P. An obstetric approach to the prevention of
    early-onset group B beta-hemolytic streptococcal sepsis. Am J
    Obstet Gynecol 1986;154:973-7. 
    Hankins GV, Chalas E. Group B streptococcal infections in
    pregnancy: ACOG's recommendations. ACOG Newsletter 1993;37:2. 
    American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Survey
    shows continued confusion over management of GBS in pregnancy.
 ACOG
    Newsletter 1994;38:1,10. 
    Landon MB, Harger J, McNellis D, Mercer B, Thom EA. Prevention
    of neonatal group B streptococcal infection. Obstet Gynecol
    1994;84:460-2. 
    Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada and
    Canadian Pediatric Society. National consensus statement on the
    prevention of early-onset group B streptococcal infections in
 the
    newborn. Journal of the Society of Obstetricians and
 Gynaecologists
    of Canada and Canadian Pediatric Society 1994;16:2271-8. 
    Rouse DJ, Goldenberg RL, Cliver SP, Cutter GR, Mennemeyer ST,
    Fargason CA. Strategies for the prevention of early-onset
 neonatal
    group B streptococcal sepsis: a decision analysis. Obstet
 Gynecol
    1994;83:483-94. 
    Schwartz B, Jackson L. Invasive group B streptococcal disease
    in adults. JAMA 1991;266:3284. 
    Goodman LS, Gilman A, Gilman AG, eds. Goodman and Gilman's the
    pharmacologic basis of therapeutics. 8th ed. New York: Pergamon
    Press, 1990. 
    Heim K, Alge A, Marth C. Anaphylactic reaction to ampicillin
    and severe complication in the fetus. Lancet 1991;337:859-60. 
    Cunningham R, Walker C, Ridgway E. Prosthetic hip-joint
    infection associated with a penicillin-tolerant group B
    streptococcus. J Infect 1992;25:77-81. 
    Steinbrecher UP. Serious infection in an adult due to
    penicillin-tolerant group B streptococcus. Arch Intern Med
    1981;141:1714-5. 
    Severin MJ, Wiley JL. Change in susceptibility of group B
    streptococci to penicillin G from 1968 through 1975. Antimicrob
    Agents Chemother 1976;10:380-1. 
    McDuffie RS, McGregor JA, Gibbs RS. Adverse perinatal outcome
    and resistant Enterobacteriaceae after antibiotic usage for
    premature rupture of the membranes and group B streptococcus
    carriage. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:487-9. 
    Amstey MS, Gibbs RS. Is penicillin G a better choice than
    ampicillin for prophylaxis of neonatal group B streptococcal
    infections? Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:1058-9. 
    Gibbs RS, McGregor JA, Mead PB, Eschenbach DA, Hager WD, Sweet
    RL. A survey of practices in infectious diseases by
    obstetrician-gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:631-6. 
    Yancey MK, Armer T, Clark P, Duff P. Assessment of rapid
    identification tests for genital carriage of group B
 streptococci.
    Obstet Gynecol 1992;80:1038-47. 
    Towers CV, Garite TJ, Friedman WW, Pircon RA, Nageotte MP.
    Comparison of a rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay test
 and
    the Gram stain for detection of group B streptococcus in
 high-risk
    antepartum patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:965-7. 
    Mohle-Boetani J, Schuchat A, Plikaytis BD, Smith D, Broome CV.
    Comparison of prevention strategies for neonatal group B
    streptococcal infection: a population-based economic analysis.
 JAMA
    1993;270:1442-8. 
    Stray-Pederson B. Economic evaluation of maternal screening to
    prevent congenital syphilis. Sex Transm Dis 1983;10:167-72. 
    Strickland DM, Yeomans ER, Hankins GDV. Cost effectiveness of
    intrapartum screening and treatment for maternal group B
    streptococci colonization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:4-8. 
    Yancey MK, Duff P. An analysis of the cost-effectiveness of
    selected protocols for the prevention of neonatal group B
    streptococcal infection. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:367-71. 
    Wiswell TE, Stoll BJ, Tuggle JM. Management of asymptomatic,
    term gestation neonates born to mothers treated with
 intrapartum
    antibiotics. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1990;9:826-31. 
    Pylipow M, Gaddis M, Kinney JS. Selective intrapartum
    prophylaxis for group B streptococcus colonization: management
 and
    outcome of newborns. Pediatrics 1994;93:631-5. 
    Gibbs RS, McDuffie RS, McNabb F, Fryer GE, Miyoshi T,
    Merenstein G. Neonatal group B streptococcal sepsis during 2
 years
    of a universal screening program. Obstet Gynecol
 1994;84:496-500. 
    Jafari HS, Schuchat A, Hilsdon R, Whitney C, Toomey K, Wenger
    J. Barriers to prevention of perinatal group B streptococcal
    disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1995;14:662-7. 
+-------------------------------------------------------------------
-------+
|            
                                                              |
|                    Erratum: Vol. 45, No. RR-7
                            |
|            
                                                              |
|            SOURCE: MMWR 45(31);679   DATE: Aug 09, 1996
                  |
|            
                                                              |
|      The MMWR Recommendations and Reports, "Prevention of
 Perinatal      |
|  Group B Streptococcal Disease: A Public Health Perspective,"
            |
|  contained two errors.
                                                   |
|            
                                                              |
|  Page 17, Box 1: Item 3 should read:
                                     |
|  3. Remove the swabs from the transport medium and inoculate both
        |
|  swabs together into selective broth medium. Todd-Hewitt broth
           |
|  supplemented with either colistin (10 ug/mL) and nalidixic acid
 (15     |
|  ug/mL) or with gentamicin (8 ug/mL) and nalidixic acid (15
 ug/mL)       |
|  may be used; appropriate commercially available options include
 Lim     |
|  or SBM broth.
                                                           |
|            
                                                              |
|  Page 20:  Figure_3 contained an arrow pointing in the
 incorrect     |
|  direction.  The corrected Figure_3E appears below.
                  |
|            
                                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------
-------+ 
Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE  1.   Risk  for  early-onset  group  B  streptococcal  (GBS)  disease  (20),  by  prenatal
maternal
colonization status and intrapartum risk factors
====================================================
===========================================
                   No. of
                  episodes                                                    Early-onset
                 early-onset     No. of        Attack Rate      Deliveries     GBS cases
Risk status *    GBS disease   deliveries   (per 1000 births)       (%)           (%)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total population     16           5,292            3.0             100.0         100.0
Colonization+        14           1,029           13.6              19.4          87.5
Colonization-         2           4,263            0.5              80.7          12.5
Risk factors+        11           1,311            8.4              24.7          68.8
Risk factors-         5           3,981            1.3              75.2          31.3
Colonization+
Risk factors+        10             245           40.8               4.6          62.5
Colonization+
Risk factors-         4             784            5.1              14.8          25.0
Colonization-
Risk factors+         1           1,066            0.9              20.0           6.2
Colonization-
Risk factors-         1           3,197            0.3              60.0           6.2
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*  Colonization  assessed  by  prenatal  rectovaginal  cultures.  Risk  factors  defined  as
rupture of
  membranes  longer  than  12  hours,  <37  weeks'  gestation,  or  intrapartum
temperature>99.5 F
  (>37.5 C). "+" refers to present; "-" refers to absent.
====================================================
===========================================
Return to top.Table_2
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE  2.  Summary  of  antimicrobial  regimens  used  for  studies  of  intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis for
group B streptococcal (GBS) disease
====================================================
===============================================
Agent                         Dose and schedule *                     Comments +
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ampicillin (47)         500 mg IV every 6 hrs         30/34 received only one dose before
delivery
Ampicillin (52)         500 mg IV                     Administered every 6 hrs
Benzyl penicillin (48)  600 mg IM every 8 hrs         Erythromycin 100 mg IM for women
                                                      allergic to penicillin
Ampicillin (50)         500 mg IV every 6 hrs         46/57 received only one dose before
                                                      delivery
Penicillin (53)         1 mU IV every 6 hrs
Ampicillin (54)         2 g IV load then 1 g IV       Mean duration of prophylaxis 5.4 hrs
                        4 hrs
Penicillin G (58)       5 mU IV every 6 hrs           If labor lasted 18 hrs, then penicillin
                                                      V 1 mU should be administered orally
                                                      every 8 hrs after initial IV therapy
Ampicillin (59)         1 g IV every 6 hrs
Ampicillin (57)         1 g IV every 6 hrs            Ampicillin levels measured in eight
                                                      mother-infant pairs
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* IV = intravenous; IM = intramuscular.
+ mU = million units.
====================================================
===============================================
Return to top.Table_3
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 3. Summary of trials employing intrapartum chemoprophylaxis for prevention of
neonatal colonization and early-onset group B streptococcal disease
====================================================
================================================
                                       Neonatal colonization       Early-onset disease
Study design,        Case selection   -----------------------    -----------------------
 control selection *    criteria +     IC &   No IC   P value     IC   No IC   P value
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R (47)               I                0/34    14/24    0.001     0/34   0/24      NA @
 Random
P/R (52)             I                4/57    62/136   <0.01     0/57   9/136    0.06
 Nonrandom
P (48)               PC               0/38    17/49    0.001      ND     ND       NA
 Random
P (50)               I or PC          2/60    24/65    <0.01     0/60   3/65     0.14
 Random
P (53)               PC                ND       ND       NA      16/     27/     0.04
 Nonrandom                                                     30,197  26,915
P (54)               PC and
 Random               Pre/PROM        8/85    40/79    0.001     0/85   5/79     0.02
P (54)               PC and
 Nonrandom            Pre/PROM        5/82   102/233   <0.01     0/82   7/233    0.02
P (58)               Heavy PC          ND       ND       NA      1/88  10/111    0.03
 Random
P/R (59)             Light I and
 Nonrandom            PPROM            ND       ND       NA      0/29   6/37     0.03
P/R (59)             Heavy I and
 Nonrandom            PPROM            ND       ND       NA      0/7    7/11     0.01
P (57)               Light PC         0/98    35/98    <0.01     0/98   0/98      NA
 Random
                     Heavy PC         0/37    24/30    <0.01     0/37   3/30     0.09
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*  R=retrospective;  P/R=prospective  case  selection,  retrospective  control  selection;
P=prospective.
+ I=intrapartum colonization; PC=prenatal colonization; Pre/PROM=preterm labor (<37
weeks'
  gestation)  or  prolonged  rupture  of  membranes  (>12  hours);  PPROM="preterm
premature rup-
  ture of membranes" (i.e., rupture of membranes at <=34 weeks' gestation and >12
hours before
  onset of labor).
& IC=Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis; ND=not done.
@ NA=not applicable.
====================================================
================================================
Return to top.Table_4
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 4. Estimated impact of several strategies for the use of intrapartum antimicrobial
prophylaxis (IAP) against early-onset group B streptococcal disease in a hypothetical
population (adapted from 68).
====================================================
=======================================
                                  Proportion of early-onset     Proportion of deliveries
                                   GBS disease prevented             receiving IAP
Prevention strategy                         (%)                            (%)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prenatal culture at 35-37 weeks'           86.0                           26.7
 gestation; IAP for preterm
 deliveries and all GBS carriers *
Prenatal culture at 26-28 weeks'           50.7                            3.4 +
 gestation; IAP for GBS carriers
 who develop intrapartum risk
 factors (e.g., fever, prolonged
 rupture of membranes, <37 weeks'
 gestation) (54)
No prenatal cultures; IAP for all          68.8                          18.3 &
 women with intrapartum risk
 factors (e.g., fever, prolonged
 rupture of membranes, <37 weeks'
 gestation) @
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Combination strategy; refer to Figure 1.
+ Percentage was estimated for a hypothetical population (68); actual proportion of
  deliveries among who had prenatal screening cultures positive for GBS and who also
  developed intrapartum risk factors was 4.6% (20).
& Percentage was estimated for a hypothetical population (68); actual proportion of
  deliveries among women who had intrapartum risk factors was 24.7% (20).
@  Empiric  strategy  suggested  by  the  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and
Gynecologists
  in 1993 (64, 65); refer to Figure 2.
====================================================
=======================================
Return to top.Table_B1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
BOX 1. Procedure for collecting and processing clinical specimens for culture
of group b Streeptococcus
====================================================
=========================
1. Obtain one or two swabs of the vaginal introitus and anorectum. Cervical
   cultures are not acceptable; a speculum should not be used for culture
   collection.
2. Place the swabs into a transport medium. The swabs in a transport medium
   will maintain GBS viability for up to 4 days at room temperature or under
   refrigeration. Appropriate nonnutritive moist swab transport systems
   (e.g. Amies') are commercially available.
3. Remove the swabs from the transport medium and inoculate both swabs
   together into selective broth medium. Todd-Hewitt broth supplemented with
   either colistin (10 g/mL) and nalidixic acid (15 g/mL) or with gentamicin
   (8 g/mL) and nalidixic acid (15 g/mL) may be used; appropriate
   commercially available options include Lim or SBM broth.
4. Incubate selective broth for 18-24 hrs. Subculture the broth to sheep
   blood agar plate.
5. Inspect and identify organisms suggestive of GBS (beta hemolytic or
   nonhemolytic, gram-positive and catalase negative). If GBS is not
   identified after incubation for 18-24 hrs on sheep blood agar plate,
   reincubate and inspect at 48 hrs to identify suspected organisms.
6. Various slide agglutination tests or other tests for GBS antigen
   detection (e.g., genetic probe or fluorescent antibody) may be used for
   specific identification, or the CAMP test may be employed for
   presumptive identification.
====================================================
=========================
Return to top.Figure_1Return to top.
Figure_2Return to top.
Table_B2
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
BOX 2. Recommended regimens for intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis for
perinatal group B streptococcal disease
====================================================
=========================
Recommended             Penicillin G, 5 mU IV
                        load, then 2.5 mUs IV every
                        4 hrs until delivery
Alternative             Ampicillin, 2 g IV load, then 1 g
                        IV every 4 hrs until delivery
If penicillin-allergic
 Recommended            Clindamycin, 900 mg IV every 8 hrs
                        until delivery
 Alternative            Erythromycin, 500 mg IV every 6 hrs until delivery
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Note: If patient is receiving treatment for amnionitis with an
  antimicrobial agent active against group B streptococci (e.g., ampicillin,
  penicillin, clindamycin, or erythromycin), additional prophylactic
  antibiotics are not needed.
====================================================
=========================
Return to top.Figure_3Return to top.
Figure_3EReturn to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 09/19/98
 
    Baker CJ, Edwards MS. Group B streptococcal infections. In:
    Remington J, Klein JO, eds. Infectious diseases of the fetus
 and
    newborn infant. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
 1995:980-1054.  
    Zangwill KM, Schuchat A, Wenger JD. Group B streptococcal
    disease in the United States, 1990: report from a multistate
 active
    surveillance system. In: CDC surveillance summaries (November
 20).
    MMWR 1992;41(No. SS-6):25-32.  
    Farley MM, Harvey RC, Stull T, et al. A population-based
    assessment of invasive disease due to group B streptococcus in
    nonpregnant adults. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1807-11.  
    Weisman LE, Stoll BJ, Cruess DF, et al. Early-onset group B
    streptococcal sepsis: a current assessment. J Pediatr
 1992;121:428-33.  
    Schwartz B, Schuchat A, Oxtoby MJ, Cochi SL, Hightower A,
 Broome
    CV. Invasive group B streptococcal disease in adults: a
    population-based study in metropolitan Atlanta. JAMA
 1991;266:1112-4.  
    Dillon HC, Khare S, Gray BM. Group B streptococcal carriage and
    disease: a 6-year prospective study. J Pediatr 1987;110:31-6.  
    Opal SM, Cross A, Palmer M, Almazan R. Group B streptococcal
    sepsis in adults and infants. Contrasts and comparisons. Arch
    Intern Med 1988;148:641-5.  
    Pass MA, Gray BM, Khare S, Dillon HC. Prospective studies of
    group B streptococcal infections in infants. J Pediatr
 1979;95:431-43.  
    Ancona RJ, Ferrieri P, Williams PP. Maternal factors that
    enhance the acquisition of group B streptococci by newborn
 infants.
    J Med Microbiol 1980;3:273-80.  
    Lannering B, Larsson LE, Rojas J, Stahlman MT. Early onset
    group B streptococcal disease. Seven year experience and
 clinical
    scoring system. Acta Paediatr Scand 1983;72:597-602.  
    Gladstone IM, Ehrenkranz RA, Edberg SC, Baltimore RS. A
    ten-year review of neonatal sepsis and comparison with the
 previous
    fifty-year experience. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1990;9:819-25.  
    Anthony BF, Okada DM, Hobel CJ. Epidemiology of group B
    Streptococcus: longitudinal observations during pregnancy. J
 Infect
    Dis 1978;137:524-30.  
    Regan JA, Klebanoff MA, Nugent RP, Vaginal infections and
    prematurity study group. The epidemiology of group B
 streptococcal
    colonization in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1991;77:604-10.  
    Yow MD, Leeds LJ, Mason EO, Clark DJ, Beachler CW. The natural
    history of group B streptococcal colonization in the pregnant
 woman
    and her offspring. I. Colonization studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol
    1980;137:34-8.  
    Dillon HC, Gray E, Pass MA, Gray BM. Anorectal and vaginal
    carriage of group B streptococci during pregnancy. J Infect Dis
    1982;145:794-9.  
    Boyer KM, Gadzala CA, Kelly PD, Burd LI, Gotoff SP. Selective
    intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of neonatal group B streptococcal
    early-onset disease. II. Predictive value of prenatal cultures.
 J
    Infect Dis 1983;148:802-9.  
    Badri MS, Zawaneh S, Cruz AC, et al. Rectal colonization with
    group B streptococcus: relation to vaginal colonization of
 pregnant
    women. J Infect Dis 1977;135:308-12.  
    Baker CJ, Goroff DK, Alpert S, et al. Vaginal colonization with
    group B streptococcus: a study of college women. J Infect Dis
    1977;135:392-7.  
    Ferrieri P, Blair LL. Pharyngeal carriage of group B
    streptococci: detection by three methods. J Clin Microbiol
    1977;6:136-9.  
    Boyer KM, Gotoff SP. Strategies for chemoprophylaxis of GBS
    early-onset infections. Antibiot Chemother 1985;35:267-80.  
    Schuchat A, Oxtoby M, Cochi S, et al. Population-based risk
    factors for neonatal group B streptococcal disease: results of
 a
    cohort study in metropolitan Atlanta. J Infect Dis
 1990;162:672-7.  
    Schuchat A, Deaver-Robinson K, Plikaytis BD, Zangwill K,
    Mohle-Boetani J, Wenger JD. Multistate case-control study of
    maternal risk factors for neonatal group B streptococcal
 disease.
    Pediatr Infect Dis J 1994;13:623-9.  
    Baker CJ, Kasper DL. Correlation of maternal antibody
    deficiency with susceptibility to neonatal group B
 streptococcal
    infection. N Engl J Med 1976;294:753-6.  
    Carstensen H, Christensen KK, Grennert L, Persson K, Polberger
    S. Early-onset neonatal group B streptococcal septicaemia in
    siblings. J Infect 1988;17:201-4.  
    Faxelius G, Bremme K, Christensen KK, Christensen P, Ringertz
    S. Neonatal septicemia due to group B streptococci -- perinatal
 risk
    factors and outcome of subsequent pregnancies. J Perinat Med
    1988;16:423-30.  
    Christensen KK, Dahlander K, Linden V, Svenningsen N,
    Christensen P. Obstetrical care in future pregnancies after
 fetal
    loss in group B streptococcal septicemia. A prevention program
    based on bacteriological and immunological follow-up. Eur J
 Obstet
    Gynecol Reprod Biol 1981;12:143-50.  
    Wood EG, Dillon HC. A prospective study of group B
    streptococcal bacteriuria in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
    1981;140:515-20.  
    Moller M, Thomsen AC, Borch K, Dinesen K, Zdravkovic M. Rupture
    of fetal membranes and premature delivery associated with group
 B
    streptococci in urine of pregnant women. Lancet 1984;ii:69-70.  
    Liston TE, Harris RE, Foshee S, Null DM. Relationship of
    neonatal pneumonia to maternal urinary and neonatal isolates of
    group B streptococci. South Med J 1979;72:1410-2.  
    Persson K, Christensen KK, Christensen P, Forsgren A, Jorgensen
    C, Persson P. Asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy with
    special reference to group B streptococci. Scand J Infect Dis
    1985;17:195-9.  
    Pass MA, Khare S, Dillon HC. Twin pregnancies: incidence of
    group B streptococcal colonization and disease. J Pediatr
    1980;97:635-7.  
    Edwards MS, Jackson CV, Baker CJ. Increased risk of group B
    streptococcal disease in twins. JAMA 1981;245:2044-6.  
    Cochi SL, Feldman RA. Estimating national incidence of group B
    streptococcal disease: the effect of adjusting for birth
 weight.
    Pediatr Infect Dis J 1983;2:414-5.  
    Easmon CSF, Hastings MJG, Clare AJ, et al. Nosocomial
    transmission of group B streptococci. Br Med J 1981;283:459-61.
  
    Anthony BF, Okada DM, Hobel CJ. Epidemiology of the group B
    streptococcus: maternal and nosocomial sources for infant
    acquisitions. J Pediatr 1979;95:431-6.  
    Yancey MK, Duff P, Clark P, Kurtzer T, Frentzen BH, Kubilis P.
    Peripartum infection associated with vaginal group B
 streptococcal
    colonization. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:816-9.  
    Baker CJ, Edwards MS, Kasper DL. Role of antibody to native
    type III polysaccharide of group B streptococcus in infant
    infection. Pediatrics 1981;68:544-9.  
    Baker CJ, Rench MA, Edwards MS, Carpenter RJ, Hays BM, Kasper
    DL. Immunization of pregnant women with a polysaccharide
 vaccine of
    group B streptococcus. N Engl J Med 1988; 319:1180-5.  
    Schuchat A, Wenger JD. Epidemiology of group B streptococcal
    disease: risk factors, prevention strategies and vaccine
    development. Epidemiol Rev 1994;16:374-402.  
    Lewin EB, Amstey MS. Natural history of group B streptococcus
    colonization and its therapy during pregnancy. Am J Obstet
 Gynecol
    1981;139:512-5.  
    Merenstein GB, Todd WA, Brown G, et al. Group B beta-hemolytic
    streptococcus: randomized controlled treatment study at term.
    Obstet Gynecol 1980;55:315-8.  
    Hall RT, Barnes W, Krishnan L, et al. Antibiotic treatment of
    parturient women colonized with group B streptococci. Am J
 Obstet
    Gynecol 1976;124:630-4.  
    Gardner SE, Yow MD, Leeds LJ, Thompson PK, Mason EO, Clark DJ.
    Failure of penicillin to eradicate group B streptococcal
    colonization in the pregnant woman: a couple study. Am J Obstet
    Gynecol 1979;135:1062-5.  
    Pyati SP, Pildes RS, Jacobs NM, et al. Penicillin in infants
    weighing two kilograms or less with early-onset group B
    streptococcal disease. N Engl J Med 1983;308:1383-9.  
    Siegel JD, McCracken GHJ, Threlkeld N, Milvenan B, Rosenfeld
    CR. Single dose penicillin prophylaxis against neonatal group B
    streptococcal infections: a controlled trial in 18,738 newborn
    infants. N Engl J Med 1980;303:769-75.  
    Siegel JD, McCracken GHJ, Threlkeld N, DePasse BM, Rosenfeld
    CR. Single-dose penicillin prophylaxis of neonatal group B
    streptococcal disease. Lancet 1982;i:1426-30.  
    Yow MD, Mason EO, Leeds LJ, Thompson PK, Clark DJ, Gardner SE.
    Ampicillin prevents intrapartum transmission of group B
    streptococcus. JAMA 1979;241:1245-7.  
    Easmon CSF, Hastings MJG, Deeley J, Bloxham B, Rivers RPA,
    Marwood R. The effect of intrapartum chemoprophylaxis on the
    vertical transmission of group B streptococci. Br J Obstet
 Gynaecol
    1983;90:633-5.  
    Boyer KM, Gadzala CA, Kelly PD, Gotoff SP. Selective
    intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of neonatal group B streptococcal
    early-onset disease. III. Interruption of mother-to-infant
    transmission. J Infect Dis 1983;148:810-6.  
    Matorras R, Garcia-Perea A, Omenaca F, Diez-Enciso M, Madero R,
    Usandizaga JA. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of early-onset
 group B
    streptococcal disease. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
 1991;40:57-62.  
    Lim DV, Morales WJ, Walsh AF, Kazanis D. Reduction of morbidity
    and mortality rates for neonatal group B streptococcal disease
    through early diagnosis and chemoprophylaxis. J Clin Microbiol
    1986;23:489-92.  
    Allardice JG, Baskett TF, Seshia MMK, Bowman N, Malazdrewicz R.
    Perinatal group B streptococcal colonization and infection. Am
 J
    Obstet Gynecol 1982;142:617-20.  
    Garland SM, Fliegner JR. Group B streptococcus and neonatal
    infections: the case for intrapartum chemoprophylaxis. Aust N Z
 J
    Obstet Gynaecol 1991;31:119-22.  
    Boyer KM, Gotoff SP. Prevention of early-onset neonatal group
    B streptococcal disease with selective intrapartum
    chemoprophylaxis. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1665-9.  
    Boyer KM, Gadzala CA, Burd LI, Fisher DE, Paton JB, Gotoff SP.
    Selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of neonatal group B
    streptococcal early-onset disease. I. Epidemiologic rationale.
 J
    Infect Dis 1983;148:795-801.  
    Boyer KM, Gotoff SP. Antimicrobial prophylaxis of neonatal
    group B streptococcal sepsis. Clin Perinatol 1988;15:831-50.  
    Morales WJ, Lim DV, Walsh AF. Prevention of neonatal group B
    streptococcal sepsis by the use of a rapid screening test and
    selective intrapartum chemoprophylaxis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
    1986;155:979-83.  
    Tuppurainen N, Hallman M. Prevention of neonatal group B
    streptococcal disease: intrapartum detection and
 chemoprophylaxis
    of heavily colonized parturients. Obstet Gynecol 1989;
 73:583-7.  
    Morales WJ, Lim D. Reduction of group B streptococcal maternal
    and neonatal infections in preterm pregnancies with premature
    rupture of membranes through a rapid identification test. Am J
    Obstet Gynecol 1987;157:13-6.  
    Allen UD, Navas L, King SM. Effectiveness of intrapartum
    penicillin prophylaxis in preventing early-onset group B
    streptococcal infection: results of a meta-analysis. Can Med
 Assoc
    J 1993; 149:1659-65.  
    Ohlsson A, Myhr TL. Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis of perinatal
    group B streptococcal infections: a critical review of
 randomized
    controlled trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:910-7.  
    American Academy of Pediatrics. Guidelines for prevention of
    group B streptococcal infection by chemoprophylaxis. Pediatrics
    1992;90:775-8.  
    Minkoff H, Mead P. An obstetric approach to the prevention of
    early-onset group B beta-hemolytic streptococcal sepsis. Am J
    Obstet Gynecol 1986;154:973-7.  
    Hankins GV, Chalas E. Group B streptococcal infections in
    pregnancy: ACOG's recommendations. ACOG Newsletter 1993;37:2.  
    American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Survey
    shows continued confusion over management of GBS in pregnancy.
 ACOG
    Newsletter 1994;38:1,10.  
    Landon MB, Harger J, McNellis D, Mercer B, Thom EA. Prevention
    of neonatal group B streptococcal infection. Obstet Gynecol
    1994;84:460-2.  
    Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada and
    Canadian Pediatric Society. National consensus statement on the
    prevention of early-onset group B streptococcal infections in
 the
    newborn. Journal of the Society of Obstetricians and
 Gynaecologists
    of Canada and Canadian Pediatric Society 1994;16:2271-8.  
    Rouse DJ, Goldenberg RL, Cliver SP, Cutter GR, Mennemeyer ST,
    Fargason CA. Strategies for the prevention of early-onset
 neonatal
    group B streptococcal sepsis: a decision analysis. Obstet
 Gynecol
    1994;83:483-94.  
    Schwartz B, Jackson L. Invasive group B streptococcal disease
    in adults. JAMA 1991;266:3284.  
    Goodman LS, Gilman A, Gilman AG, eds. Goodman and Gilman's the
    pharmacologic basis of therapeutics. 8th ed. New York: Pergamon
    Press, 1990.  
    Heim K, Alge A, Marth C. Anaphylactic reaction to ampicillin
    and severe complication in the fetus. Lancet 1991;337:859-60.  
    Cunningham R, Walker C, Ridgway E. Prosthetic hip-joint
    infection associated with a penicillin-tolerant group B
    streptococcus. J Infect 1992;25:77-81.  
    Steinbrecher UP. Serious infection in an adult due to
    penicillin-tolerant group B streptococcus. Arch Intern Med
    1981;141:1714-5.  
    Severin MJ, Wiley JL. Change in susceptibility of group B
    streptococci to penicillin G from 1968 through 1975. Antimicrob
    Agents Chemother 1976;10:380-1.  
    McDuffie RS, McGregor JA, Gibbs RS. Adverse perinatal outcome
    and resistant Enterobacteriaceae after antibiotic usage for
    premature rupture of the membranes and group B streptococcus
    carriage. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:487-9.  
    Amstey MS, Gibbs RS. Is penicillin G a better choice than
    ampicillin for prophylaxis of neonatal group B streptococcal
    infections? Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:1058-9.  
    Gibbs RS, McGregor JA, Mead PB, Eschenbach DA, Hager WD, Sweet
    RL. A survey of practices in infectious diseases by
    obstetrician-gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:631-6.  
    Yancey MK, Armer T, Clark P, Duff P. Assessment of rapid
    identification tests for genital carriage of group B
 streptococci.
    Obstet Gynecol 1992;80:1038-47.  
    Towers CV, Garite TJ, Friedman WW, Pircon RA, Nageotte MP.
    Comparison of a rapid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay test
 and
    the Gram stain for detection of group B streptococcus in
 high-risk
    antepartum patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:965-7.  
    Mohle-Boetani J, Schuchat A, Plikaytis BD, Smith D, Broome CV.
    Comparison of prevention strategies for neonatal group B
    streptococcal infection: a population-based economic analysis.
 JAMA
    1993;270:1442-8.  
    Stray-Pederson B. Economic evaluation of maternal screening to
    prevent congenital syphilis. Sex Transm Dis 1983;10:167-72.  
    Strickland DM, Yeomans ER, Hankins GDV. Cost effectiveness of
    intrapartum screening and treatment for maternal group B
    streptococci colonization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:4-8.  
    Yancey MK, Duff P. An analysis of the cost-effectiveness of
    selected protocols for the prevention of neonatal group B
    streptococcal infection. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:367-71.  
    Wiswell TE, Stoll BJ, Tuggle JM. Management of asymptomatic,
    term gestation neonates born to mothers treated with
 intrapartum
    antibiotics. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1990;9:826-31.  
    Pylipow M, Gaddis M, Kinney JS. Selective intrapartum
    prophylaxis for group B streptococcus colonization: management
 and
    outcome of newborns. Pediatrics 1994;93:631-5.  
    Gibbs RS, McDuffie RS, McNabb F, Fryer GE, Miyoshi T,
    Merenstein G. Neonatal group B streptococcal sepsis during 2
 years
    of a universal screening program. Obstet Gynecol
 1994;84:496-500.  
    Jafari HS, Schuchat A, Hilsdon R, Whitney C, Toomey K, Wenger
    J. Barriers to prevention of perinatal group B streptococcal
 
 
 
 disease.
 Pediatr
 Infect
 Dis
 J
 1995;14:662-7.
 
+-------------------------------------------------------------------
-------+
|            
                                                              |
|                    Erratum: Vol. 45, No. RR-7
                            |
|            
                                                              |
|            SOURCE: MMWR 45(31);679   DATE: Aug 09, 1996
                  |
|            
                                                              |
|      The MMWR Recommendations and Reports, "Prevention of
 Perinatal      |
|  Group B Streptococcal Disease: A Public Health Perspective,"
            |
|  contained two errors.
                                                   |
|            
                                                              |
|  Page 17, Box 1: Item 3 should read:
                                     |
|  3. Remove the swabs from the transport medium and inoculate both
        |
|  swabs together into selective broth medium. Todd-Hewitt broth
           |
|  supplemented with either colistin (10 ug/mL) and nalidixic acid
 (15     |
|  ug/mL) or with gentamicin (8 ug/mL) and nalidixic acid (15
 ug/mL)       |
|  may be used; appropriate commercially available options include
 Lim     |
|  or SBM broth.
                                                           |
|            
                                                              |
|  Page 20:  Figure_3 contained an arrow pointing in the
 incorrect     |
|  direction.  The corrected Figure_3E appears below.
                  |
|            
                                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------
-------+  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 09/19/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00043277.htm
