Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
Mention  of  a  product  or  company  name  is  for  identification  purposes  only  and
does  not  constitute  endorsement  by  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention.  Schools  provide  safe,  supportive  environments,  routines,  and
important  services  that  support  student  health  and  well-being.  Schools  should  have
plans  in  place  that  can  help  reduce  illness  and  illness-related  absenteeism  by
preventing  the  spread  of  common  infections.  This  guidance  is  designed  to  maximize
school attendance and its benefits for all students, while also preventing the spread of
infectious
 diseases.
 This
 new
 guidance
 consolidates
 and
 simplifies
 previous
recommendations  intended  specifically  for  K-12  school  settings.  It  replaces  previous
guidance  that  was  for  COVID-19  and  influenza  in  schools,  is  aligned  with  CDC’s
respiratory virus guidance, and is based on scientific studies that showed what works
best to prevent the spread of many common respiratory and stomach infections. These
strategies  can  also  reduce  the  spread  of  many  other  infectious  diseases  in  schools.
Prevention  and  Control  of  Respiratory  and  Gastrointestinal  Infections  in  Kindergarten
through  Grade  12  (K-12)  Schools  On  CDC’s  website,  there  is  additional  guidance  for
several  other  illnesses  (e.g.,  strep  throat,  hand-foot-mouth  disease,  norovirus,  head
lice,  pink  eye,  impetigo,  scabies,  measles,  and  molluscum  contagiosum)  that  schools
can  use  to  prevent  specific  infections.  Information  on  diseases  from  mosquitos  (e.g.,
West Nile Virus, dengue) is also available. Schools should work with their local public
health  partners,  and  engage  parents/caregivers  and  other  community  partners,  to
create their emergency operations plan that includes a section on infectious diseases.
School and public health officials can promote learning and health for all students and
staff  by  implementing  comprehensive  prevention  strategies  to  keep  students,  staff,
families,  and  school  communities  healthy  and  provide  supportive  environments  for
in-person learning. Federal civil rights laws may require that schools provide reasonable
modifications  or  accommodations  in  various  circumstances.  Schools  must  provide
reasonable  modifications  or  reasonable  accommodations,  when  necessary,  to  ensure
equal  access  to  in-person  learning  for  students  with  disabilities  during  increased
infectious  illness  activity.  Nothing  in  this  guidance  is  intended  to  detract  from  or
supersede  those  laws.  This  guidance  also  highlights  the  importance  of  clear  and
consistent communication between school administrators, parents and caregivers, and
staff. Providing clear and accessible communication to families and staff is required for
the success of many strategies described in this guidance. Communication strategies
should  consider  the  needs  of  people  with  limited  English  proficiency  who  require
language services, and individuals with disabilities who require accessible formats. 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/orr/school-preparedness/infection-prevention/index.html
