A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Patients  who  are  colonized  with  Candida  auris  (C.  auris)  are  at  risk  for  invasive
infections.  Extra  precautions  are  needed  if  these  patients  require  invasive  medical
devices  and  surgical  procedures.  C.  auris  is  found  on  the  skin  of  patients  who  are
colonized,  as  typically  identified  through  screening  with  skin  swabs.  Patients  with
clinical infections may also be colonized, meaning they have C. auris on their skin or
other body sites in addition to the site of infection.  C. auris on the skin can enter the
body  through  invasive  devices,  incisions,  wounds,  and  during  surgery.  Special
precautions  should  be  taken  to  prevent  invasive  infections.  The  same  infection
prevention and control measures apply to patients with clinical infections and patients
with  colonization  without  infection.  C.  auris  typically  affects  patients  with  severe
underlying medical conditions who may need invasive devices. These include lines and
tubes,  including  central  venous  catheters,  urinary  catheters  and  tracheostomy  tubes.
These devices can provide ways for C. auris to enter the body. To help prevent invasive
infections  through  medical  devices,  healthcare  providers  should  ensure  following
recommendations  for:   Clinicians  should  continually  assess  the  need  for  invasive
devices and promptly remove them when they are no longer needed. Patients who are
colonized  or  infected  with  C.  auris  are  at  risk  for  surgical  site  infections.  Strict
adherence to the CDC Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection is critical. 
Meticulous  skin  preparation  in  the  operating  room  should  be  performed  using  an
alcohol-based  agent  unless  contraindicated.   C.  auris  is  an  emerging  fungus  that  can
cause severe, often multidrug-resistant, infections. It spreads easily among patients in
healthcare facilities. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/candida-auris/hcp/infection-control/invasive-infection-prevention.html
