Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Smallpox is spread through prolonged face-to-face contact via
droplets  expelled  from  the  patient’s  nose  and  mouth,  usually  by  coughing.  Smallpox
may  also  be  transmitted  through  contact  with  materials  from  smallpox  pustules  or
scabs.  There  have  also  been  rare  reports  of  airborne  transmission  in  hospital  and
laboratory  settings.  Prevent  the  spread  of  disease  within  your  facility  and  from  your
facility  to  the  community  by  adhering  to  infection  and  environmental  controls.  Only
vaccinated individuals should have access to the healthcare facility treating smallpox
patients. Facilities may need to limit entrance to only approved, vaccinated individuals
during a smallpox emergency. This includes staff, visitors, and any non-staff individuals
who  provide  services  for  the  facility  (delivery  or  service  personnel,  public  health
officials,  law  enforcement,  etc.).  Limiting  access  may  require  designating  staff  to
maintain  lists  of  individuals  approved  to  enter  the  facility,  check  identification,  and
monitor  individuals  for  signs  and  symptoms  of  smallpox.  All  staff  should  follow
standard,  contact,  and  airborne  precautions,  and  use  the  appropriate  personal
protective  equipment  (PPE),  regardless  of  vaccination  status.  This  helps  assure  that
healthcare workers are protected regardless of when they were last vaccinated. It also
provides additional protection should there be any modification to the infectivity of the
smallpox virus. These precautions also apply to visitors and any other person entering
the  patient’s  room.  Train  healthcare  facility  staff  prior  to  an  outbreak  on:  Prior  to
entering  a  smallpox  patient’s  room,  all  staff  should  put  on  the  appropriate  PPE:  Staff
should remove all PPE, except for the N95 respirator, before leaving the patient’s room.
After removing gloves, the staff member should wash his or her hands with soap and
water or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Maintaining proper hand hygiene will help
limit  the  spread  of  disease.  Ensure  your  facility  will  have  enough  PPE  available  to
protect  staff  caring  for  one  or  more  patients  with  smallpox  in  AIIRs.  Include  in  your
emergency  plans  how  you  will  acquire  additional  PPE  quickly  to  handle  a  potential
surge. Current practices for disinfection and sterilization of patient-care equipment and
environmental  surfaces  also  apply  to  facilities  evaluating  and  caring  for  smallpox
patients.  There  is  no  EPA-registered  disinfectant  approved  to  inactivate  variola  virus
(the virus that causes smallpox). Since variola virus is similar to vaccinia virus (the virus
used  in  the  smallpox  vaccine),  any  EPA-registered  hospital  disinfectant  approved  to
inactivate vaccinia virus may be used to disinfect nonporous surfaces contaminated by
variola  virus.  Follow  the  manufacturer’s  recommendations  for  concentration,  contact
time, and care in handling. The nature and extent of surface contamination will dictate
the  level  of  disinfection  (i.e.,  low-level  or  intermediate-level)  needed  to  make  the
surface safe to handle or use. All personnel performing environmental control tasks in a
facility  caring  for  smallpox  patients  should  be  vaccinated  and  wear  appropriate  PPE.
Specific  considerations:  Treat  laundry  carefully,  as  there  have  been  reports  of
re-aerosolized transmission of variola virus from infected fabric and bedding (fomites).
Never shake or handle the linens roughly, as this may contaminate air, surfaces, and
others  with  infectious  particles.  Personnel  handling  laundry  from  smallpox  patients
should  be  vaccinated  and  wear  appropriate  PPE.  Only  vaccinated  personnel  should
handle waste from a facility caring for smallpox patients. All waste contaminated with
smallpox  (or  suspected  to  be  contaminated  with  smallpox)  is  a  Category  A  infectious
substance
 regulated
 as
 hazardous
 material
 under
 the
 U.S.
 Department
 of
Transportation  (DOT)  Hazardous  Materials  Regulations  (HMR;  49  CFR,  Parts  171-180).
These regulations require special packaging of hazardous materials prior to shipment or
transport. DOT may grant special permits to allow a variance to the regulations, as long
as  the  applicant  can  demonstrate  alternative  packaging  meets  certain  requirements.
Other  state  and  local  transportation  guidelines  may  apply.  Include  representatives  of
these  departments  in  your  facility’s  planning  process.  Other  options  for  disposal
include:  Note:  Waste  generated  from  the  smallpox  vaccine,  which  contains  vaccinia
virus, is a Category B infectious substance under the same regulations.
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/smallpox/bioterrorism-response-planning/healthcare-facility/prevent-spread-disease.
html
