A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Infection  control  measures  depend  on  whether  the  patient  with  herpes  zoster  is
immunocompetent  or  immunocompromised.  Healthcare  professionals  should  also
determine  if  the  rash  is  localized  or  disseminated  (appearance  of  lesions  outside  the
primary  or  adjacent  dermatomes).  In  all  cases,  follow  standard  infection  control
precautions.  Use  the  table  below  to  determine  if  any  additional  infection  control
precautions are required. Infection control precautions are based on patient's immune
status  and  rash  localization.   Guidance  for  work  restrictions  for  healthcare  personnel
exposed  to  or  infected  with  certain  vaccine-preventable  diseases  and  conditions,
including
 herpes
 zoster,
 are
 summarized
 in
 Table
 5
 (page
 43)
 of
 ACIP's
recommendations.  As  noted  in  this  guidance:  Healthcare  personnel  who  have  one  or
more documented doses of varicella vaccine or other evidence of immunity to varicella:
Healthcare  personnel  who  are  not  vaccinated  or  do  not  have  other  evidence  of
immunity  to  varicella:  To  prevent  the  spread  of  varicella  and  nosocomial  disease,
healthcare institutions should have documented evidence of varicella immunity for all
healthcare personnel readily available at the healthcare personnel's work location.
 Alert healthcare personnel without evidence of immunity to varicella about the risks of
possible infection. Healthcare institutions are advised to offer those without evidence of
immunity  2  doses  of  varicella  vaccine,  administered  4  to  8  weeks  apart,  when  they
begin employment.
 Healthcare institutions should establish protocols and recommendations for screening
and  vaccinating  healthcare  personnel.  Additionally,  protocols  should  be  identified  to
manage  healthcare  personnel  after  exposures  in  the  workplace.  Shingles  is  a  painful
rash  illness  caused  by  the  varicella-zoster  virus  (VZV).  Protect  yourself  from  serious
complications  by  getting  vaccinated.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/shingles/hcp/infection-control/index.html
