Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  March  25,  2016  /  65(11);290–292  On  March  22,
2016, this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. Christine K. Olson, MD1;
Martha Iwamoto, MD2; Kiran M. Perkins, MD3; Kara N.D. Polen, MPH4; Jeffrey Hageman,
MHS3;  Dana  Meaney-Delman,  MD5;  Irogue  I.  Igbinosa,  MD6;  Sumaiya  Khan,  MPH7;
Margaret  A.  Honein,  PhD4;  Michael  Bell,  MD3;  Sonja  A.  Rasmussen,  MD8;  Denise  J.
Jamieson, MD1 (View author affiliations) Views equals page views plus PDF downloads
Zika virus transmission was detected in the Region of the Americas (Americas) in Brazil
in May 2015, and as of March 21, 2016, local mosquito-borne transmission of Zika virus
had been reported in 32 countries and territories in the Americas, including Puerto Rico
and the U.S. Virgin Islands.* Most persons infected with Zika virus have a mild illness or
are  asymptomatic.  However,  increasing  evidence  supports  a  link  between  Zika  virus
infection  during  pregnancy  and  adverse  pregnancy  and  birth  outcomes  (1),  and  a
possible  association  between  recent  Zika  virus  infection  and  Guillain-Barré  syndrome
has been reported (2). Although Zika virus is primarily transmitted through the bite of
Aedes species of mosquitoes, sexual transmission also has been documented (3). Zika
virus RNA has been detected in a number of body fluids, including blood, urine, saliva,
and  amniotic  fluid  (3–5),  and  whereas  transmission  associated  with  occupational
exposure  to  these  body  fluids  is  theoretically  possible,  it  has  not  been  documented.
Although  there  are  no  reports  of  transmission  of  Zika  virus  from  infected  patients  to
health  care  personnel  or  other  patients,  minimizing  exposures  to  body  fluids  is
important  to  reduce  the  possibility  of  such  transmission.  CDC  recommends  Standard
Precautions  in  all  health  care  settings  to  protect  both  health  care  personnel  and
patients  from  infection  with  Zika  virus  as  well  as  from  blood-borne  pathogens  (e.g.,
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] and hepatitis C virus [HCV]) (6). Because of the
potential  for  exposure  to  large  volumes  of  body  fluids  during  the  labor  and  delivery
process and the sometimes unpredictable and fast-paced nature of obstetrical care, the
use  of  Standard  Precautions  in  these  settings  is  essential  to  prevent  possible
transmission  of  Zika  virus  from  patients  to  health  care  personnel.   Top  Health  care
personnel should adhere to Standard Precautions in every health care setting. Standard
Precautions  are  designed  to  protect  health  care  personnel  and  to  prevent  them  from
spreading  infections  to  patients.  They  are  based  on  the  premise  that  all  blood,  body
fluids,  secretions,  excretions  (except  sweat),  nonintact  skin,  and  mucous  membranes
might  contain  transmissible  infectious  agents  and  include  1)  hand  hygiene,  2)  use  of
personal  protective  equipment  (PPE),  3)  respiratory  hygiene  and  cough  etiquette,  4)
safe injection practices, and 5) safe handling of potentially contaminated equipment or
surfaces  in  the  patient  environment  (6).  Because  patients  with  Zika  virus  infection
might  be  asymptomatic,  Standard  Precautions  should  be  in  place  at  all  times,
regardless  of  whether  the  infection  is  suspected  or  confirmed.  Health  care  personnel
should assess the potential for exposure to potentially infectious material during health
care  delivery  and  protect  themselves  accordingly,  based  on  the  level  of  clinical
interaction with the patient and the physical distance at which care is provided (6). In
addition,  health  care  providers  should  use  soap  and  water  or  alcohol-based  products
(gels,  rinses,  foams),  at  a  minimum,  before  and  after  a  patient  contact  and  after
removing PPE, including gloves (6). Top Pregnant women lose an average of 500 mL of
blood  during  uncomplicated  vaginal  deliveries,  with  higher  losses  during  complicated
vaginal  deliveries  and  cesarean  deliveries  (7).  Amniotic  fluid  volume  at  the  time  of
full-term delivery typically exceeds 500 mL (8). Eye protection used during deliveries
has been demonstrated to be contaminated with blood and body fluids (9), and when
double layers of gloves are used for procedures and surgeries, the outer layers often
have significant perforations, whereas the inner layers are intact or have many fewer
perforations  (10).  Although  health  care  personnel  in  these  settings  are  at  substantial
risk  for  exposure  to  blood  and  body  fluids,  varying  levels  of  adherence  to  Standard
Precautions have been reported in health care settings, including in labor and delivery
units (11). Numerous barriers to the appropriate use of PPE have been cited, including
the perception that PPE is uncomfortable and limits dexterity, fogging of goggles or face
masks,  the  misperception  that  prescription  eyeglasses  provide  adequate  eye
protection, lack of available PPE, forgetting to use PPE, lack of time in urgent clinical
situations to don appropriate PPE, the perception that the patient poses minimal risk,
and  concerns  about  interference  with  patient  care  (11).  Given  the  theoretic  risk  for
transmission of Zika virus through contact with body fluids in a health care setting in
which female health care personnel might be pregnant, or male or female health care
personnel might be trying to conceive a pregnancy, the outbreak of Zika virus disease
provides  an  opportunity  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  maintaining  appropriate
infection  control.  The  goals  of  Standard  Precautions  include  1)  preventing  contact
between  a  patient’s  body  fluids  and  health  care  personnel’s  mucous  membranes
(including  conjunctivae),  skin,  and  clothing;  2)  preventing  health  care  personnel  from
carrying  potentially  infectious  material  from  one  patient  to  another;  and  3)  avoiding
unnecessary exposure to contaminated sharp implements. Health care personnel must
assess  the  likelihood  of  body  fluid  exposure,  based  on  the  type  of  contact  and  the
nature of the procedure or activity, and use appropriate PPE. For example, because the
risk for splashes to areas of the body other than the hands is small when performing
vaginal  examinations  of  pregnant  women  with  minimal  cervical  dilation  and  intact
membranes,  only  gloves  are  required.  Placement  of  a  fetal  scalp  electrode  when
membranes  have  already  been  ruptured  or  handling  newborns  before  blood  and
amniotic fluid have been removed from the newborn’s skin require protection of health
care personnel’s skin and clothing using gloves and an impermeable gown. In contrast,
when performing procedures where exposure to body fluids is anticipated, such as an
amniotomy  or  placement  of  an  intrauterine  pressure  catheter,  protection  of  mucous
membranes, skin, and clothing are recommended, with a mask and eye protection, in
addition  to  gloves  and  an  impermeable  gown.  Anesthesia  providers  in  the  labor  and
delivery setting should adhere to Standard Precautions and wear sterile gloves and a
surgical mask when placing a catheter or administering intrathecal injections; additional
PPE  should  be  worn  based  on  anticipated  exposure  to  body  fluids  (6).  Double  gloves
might minimize the risk for percutaneous injury when sharps are handled. Patient body
fluids also should not come into direct contact with health care personnel clothing or
footwear.  When  performing  procedures  including  vaginal  deliveries,  manual  placenta
removal,  bimanual  uterine  massage,  and  repair  of  vaginal  lacerations,  PPE  should
include (in addition to mucous membrane and skin protection) impermeable gowns and
knee-high impermeable shoe covers. Clothing, skin, and mucous membrane protections
should be maintained for procedures performed in operating room settings. Health care
personnel  should  assess  their  risk  for  exposure  and  select  PPE  appropriate  for  the
situation, and all personnel on a team involved in the same procedures should use the
same level of PPE. All health care personnel should be trained in the correct use and
disposal  of  PPE  and  be  able  to  demonstrate  the  ability  to  don  PPE  quickly  in  urgent
situations  and  remove  it  safely.  Non–health  care  personnel  in  attendance  should  be
positioned away from areas of exposure risk or adequately protected. Any occupational
exposures,  including  mucous  membrane  exposure  following  splash  of  body  fluids,
sustained  by  health  care  personnel  should  be  reported  as  soon  as  possible  to  the
facility’s  occupational  health  clinic  to  ensure  appropriate  assessment  of  health  care
personnel, and so that any systemic safety risks can be addressed. In addition to use of
PPE by health care personnel, placement of disposable absorbent material on the floor
around the procedure and delivery area to absorb fluid can reduce the risk for splash
exposure to body fluids. Infection control supplies should be available and accessible in
all  patient  care  areas  where  they  will  be  needed.  Standard  cleaning  and  disinfection
procedures
 for
 environmental
 surfaces,
 using
 Environmental
 Protection
Agency-registered hospital disinfectants, should be followed. Top Standard Precautions
represent the minimum infection prevention expectations for safe care across all health
care settings. Ongoing education and training of all health care personnel in a facility,
including those employed by outside entities, on the principles and rationale for use of
Standard Precautions and use of specific PPE help ensure that infection control policies
and  procedures  are  understood  and  followed  (6).  These  educational  efforts  should
emphasize that infection prevention strategies enhance the quality of patient care and
do not alter the relationship between provider and patient. Barriers (e.g., cost and lack
of standardized protocols in facilities) to implementation of Standard Precautions and
use of PPE should be addressed as soon as they are recognized. Facility, nursing, and
obstetric leadership is critical for instituting infection prevention policies and promoting
routine use of and adherence to Standard Precautions (6). Infectious disease outbreaks,
such as the current Zika virus disease outbreak, provide an opportunity to emphasize
the  importance  of  adherence  to  published  infection  prevention  strategies  to  prevent
transmission  of  infectious  diseases  in  all  health  care  settings,  including  labor  and
delivery  units.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Christine  K.  Olson,  zikamch@cdc.gov,
770-488-7100.  Top  1Division  of  Reproductive  Health,  National  Center  for  Chronic
Disease  Prevention  and  Health  Promotion,  CDC;  2Division  of  Foodborne,  Waterborne,
and  Environmental  Diseases,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious
Diseases, CDC; 3Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging
and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  4Division  of  Congenital  and  Developmental
Disorders,  National  Center  for  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental  Disabilities,  CDC;
5Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases,
CDC;  6Division  of  Scientific  Education  and  Professional  Development,  Center  for
Surveillance,  Epidemiology,  and  Laboratory  Services,  CDC;  7Immunization  Services
Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 8Division of
Public  Health  Information  Dissemination,  Center  for  Surveillance,  Epidemiology,  and
Laboratory Services, CDC. Top Top * http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/active-countries.html.
Top  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Olson  CK,  Iwamoto  M,  Perkins  KM,  et  al.  
Preventing  Transmission  of  Zika  Virus  in  Labor  and  Delivery  Settings  Through
Implementation  of  Standard  Precautions  —  United  States,  2016.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal
Wkly Rep 2016;65:290–292. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6511e3. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6511e3.htm
