 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by
Rafael Harpaz, MD, Ismael R. Ortega-Sanchez, PhD, Jane F. Seward, MBBS,
Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases
 
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Immunization  and
Respiratory Diseases, Anne Schuchat, MD, Director; and the 
Division of Viral Diseases, Larry Anderson, MD, Director. 
 Corresponding  preparer:  Rafael  Harpaz,  MD,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and
Respiratory Diseases, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, MS 
A-47, Atlanta, GA 30333. Telephone: 404-639-6284; Fax: 
404-639-8665; E-mail: rzh6@cdc.gov. 
 These recommendations represent the first statement by the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) 
on the use of a live attenuated vaccine for the prevention of herpes zoster (zoster) (i.e.,
shingles) and its sequelae, which 
was  licensed  by  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  on  May  25,  2006.  This
report summarizes the 
epidemiology  of  zoster  and  its  sequelae,  describes  the  zoster  vaccine,  and  provides
recommendations for its use among adults aged 
>60 years in the United States. 
 Zoster is a localized, generally painful cutaneous eruption that occurs most frequently
among older adults 
and immunocompromised persons. It is caused by reactivation of latent varicella zoster
virus (VZV) decades after initial 
VZV  infection  is  established.  Approximately  one  in  three  persons  will  develop  zoster
during their lifetime, resulting in 
an estimated 1 million episodes in the United States annually. A common complication
of zoster is postherpetic 
neuralgia  (PHN),  a  chronic,  often  debilitating  pain  condition  that  can  last  months  or
even years. The risk for PHN in patients 
with  zoster  is  10%--18%.  Another  complication  of  zoster  is  eye  involvement,  which
occurs in 10%--25% of zoster episodes 
and  can  result  in  prolonged  or  permanent  pain,  facial  scarring,  and  loss  of  vision.
Approximately 3% of patients with 
zoster  are  hospitalized;  many  of  these  episodes  involved  persons  with  one  or  more
immunocompromising conditions. 
Deaths  attributable  to  zoster  are  uncommon  among  persons  who  are  not
immunocompromised.  
 Prompt treatment with the oral antiviral agents acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir
decreases the severity 
and  duration  of  acute  pain  from  zoster.  Additional  pain  control  can  be  achieved  in
certain patients by supplementing 
antiviral  agents  with  corticosteroids  and  with  analgesics.  Established  PHN  can  be
managed in certain patients with 
analgesics, tricyclic antidepressants, and other agents. 
 Licensed zoster vaccine is a lyophilized preparation of a live, attenuated strain of VZV,
the same strain used in 
the varicella vaccines. However, its minimum potency is at least 14-times the potency
of single-antigen varicella vaccine. In 
a large clinical trial, zoster vaccine was partially efficacious at preventing zoster. It also
was partially efficacious at 
reducing  the  severity  and  duration  of  pain  and  at  preventing  PHN  among  those
developing zoster. 
 Zoster vaccine is recommended for all persons aged 
>60 years who have no contraindications, including persons 
who report a previous episode of zoster or who have chronic medical conditions. The
vaccine should be offered at the 
patient's first clinical encounter with his or her health-care provider. It is administered
as a single 0.65 mL dose subcutaneously 
in the deltoid region of the arm. A booster dose is not licensed for the vaccine. Zoster
vaccination is not indicated to 
treat  acute  zoster,  to  prevent  persons  with  acute  zoster  from  developing  PHN,  or  to
treat ongoing PHN. Before administration 
of  zoster  vaccine,  patients  do  not  need  to  be  asked  about  their  history  of  varicella
(chickenpox) or to have serologic 
testing conducted to determine varicella immunity.
Introduction
 Infection  with  varicella  zoster  virus  (VZV)  causes  two  distinct  clinical  conditions.
Primary VZV infection 
causes varicella (i.e., chickenpox), a contagious rash illness that typically occurs among
children. A vaccine for preventing 
initial 
VZV  infection  has  been  available  in  the  United  States  since  1995,  and  the  Advisory
Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends routine varicella 
vaccination for all persons aged >12 months who lack evidence 
of  immunity  (1--3).  Varicella  vaccination  has  dramatically  reduced  chickenpox  cases
among children 
(3). 
 VZV  can  reactivate  clinically  decades  after  initial  infection  to  cause  herpes  zoster
(zoster) (i.e., shingles), a 
localized and generally painful cutaneous eruption that occurs most frequently among
older adults. Approximately 1 million 
new  cases  of  zoster  occur  in  the  United  States  annually.  Approximately  one  in  three
persons in the general population 
will  develop  zoster  during  their  lifetime.  A  common  complication  of  zoster  is
postherpetic neuralgia (PHN), a chronic 
pain  condition  that  can  last  months  or  even  years.  In  May  2006,  a  live,  attenuated
vaccine for prevention of 
zoster  (ZOSTAVAX®,  manufactured  by  Merck  &  Co.,  Inc.)  was  licensed  in  the  United
States for use in persons aged 
>60  years.  This  report  provides  recommendations  for  use  of  zoster  vaccine  for
prevention of zoster and its sequelae. 
Methods
 In  Spring  2005,  Merck  &  Co.,  Inc.  (Whitehouse  Station,  New  Jersey)  submitted  a
Biologics License Application 
to  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  for  an  investigational  live,  attenuated
vaccine for prevention of zoster on 
the basis of a phase 3 clinical trial. These results were published in June 2005 
(4)  and  presented  at  the  ACIP  meeting  later  that  month.  In  September  2005,  ACIP's
measles-mumps-rubella and varicella workgroup expanded its membership 
to include experts in adult medicine and in zoster and began review of relevant data on
zoster and the 
investigational  vaccine.  Shortly  thereafter,  this  workgroup  reformed  as  the  ACIP
shingles workgroup and, during subsequent 
months,  held  19  conference  calls  to  review  and  discuss  scientific  evidence  related  to
herpes zoster and zoster vaccine, 
including  the  epidemiology  and  natural  history  of  zoster  and  its  sequelae,  and  the
safety, immunogenicity, efficacy, 
financing,  storage,  and  handling  of  the  zoster  vaccine.  The  workgroup  also  reviewed
several economic analyses on zoster 
prevention.  Workgroup  members  participated  in  10  additional  conference  calls  to
develop and discuss recommendation options 
for  preventing  zoster.  When  scientific  evidence  was  lacking,  recommendations
incorporated expert opinions of 
the workgroup members. 
 Presentations  of  background  materials  on  zoster  and  the  vaccine  were  made  during
ACIP meetings in October 
2005  and  the  three  meetings  in  2006.  Following  vaccine  licensure  on  May  25,  2006,
recommendation options were 
presented to ACIP in June 2006, and final options were presented at the October 2006
meeting. During review by CDC 
and external partners, modifications were made to the proposed recommendations to
update and clarify wording in 
the  document.  As  new  information  on  the  epidemiology  and  prevention  of  zoster
becomes available, it will be reviewed 
by ACIP and recommendations will be updated as needed. 
Background
Biology of VZV
 VZV  is  an  exclusively  human  pathogen  that  infects  approximately  98%  of  the  adult
population in the United 
States (5). The primary infection typically occurs during childhood and causes varicella.
During its viremic phase, 
cell-associated VZV gains access to epidermal cells, causing the typical varicella rash.
The virus then enters sensory nerves 
in mucocutaneous sites and travels through retrograde axonal transport to the sensory
dorsal root ganglia adjacent to 
the spinal cord where the virus establishes permanent latency in neuronal cell bodies 
(6--7).  Latent  VZV  is  present  in  approximately  1%--7%  of  sensory  ganglion  neurons,
with <10 genomic copies per infected cell 
(8--10). Seeding of dorsal root ganglia also might occur during viremia. The magnitude
of viremia, the number of skin lesions, and 
the burden of VZV that establishes latency during primary varicella infection might be
linked 
(11). As with other members of the herpesvirus family, VZV is noninfectious in its latent
form but can reactivate at a later time to form intact 
virions in the involved sensory neurons. These virions then migrate to the skin through
axons, spread from cell to cell, 
and  penetrate  the  epidermis  (12).  In  its  full  clinical  expression,  zoster  causes  pain,
which is followed by a vesicular 
rash distributed across closely overlapping dermatomes 
of the involved sensory nerve roots. 
 The  triggers  for  reactivation  of  VZV  have  not  been  identified  and  probably  involve
multiple factors. However, 
specific  components  of  cell-mediated  immunity  (CMI)  have  an  important  role  in
controlling the development of zoster 
by  preventing  reactivation  within  the  neuron  or  the  full  clinical  expression  of
reactivated VZV as zoster. The 
effectiveness  of  these  protective  components  of  CMI  is  well  maintained  in
immunocompetent persons during childhood and 
early  adulthood.  These  CMI  components  are  believed  to  be  partially  or  substantially
maintained by 
periodic  immunologic  boosting.  "Endogenous  boosting"  might  occur  in  response  to
subclinical reactivation of 
latent VZV or to development of zoster itself, and "exogenous boosting" might occur in
response to exposure to VZV circulating in the population 
as chickenpox (13--19). Although virtually all adults are infected with VZV 
(5), specific immunologic parameters have 
not been identified to distinguish who will develop zoster. Anti-VZV antibody levels per
se are not thought to have a role 
in zoster prevention (20). Parameters that have been monitored and correlate with such
protection include 
anamnestic boost in anti-VZV antibodies in vivo in response to VZV-based vaccination,
and the presence of and boost in 
memory  CD4  T  cells  as  measured  in  vitro  by  proliferation  of  peripheral  blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC), by frequency 
of proliferating PBMC, or by frequency of 
interferon-g (IFN-g) releasing PBMC, all in response to VZV-antigens 
(21,22).  These  latter  two  parameters  are  generally  assessed  using  a  responder  cell
frequency (RCF) assay and an 
IFN-g enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot-forming cell (ELISPOT) assay, respectively 
(22).  VZV-specific  class  I-restricted  and  unrestricted  cytotoxicities  also  have  been
monitored using target cell lysis 
(23). Although CMI is necessary for the control of zoster, other nonimmunologic factors
also might be involved 
(24). 
Clinical Features of Zoster and PHN
 The clinical course of acute zoster is variable. It is usually less severe in children and
younger adults. Typically, 
zoster begins with a prodrome. Headache, photophobia, and malaise might occur, with
fever being less 
common. Abnormal skin sensations and pain of varying severity are the most common
symptoms. These symptoms can 
precede the zoster rash by days to weeks 
(25) and rarely might be the only clinical manifestation of VZV reactivation 
(termed  zoster  sine  herpete)  (7).  Pain  is  described  as  aching,  burning,  stabbing,  or
shock-like. Altered sensitivity to touch, 
pain provoked by trivial stimuli, and unbearable itching are all frequently reported. 
 Zoster rash is typically unilateral and does not cross the mid-line, erupting in one or
two adjacent dermatomes. 
The  frequency  of  zoster  occurrence  in  different  dermatomes  has  been  evaluated  in
certain studies. In general, 
thoracic, cervical, and ophthalmic involvement are most common 
(Figure 1) (26--28). Small numbers of lesions can occur 
outside  the  primary  or  adjacent  dermatome.  The  rash  is  initially  erythematous  and
maculopapular but progresses to 
form coalescing clusters of clear vesicles containing high concentrations of VZV (Figure
1). The vesicles form over several 
days and then evolve through pustular, ulcer, and crust stages. The rash usually lasts
7--10 days, with complete 
healing  within  2-4  weeks.  However,  pigmentation  changes  and  scarring  might  be
permanent. Streptococcal or 
staphylococcal superinfections might complicate zoster rash 
(29). 
 A common and potentially debilitating consequence of zoster is PHN, a persistent pain
after resolution of the 
rash.  Pathologic  observations  thought  to  distinguish  PHN  from  uncomplicated  zoster
include axonal and cell 
body degeneration, atrophy of the spinal cord dorsal horn, scarring of the dorsal root
ganglion, and loss of 
epidermal  innervation  of  the  affected  area.  Certain  experts  believe  this  neuronal
damage might be caused by ongoing 
viral replication (30,31). In addition, consensus is lacking regarding criteria needed to
distinguish the quality, duration, 
or underlying pathophysiology of pain occurring with zoster versus PHN. Therefore, the
duration of pain used to 
define PHN has been inconsistent, ranging from any duration after resolution of the rash
to periods from 
>30 days to >6 months after rash onset. 
 Regardless of definition, the pain of PHN can last for weeks or months and occasionally
persists for many years. 
The  nature  of  PHN  pain  varies  from  mild  to  excruciating  in  severity,  constant,
intermittent, or triggered by trivial 
stimuli.  Approximately  half  of  patients  with  zoster  or  PHN  describe  their  pain  as
"horrible" or "excruciating", ranging 
in duration from a few minutes to constant on a daily or almost daily basis 
(32). The pain can disrupt sleep, mood, 
work, and activities of daily living, adversely impacting the quality of life and leading to
social withdrawal and 
depression (Table 1) (31--33). Anecdotes of suicide among 
patients suffering from PHN have been reported 
(34; Peter Richards, MD, personal communication, 2007). Among persons experiencing
zoster, predictors of PHN include the 
occurrence 
and  severity  of  pain  both  before  and  after  onset  of  the  rash,  the  extent  of  the  rash,
trigeminal or ophthalmic 
distribution (35,36), and the occurrence of viremia 
(37). 
 In  addition  to  PHN,  zoster  is  associated  with  a  variety  of  other  complication.  Among
persons with zoster, 
10%--25% have eye involvement, called herpes zoster ophthalmicus (HZO) 
(38,39) (Figure 2). HZO can occur when 
reactivation  involves  the  nasociliary  branch  of  the  trigeminal  nerve,  sometimes
preceded by the presence of zoster vesicles on the 
nose  (Hutchinson  sign).  Keratitis  occurs  in  approximately  two  thirds  of  patients  with
HZO 
(40),  often  causing  corneal  ulceration.  Other  complications  include  conjunctivitis,
uveitis, episcleritis and scleritis, retinitis, choroiditis, 
optic  neuritis,  lid  retraction,  ptosis,  and  glaucoma.  Extraocular  muscle  palsies  also
occur. Prolonged or permanent sequelae 
of HZO include pain, facial scarring, and loss of vision 
(41). 
 An  uncommon  complication  of  zoster  is  Ramsay  Hunt  syndrome,  a  peripheral  facial
nerve palsy accompanied 
by zoster vesicles on the ear, hard palate, or tongue 
(42). The pathophysiology of this complication involves reactivation 
of VZV in the geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve. 
Additional signs and symptoms of Ramsey Hunt syndrome 
can include pain, vertigo, hearing loss, sensitivity to sound, tinnitus, and loss of taste.
Many patients do not 
recover  completely  (42).  Idiopathic  facial  palsy  (Bell's  palsy)  might  be  caused  by
inapparent VZV reactivation 
(42,43). 
 Occasionally, zoster can cause motor weakness in noncranial nerve distributions, called
zoster paresis 
(44,45).  The  mechanism  has  not  been  determined.  The  weakness  develops  abruptly
within 2--3 weeks after onset of the rash and 
can  involve  upper  or  lower  extremities.  Diaphragmatic  paralysis  also  has  been
described. The prognosis of zoster paresis 
is good (46). Zoster also can result in autonomic dysfunction, causing urinary retention
and colon pseudo-obstruction.
 Rarely, patients will experience acute focal neurologic deficits weeks to months after
resolution of the zoster 
rash, involving the trigeminal distribution contralateral to the initial rash. This ischemic
stroke syndrome, 
termed  granulomatous  angiitis,  is  believed  to  be  caused  by  direct  extension  of  VZV
from the trigeminal ganglion to 
the internal carotid artery or its branches, resulting in inflammation 
(30). Mortality from this syndrome is 
substantial. Other rare neurologic complications of zoster include 
myelitis, aseptic meningitis, and meningoencephalitis. 
The  prognosis  for  these  conditions  is  good,  although  encephalomyelitis  can  be  life
threatening. Guillain-Barré syndrome 
also has been reported in association with zoster 
(47).
 In immunocompromised persons, zoster initially might present typically. However, the
rash tends to be 
more severe and its duration prolonged 
(48,49). One specific risk for persons with some immunosuppressive conditions 
is dissemination of the zoster rash. True cutaneous dissemination generally occurs only
among 
immunocompromised patients, occurring in up to 37% of zoster cases in the 
absence of antiviral treatment (49--54). Dissemination 
usually begins with a dermatomal rash; however, the rash sometimes 
begins with no primary dermatomal involvement 
(54). 
 Cutaneous  dissemination  is  not  life-threatening;  however,  it  is  a  marker  for  VZV
viremia that can seed the lungs, 
liver, gut, and brain and cause pneumonia, hepatitis, 
encephalitis, and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy in 
10%--50%  of  episodes.  Visceral  dissemination  with  no  skin  involvement  can  occur  in
profoundly immunocompromised 
persons.  Even  with  antiviral  treatment,  the  case  fatality  rate  from  visceral
dissemination is 5%--15%, with most 
deaths attributable to pneumonia (49,54,55). 
 The
 risk
 for
 neurologic
 zoster
 complications
 is
 generally
 increased
 in
immunocompromised persons. 
These complications, which can be aggressive and even fatal, include myelitis, chronic
encephalitis, 
ventriculitis, meningoencephalitis, and cranial palsies 
(30). However, the risk for PHN is not appreciably increased 
among immunocompromised persons who develop zoster 
(30).
 Compared with other immunocompromised persons, the clinical features of zoster are
less severe and 
visceral dissemination less common among persons infected with 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (56,57). Some 
zoster presentations that are unique to persons infected with HIV include atypical skin
eruptions 
(58,59)  and  an  aggressive  variant  of  acute  retinal  necrosis  that  generally  results  in
blindness 
(60). Alveolar bone necrosis and tooth exfoliation also have been reported 
(61). 
Diagnosis
 Zoster diagnosis might not be possible in the absence of rash (e.g., before rash or in
cases of zoster sine 
herpete).  Patients  with  localized  pain  or  altered  skin  sensations  might  undergo
evaluation for kidney stones, gallstones, or 
coronary artery disease until the zoster rash appears and the 
correct diagnosis is made (62). In its classical manifestation, the 
signs 
and  symptoms  of  zoster  are  usually  distinctive  enough  to  make  an  accurate  clinical
diagnosis once the rash has 
appeared  (63).  Occasionally,  zoster  might  be  confused  with  impetigo,  contact
dermatitis, folliculitis, scabies, 
insect  bites,  papular  urticaria,  candidal  infection,  dermatitis  herpetiformis,  or  drug
eruptions. More frequently, zoster is confused with 
the rash of herpes simplex virus (HSV), including eczema herpeticum 
(4,31,64--66). The accuracy of diagnosis is lower 
for  children  and  younger  adults  in  whom  zoster  incidence  is  lower  and  its  symptoms
less 
often classic. 
 In  some  cases,  particularly  in  immunosuppressed  persons,  the  location  of  rash
appearance might be atypical, or 
a  neurologic  complication  might  occur  well  after  resolution  of  the  rash.  In  these
instances, laboratory testing might 
clarify the diagnosis (67--71). Tzanck smears are inexpensive and can be used at the
bedside to detect multinucleated 
giant cells in lesion specimens, but they do not distinguish between infections with VZV
and HSV. VZV obtained 
from lesions can be identified using tissue culture, but this can take several days and
false negative 
results occur because viable virus is difficult to recover from cutaneous lesions. Direct
fluorescent antibody (DFA) staining of VZV-infected cells in 
a  scraping  of  cells  from  the  base  of  the  lesion  is  rapid  and  sensitive.  DFA  and  other
antigen-detection methods also can 
be  used  on  biopsy  material,  and  eosinophilic  nuclear  inclusions  (Cowdry  type  A)  are
observed on 
histopathology.  Polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  techniques  performed  in  an
experienced laboratory also can be used to detect 
VZV DNA rapidly and sensitively in properly-collected lesion material, although VZV PCR
testing is not available in 
all  settings.  A  modification  of  PCR  diagnostic  techniques  has  been  used  at  a  few
laboratories to distinguish wild-type 
VZV from the Oka/Merck strain used in the licensed varicella and zoster 
vaccines. 
 In immunocompromised persons, even when VZV is detected by laboratory methods in
lesion 
specimens, distinguishing chickenpox from disseminated zoster might not be possible
by physical examination 
(72) or serologically (73--75). In these instances, a history of VZV exposure, a history
that the rash began with a dermatomal pattern, 
and results of VZV antibody testing at or before the time of rash onset might help guide
the diagnosis.  
Zoster Transmission
 Zoster lesions contain high concentrations of VZV that can be spread, presumably by
the airborne route 
(76,77), and cause primary varicella in exposed susceptible persons 
(77,78--83). Localized zoster is only contagious after the 
rash erupts and until the lesions crust. Zoster is less contagious than varicella 
(78). In one study of VZV transmission from zoster, varicella occurred among 15.5% of
susceptible household contacts 
(78).  In  contrast,  following  household  exposure  to  varicella,  a  more  recent  study
demonstrated VZV transmission among 71.5% of susceptible contacts 
(84). In hospital settings, transmission has been documented between patients or from
patients to health-care personnel, 
but  transmission  from  health-care  personnel  to  patients  has  not  been  documented.
Persons with localized zoster are 
less likely to transmit VZV to susceptible persons in household or occupational settings
if their lesions are covered 
(85).
Epidemiology of Zoster and Complications
 
Risk Factors
 Infection with VZV 
 Wild-type VZV. Because zoster reflects reactivation of 
latent VZV, the primary risk factor and a necessary 
precondition  for  zoster  is  previous  VZV  infection.  Approximately  99.5%  of  the  U.S.
population aged 
>40  years  has  serologic  evidence  of  previous  infection,  including  all  evaluated
subgroups; therefore, all older adults are at risk for zoster 
(5), although many cannot recall a history of varicella 
(86--90). Varicella vaccine is effective at preventing initial wild-type 
VZV  infection  in  persons  not  previously  infected.  Any  wild-type  VZV  infections
prevented cannot reactivate as 
zoster. 
 The age at the time of initial VZV infection influences the age at which zoster occurs.
Persons acquiring 
an intrauterine or early childhood infection with VZV are at 
increased risk for pediatric zoster (91--93). When 
VZV infections occur before age 2 months, the risk for zoster occurring by the age of 12
years is increased >35-fold 
compared with the risk for VZV infections occurring after 
infancy (92). Other case series suggest that the risk for 
pediatric zoster also might be increased in children who experienced varicella at older
ages 
(94). Conversely, the risk for zoster might 
be diminished in persons born in countries 
(95) or living in communities (96) where varicella 
infection tends to occur at 
later  ages.  These  observations  suggest  that  changes  in  the  epidemiology  of  varicella
caused by varicella vaccination or 
by other factors can alter the epidemiology of zoster, particularly pediatric zoster. 
 Oka/Merck Strain VZV. Among vaccine recipients, the attenuated Oka/Merck strain of
VZV included in 
varicella vaccine also can establish a latent infection and clinically reactivate as zoster 
(97).  Zoster  caused  by  Oka/Merck  strain  VZV  cannot  be  distinguished  on  clinical
grounds from zoster caused by wild-type VZV. The risk for zoster 
caused specifically by Oka/Merck strain VZV is unknown because recipients of varicella
vaccine might have already 
been infected with wild-type VZV or might have become 
infected with wild-type VZV following vaccination (i.e., due 
to  vaccine  failure)  that  could  also  reactivate.  Therefore,  the  rate  of  all  episodes  of
zoster among varicella vaccine 
recipients  define  the  upper  bound  for  the  risk  of  the  subset  of  episodes  caused  by
Oka/Merck strain VZV. The risk for zoster 
in  immunocompromised  children  was  approximately  65%  less  for  those  who  had
received the 
varicella vaccine compared with those with previous wild-type varicella infection 
(98,99). In immunocompetent children, the risk also appears 
to be reduced among 1-dose vaccine recipients compared with children with a history
of wild-type varicella, 
although longer follow up is needed 
(99--101). The risk for zoster in immunocompetent children following 2 doses of 
varicella vaccine has not been studied. Collectively these studies suggest that the risk
for Oka/Merck strain zoster 
following  varicella  vaccination  is  no  higher,  and  likely  considerably  lower,  than  that
following wild-type varicella infection, 
even though the acquisition of the Oka/Merck VZV through vaccination generally occurs
at a young age (i.e., 
varicella vaccination is recommended for children aged 
>12 months [1--3]), which might be a risk factor for pediatric zoster. 
As varicella vaccine recipients age, the risk for and manifestation of Oka/Merck strain
zoster in older persons at greater 
risk for zoster complications can be evaluated. 
 
Age
 Influence on zoster. Age is the most important risk factor for development of zoster 
(Figure 3). Virtually all studies conducted in numerous settings and with various study
designs have indicated an association between age 
and increasing zoster incidence, extending to the oldest cohorts 
(4,62,95,102--104). One study indicated that 
zoster  incidence  increased  with  age  by  a  factor  of  >10,  from  0.74  per  1000  person
years in children aged <10 years to 10.1 
per  1000  person  years  in  persons  aged  80--89  years,  with  much  of  the  increase
beginning at age 50--60 years 
(13).  Approximately  50%  of  persons  who  live  to  age  85  years  will  have  experienced
zoster 
(105,106). 
 The important role of age as a risk factor for zoster is presumably related to a loss of
components of 
VZV-specific CMI response because of aging (i.e., immune 
senescence) possibly combined with waning immunity that might occur 
over  time  following  initial  varicella  infection.  Loss  of  specific  immunity  allows  VZV  to
complete the process of 
reactivation and spread to the epidermis to produce the fully expressed clinical illness 
(12). Although precise correlates of 
protection  against  zoster  have  not  been  identified,  certain  CMI  responses  to  VZV
antigen decline with age 
(21,22,107,108). 
 Influence on PHN. Among persons experiencing zoster, the primary risk factor for the
development of PHN is 
age.  Several  studies  have  indicated  that  the  risk  for  PHN  among  persons  with  zoster
increases with age, particularly 
for persons aged >50 years 
(13,35,62,109,110) (Figure 3). In one study, the risk for experiencing at least 2 months
of 
pain from PHN increased 27.4-fold among patients aged 
>50 years compared with those aged <50 years 
(109). Approximately 80%-85% of PHN occurs in zoster patients aged 
>50 years (62). 
 
Sex
 Results from a large, randomized, controlled vaccine trial in the United States 
(4)  indicated  that  the  incidence  of  confirmed  zoster  cases  in  a  cohort  of
immunocompetent persons aged 
>60 years was 11% higher among the women (11.8 versus 10.7 cases per 1000 person
years in women and men, respectively). A prospective cohort study in 
the Netherlands documented 38% more cases among women than men (odds ratio =
1.38 [95% confidence interval [CI] 
= 1.22--1.56) after controlling for age and other zoster risk factors 
(111). Other studies 
(13,102--104,112) using a variety of methods also demonstrated an age-standardized
excess of zoster among women. However, some researchers 
did not find a difference by sex 
(36,38,105,113--115). Women with zoster might also be at increased age-specific risk 
for developing PHN compared with men (35,62).
 
Race 
 Certain  studies  have  suggested  racial  differences  in  the  risk  for  zoster.  In  North
Carolina, reported lifetime 
zoster  occurrences  and  reported  incidence  were  lower  in  blacks  by  65%  and  75%,
respectively, compared with 
whites after controlling for relevant confounders 
(115,116). A study in the United Kingdom indicated that zoster risk 
in patients was 54% lower among blacks after adjusting for age, sex, country of birth, or
household childhood 
contacts (95). The reasons for these racial differences are unknown. 
 
Geographic or Seasonal Variation
 Most studies have not documented a seasonal pattern to zoster incidence 
(13,38,92,95,105,117). Certain studies have reported summer seasonality, particularly
for exposed skin sites. This pattern might be related to ultraviolet 
irradiation that peaks during summer months and might serve as a trigger for zoster 
(28,118,119).  No  studies  exist  regarding  variation  in  zoster  incidence  by  latitude.
Urban/rural status does not appear to be a risk factor for zoster 
(95). 
 
Altered Immunocompetence
 Unlike other vaccine-preventable diseases, zoster epidemiology is not directly related
to exposure but to the 
biology  underlying  the  virus-host  relation  that  allows  reactivation  of  latent  VZV.
Because CMI plays a key role in 
controlling  both  development  of  zoster  and  the  features  of  its  clinical  expression,
deficiencies in CMI, regardless of their etiology, 
are risk factors for both zoster and its severe manifestations. Although the magnitude
of zoster risk can be extremely 
high  among  immunocompromised  persons,  the  overall  population  attributable  risk  is
modest because 
immunosuppression is uncommon (62,103,114). 
 The  incidence  of  zoster  is  increased  substantially  in  persons  with  hematologic
malignancies and solid tumors 
(120). Rates are highest among children with these conditions. The magnitude of risk
depends on both the nature of 
the underlying cancer and the type of treatment 
(121). Although the incidence of zoster in patients with solid 
tumors  is  <5%,  this  rate  is  many-fold  higher  than  that  in  unaffected  age-matched
persons 
(120).  Patients  with  Hodgkin's  disease  are  at  particularly  high  risk  for  zoster,  with
cumulative risks during the illness and its treatment as high as 
27.3% (51,53,120,122--127). 
 Zoster is common following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT); rates are
13%--55% during the 
first  year  (54,128,129).  Rates  are  increased  following  solid  organ  transplants  (renal,
cardiac, liver, and lung) 
(5%--17%).  Incidence  is  highest  during  the  months  immediately  following  the
procedure, and the majority of zoster cases 
occur within a year of transplantation 
(130--132).  
 The risk for zoster and its recurrence is elevated in persons infected with HIV. Zoster
rates of 29.4--51.5 per 
1000  person  years  have  been  reported  among  HIV-infected  adults,  reflecting  12-  to
17-fold increase compared with 
HIV-negative  persons  (56,133--136).  For  HIV-infected  children,  the  risk  is  even  higher
(467 per 1000 person 
years), especially among children who acquire VZV infection when they are profoundly
immunosuppressed 
(137). Most studies have documented increasing zoster risk as CD4+ 
T-lymphocyte counts decline, but the risk is increased 
nine-fold even among HIV-infected women with CD4+ 
T-lymphocyte counts >750/µL compared with 
HIV-negative controls (135). However, the risk might decline at CD4+ T-cell counts <50 
cells/µL (136). Persons infected with HIV also are 
at increased risk for recurrences of zoster. 
 
Other Co-morbidities
 The  risk  for  zoster  appears  to  be  elevated  in  persons  with  inflammatory  diseases;
however, for most of these 
conditions, data are insufficient to determine how much of the risk is attributable to the
underlying disease versus its 
treatment. Zoster has been associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), with
rates of 15--91 per 1000 person years 
(138--143).  The  risk  for  zoster  also  is  increased  among  persons  with  rheumatoid
arthritis (adjusted hazard ratio = 1.9 [95% 
CI = 1.8--2.0]), with an incidence of approximately 10 cases of per 1000 person years
reported 
(144,145).  Patients  with  Wegener's  granulomatosis  have  a  reported  incidence  of  45
zoster cases per 1000 person years 
(146),  and  recurrences  in  these  patients  are  common.  In  one  study,  Crohn's  disease
and ulcerative colitis were both associated with a 
significantly increased risk for zoster (incident rate ratios = 1.6 and 1.2, respectively).
The 
increase was, in part, caused by use of immunosuppressive medications 
(147). For all these conditions, zoster is generally not life-threatening, 
although cutaneous dissemination is more common, and deaths have been reported in
such patients 
(138,141,142).
 Certain  studies  have  evaluated  the  risk  for  zoster  in  persons  with  other
noninflammatory co-morbid 
conditions, although findings have not been consistent. Two studies have documented
an association between zoster and 
diabetes mellitus (148,149). However, this association was not indicated in two other
studies 
(150,151).  Another  study  documented  an  increased  risk  for  zoster  in  persons  who
subsequently had multiple sclerosis diagnosed 
(152). 
 
Exposure to VZV/External Boosting
 VZV can be transmitted from zoster lesions to cause primary varicella in susceptible
persons. Although 
some experts have suggested that zoster can be caused directly by exposure to VZV
from varicella or from other cases of 
zoster (72,153,154), in general, zoster is not associated with epidemics of varicella. In
addition, zoster does not have a 
seasonal pattern to suggest it is spread directly from varicella 
(13,28,38,92,105,117). Theoretically, reactivation of latent 
VZV might be triggered by exposure to exogenous VZV 
(123,153); however, no evidence suggests that such episodes 
occur more frequently than would be expected to occur by chance. 
 Conversely, exposure to varicella might reduce the risk for zoster 
(13). Protection might be partially maintained 
by  exposure  to  varicella  circulating  in  the  population  and  the  resulting  exogenous
boosting of VZV-specific 
immunity  (15,117,155).  An  analysis  of  surveillance  data  from  the  United  Kingdom
indicated an inverse relation between 
annual  varicella  incidence  in  children  aged  <5  years  and  zoster  incidence  in  adults
aged 15--44 years 
(117). A case-control study in the United Kingdom 
(15) documented a graded reduction in zoster risk as a function of number of 
varicella  contacts  over  a  10-year  period.  Multivariate  analysis  suggested  a  74%
reduction in risk for zoster among persons 
with three to four varicella exposures compared with those with no exposures, with a
significant trend suggesting 
some  reduction  with  fewer  than  three  exposures.  Social  contacts  with  children  (as  a
proxy for 
varicella exposure) and occupational contact with sick children were protective 
(15). A cohort analysis based on data from a sentinel 
physician network in the United Kingdom 
(155) suggested that adults living with children had both increased varicella 
exposure  and  a  25%  decrease  in  zoster  incidence.  The  analysis  estimated  that  this
boosting effect lasted an average of 20 
years (95% CI = 7--41 years). However, persons living or interacting with children might
have different underlying 
health  compared  with  persons  without  exposure  to  children,  which  might  be  a
confounder in these studies. Other 
evidence that varicella exposure might protect against zoster includes possible effects
household 
exposure  to  varicella  had  against  subsequent  development  of  zoster  among  children
with leukemia 
(156). Finally, the efficacy of the zoster vaccine 
(4) supports the concept that exposure to exogenous VZV can reduce risk for zoster,
presumably by boosting 
specific immunity against VZV. 
 Contrary  evidence  also  exists  that  varicella  exposure  does  not  reduce  the  risk  for
zoster. Women are at greater risk 
for  zoster  (13,102,103,110,111)  despite  the  fact  that  women  probably  have  more
exposure to young children 
who experience varicella. A Japanese study indicated that the risk for zoster in children
was not diminished by 
repeated varicella exposures (92). 
 Although a sufficient number of varicella exposures could reduce the risk for zoster in
select populations, it is 
unclear  whether  such  levels  of  exposure  play  an  epidemiologically  important  role  in
reducing the risk for zoster among 
the general population of older adults who are at the highest risk for the disease, and, if
so, how long such effects would 
last in the elderly. 
 
Other Risk Factors
 As with orofacial and genital flairs of HSV, zoster has been anecdotally linked to stress.
However, only two 
rigorous evaluations of the role of psychological stress on zoster have been conducted.
A case-control study documented 
a significant association with number of stressful life events within 6 months of reported
zoster (p = 0.012) 
(157).  A  prospective  cohort  study  indicated  a  nonsignificant  association  (p  =  0.078)
between zoster risk and negative life events.
 Trauma  or  surgery  could  lead  to  reactivation  of  VZV  in  the  affected  dorsal  root
ganglion and increase the risk for 
zoster  rash  in  that  dermatome.  Such  a  development  would  seem  to  be  specific  and
easily ascertained, and certain 
reports and case series describe such events 
(158--161). One case-control study collected information about recent trauma 
and/or  surgery  in  patients  who  developed  zoster  and  in  matched  controls.  The
frequency of trauma in nonzoster sites 
was similar between the two groups, but zoster patients 
were significantly more likely than controls to report 
trauma at the site of their zoster during the month before zoster onset (adjusted OR =
12.1 [95% CI = 1.5--97.6]; p = 0.002) 
(24). 
The  basis  by  which  these  stimuli  provoke  zoster  is  unclear,  but  they  suggest  that
nonimmunologic factors can 
play important roles in the pathophysiology of zoster. 
 Finally,  one  study  indicated  that  dietary  micronutrient  intake  was  protective  against
zoster. Body mass index did 
not appear to be associated with zoster risk 
(162). Genetic predisposition for zoster also has been reported 
(163).
 
Population Rates of Zoster and PHN
 Zoster
 Zoster is not a reportable condition in the United States; therefore, incidence has been
inferred from a variety 
of studies. Observed rates have varied substantially on the basis of methods for case
ascertainment, access to health 
care, and case definitions. The age distribution in the population being studied also is
an important consideration 
when comparing these studies because zoster can vary dramatically across study sites.
Conclusions cannot be drawn from 
cross-study  comparisons  without  adjusting  for  age  or  comparing  age-specific  rates
directly. Differences in the prevalence 
of  immunosuppression  or  in  racial  makeup  also  can  influence  population-wide  zoster
incidence. In addition, the 
incidence of zoster appears to have been increasing over recent 
decades, even after adjusting for other factors, although this 
increase has not been observed consistently. 
 Despite  these  limitations,  certain  analyses  of  zoster  incidence  in  the  United  States
have been conducted. The 
incidence  in  all  studies  ranged  from  3.2--4.2  per  1000  population  per  year
(age-adjusted to the 2000 U.S. 
population) (62,103,104,114,164,165), translating into an 
estimated 1 million cases annually. In all studies, a 
substantial increase in zoster incidence occurred with age and extended to the oldest
strata; for all persons aged 
>60 years, the annual incidence was approximately 10 per 1000 persons 
(62,103,104,114,164,165), similar to the annual 
incidence of 11.1 per 1000 observed during the zoster vaccine trial 
(4). On the basis of these data, an estimated 32% of persons 
in the United States will experience zoster during their lifetime (CDC unpublished data,
2007).  
 Certain studies provide evidence of increasing 
age-specific zoster incidence in the United States 
(38,62,165,166), although other studies have shown no such trend 
(104). The observed increases cannot be solely attributed to changes 
in  the  epidemiology  of  varicella,  because  documentation  of  increases  predated
licensure of varicella vaccine in the 
United States in 1995 (38) and because age-specific increases over time also are being 
reported  in  certain  international  settings,  including  in  the  absence  of  varicella
vaccination programs 
(105,167,168). Because the basis for this increase 
remains  unclear,  predicting  whether  the  age-specific  risk  for  zoster  will  continue  to
increase in the future is difficult.
 
Recurrent Zoster
 Effectively evaluating the risks for recurrent zoster 
(i.e., second or subsequent episodes) in 
immunocompetent persons requires large populations, long-term follow up, 
adequate duration, and laboratory confirmation. Although data 
are limited, certain studies suggest a recurrence rate that is comparable to the rate of
initial episodes 
(13,38,114). A community-based study of clinician-diagnosed zoster was conducted in
Olmsted County, Minnesota. The 
observational period lasted 6 years. Of 1,669 persons that experienced an episode of
zoster during that period, 24 experienced 
a second episode, suggesting a high incidence of zoster 
recurrence and providing no evidence that an episode of 
zoster  protects  against  recurrence  (62).  Similar  observations  were  noted  in  an  older
survey-based study 
(169). In the Shingles Prevention Study, two of approximately 20,000 vaccine placebo
recipients had two episodes of zoster within 3 years 
of the initial episode. These cases provide the first laboratory-confirmed evidence that
zoster can recur 
in immunocompetent persons, even soon after the initial 
episode (4).
 
Zoster Hospitalizations and Deaths
 Hospitalizations.  Conclusions  about  hospitalization  for  zoster  should  be  interpreted
carefully if they are derived 
from administrative data. Hospital administrative data 
often do not distinguish zoster episodes that were reasons 
for  hospitalizations  from  those  episodes  that  were  incidental  to  the  hospitalization  or
that occurred during 
prolonged hospital stay. PHN at the time of an unrelated hospitalization also might be
coded as zoster. In addition, 
underlying  immunosuppressive  conditions  might  not  be  available  or  might  not  be
collected from administrative data. These 
factors  preclude  determination  of  the  portion  of  hospitalizations  that  could  be
prevented by a live-attenuated vaccine that 
is contraindicated for immunosuppressed persons. 
 Given these limitations, crude annual rates of zoster hospitalization have ranged from
2.1 per 100,000 population in 
a Northern California managed care population 
(170) to 4.4 per 100,000 population in England 
(171).  A  crude  rate  of  16.1  per  100,000  population  was  identified  in  an  analysis  of
Connecticut-wide hospitalization data that 
included all zoster episodes, not just primary discharge 
diagnosis (172). 
 In  a  community-based  study  in  Olmsted  County,  Minnesota,  approximately  3%  of
patients with zoster 
were  hospitalized  for  the  illness  (62).  Although  values  differ  substantially,  all  studies
indicate that zoster hospitalization 
rates increase with age (170,172--174). In the Connecticut study, zoster hospitalization
rates were approximately 
75-fold greater among persons aged >85 years than in persons aged <30 years 
(172). Although precise denominators are 
not  available,  risks  for  hospitalization  also  increased  among  persons  with  altered
immunocompetence; approximately 30% 
of all persons hospitalized with zoster episodes had one or more immunocompromising
conditions, primarily 
malignancies (82%) and HIV infection (8%) 
(62,172). Central nervous system and ophthalmologic complications accounted for 
most of the reported complications among hospitalized zoster cases 
(172--174), although bacterial superinfection 
was  common  in  one  series  (175).  Another  study  indicated  that  0.5%  of  patients  with
confirmed zoster were 
hospitalized before their zoster rash developed for prodromal pain syndromes including
suspected myocardial infarction, severe 
new-onset headache, back pain, and abdominal pain resulting in appendectomy 
(62).
 Deaths. On the basis of clinical experience and in the absence of zoster-related deaths
in cohort studies, certain 
experts  believe  that  zoster  mortality  appears  to  be  uncommon,  particularly  among
healthy persons 
(176). Vital records might not distinguish deaths attributed to zoster from 
incidental deaths occurring merely in the presence of zoster, and 
they might not capture information on the immunologic status among those deaths. An
Australian study 
using  administrative  data  indicated  that  1%  of  patients  hospitalized  with  a  primary
zoster diagnosis died; the number 
of deaths directly attributable to zoster was not validated 
(174). Certain analyses have indicated that almost all 
zoster deaths occur in the elderly, with a rate 
>10-fold higher among persons aged >65 years 
(171,173,174). Immunosuppression also appears to be a risk factor for zoster mortality.
In one study, 52% of patients hospitalized 
with  zoster  who  died  had  one  or  more  immunocompromising  condition  (e.g.,
malignancies, leukemia, and HIV). In 
that study, the risk for death in persons with immunocompromising 
conditions was 8.7%; the risk in persons without 
these conditions was 3.7% (172). 
 
PHN
 Drawing conclusions from studies on the risk for PHN is difficult because definitions for
PHN vary and results 
are influenced by many factors, including the source and age of the study population.
Among zoster patients treated with 
a placebo in clinical trials of antiviral drugs, approximately one third still had pain after
3 months and approximately 
one  fourth  had  pain  at  6  months  (177,178).  However,  these  trials  might  include  a
population of patients with more 
severe  zoster  pain,  thereby  introducing  a  detection  bias  that  could  inflate  estimated
risks for PHN. In a phase 3 clinical trial 
of zoster vaccine (4), zoster occurred among 642 
placebo recipients; the risk for pain persisting at least 30, 60, 90, 120 
or  180  days  among  these  person  was  30.3%,  17.6%,  12.5%,  8.4%,  and  5.1%,
respectively. Results from the trial 
might  not  reflect  risks  for  progression  to  PHN  in  community  settings  because
ascertainment, diagnosis, and antiviral 
treatment of zoster were standardized and thorough. However, in a community-based
study in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 
in  which  almost  all  medical  events  were  captured,  the  risk  for  PHN  in  patients  with
zoster was 18%, 13%, and 10% 
when defining PHN as at least 30, 60, and 90 days of pain, respectively 
(62).
Treatment and Nonspecific Management of Zoster and PHN
 The  treatment  of  acute  zoster,  the  prevention  of  PHN  development  among  patients
with acute zoster, and 
the treatment of patients with current PHN are complex clinical problems with ongoing
uncertainties and active 
research  (31).  Acyclovir,  famciclovir,  and  valacyclovir  are  approved  by  the  FDA  for
treatment of zoster in 
immunocompetent patients. All three are nucleoside analogs that inhibit replication of
human herpes viruses, including VZV. Clinical 
trials  have  indicated  that  these  agents,  taken  orally,  reduce  the  duration  of  viral
shedding and lesion formation, 
reduce the time to rash healing, and decrease the severity and duration of acute pain
from zoster and the risk for progression 
to  PHN.  Because  all  three  antiviral  agents  are  safe  and  well  tolerated,  many  experts
recommend that treatment should 
be  considered  for  all  eligible  patients  with  zoster,  and  specifically  recommend
treatment for persons aged 
>50 years who 
have moderate or severe pain, moderate or severe rash, or involvement of nontruncal
dermatomes 
(31).  In  clinical  trials,  treatment  has  been  initiated  within  72  hours  of  rash  onset,  a
biologically arbitrary time point that often is not 
feasible in clinical practice. The benefits of later treatment have not been studied 
(31). If treatment cannot be initiated 
within 72 hours of rash onset, experts recommend that it should be initiated as soon as
possible, particularly in the presence 
of new vesicle formation or of complications. 
 Two  clinical  trials  have  assessed  the  role  of  corticosteroids  in  combination  with
acyclovir for treatment of zoster 
and  prevention  of  subsequent  PHN  (179,180).  Patients  at  risk  for  steroid-related
toxicities (e.g., those with diabetes 
mellitus or gastritis) were excluded from the trials. A 
3-week tapering course of corticosteroids diminished acute zoster pain 
and decreased the time to cutaneous healing, cessation 
of analgesic therapy, and return of uninterrupted sleep and 
normal daily activities. However, no evidence indicated 
that use of corticosteroids prevented development of PHN. 
Theoretically,  corticosteroids  should  be  equally  effective  in  combination  with
valacyclovir or famciclovir; however, combinations 
of  these  agents  have  not  been  studied  in  clinical  trials.  No  evidence  indicates  that
topical 
antiviral therapy or corticosteroids without systemic 
antiviral therapy have a role in treatment of zoster. 
 A variety of approaches have been used with varying 
degrees of success for control of acute zoster pain, 
including
 acetaminophen,
 nonsteroidal
 anti-inflammatory
 agents,
 tricyclic
antidepressants, opiates, anticonvulsants, capsaisin, 
and  topical  anesthetics  (31).  In  more  severe  instances  of  pain,  referral  to  a  pain
specialist, or even hospitalization 
and  administration  of  epidural  analgesics,  is  often  considered.  Many  of  these  same
modalities are used with varying 
degrees of success for control of chronic PHN pain 
(26,181,182). Elderly persons, who already have reduced physiologic 
reserve  and  typically  take  multiple  medications  for  pre-existing  chronic  conditions,
might be unable to tolerate 
psychotropic  and  other  medications  for  management  of  their  acute  zoster  or  chronic
PHN pain 
(31,33). 
 Patients with uncomplicated zoster should be advised to keep the rash clean and dry,
to avoid topical antibiotics, 
and, if possible, to keep the rash covered. They should alert their physician if the rash
worsens or they have fever, which 
could indicate bacterial superinfection (31). 
Prevention of Transmission from Zoster
 Some health-care institutions might exclude personnel with zoster from work until their
lesions dry and crust 
(85). Persons with localized zoster should avoid contact with susceptible persons at high
risk for severe varicella 
in household and occupational settings until lesions are crusted. Such persons include
pregnant women, all 
premature infants born to susceptible mothers, infants born at 
<28 weeks' gestation or who weigh <1000 g regardless of 
maternal immune status, and immunocompromised persons of all ages 
(85). Persons with opportunities for contact with 
such high risk-persons in household or occupational settings should be informed about
how to recognize the signs 
and  symptoms  of  zoster.  If  a  person  susceptible  to  varicella  infection  has  close
exposure to a persons with zoster, 
postexposure prophylaxis with varicella vaccine or 
VARIZIG™ should be considered 
(3,85,183).
Zoster Vaccine
Vaccine Composition, Dosage, and Administration
 The zoster vaccine licensed in the United States 
(ZOSTAVAX®, Merck & Co., Inc.) is a lyophilized preparation of 
the  Oka/Merck  strain  of  live,  attenuated  VZV,  the  same  strain  used  in  the  varicella
vaccines 
(VARIVAX®, 
PROQUAD®). The Oka strain was isolated in Japan 
(184) in the early 1970s from vesicular fluid from a healthy child who 
had varicella; the strain was attenuated through sequential 
propagation in cultures of human embryonic lung 
cells, embryonic guinea-pig cells, and human diploid cells (WI-38). Further passage of
the virus was performed at 
Merck Research Laboratories in human diploid cell cultures 
(MRC-5). The cells, virus seeds, virus bulks, and bovine 
serum  used  in  the  manufacturing  are  all  tested  to  provide  assurance  that  the  final
product is free of adventitious agents. 
 Zoster vaccine, when reconstituted as directed in the package label using the supplied
diluent, is a sterile 
preparation for subcutaneous administration. Each 0.65-mL dose contains a minimum
of 19,400 PFU (4.29 
log10) of Oka/Merck strain of VZV when reconstituted and stored at room temperature
for up to 30 minutes. Zoster vaccine is similar 
to VARIVAX®. However, its minimum potency is at least 14-times the potency of 
VARIVAX®, which contains a minimum 
of 1,350 (approximately 3.13 log10) PFU. 
PROQUAD® contains 3.993 log10 
PFU, similar in potency to 
ZOSTAVAX®.  Each  dose  of  zoster  vaccine  also  contains  additional  VZV  antigenic
component from nonviable Oka/Merck 
VZV. Additional vaccine components in each dose include 31.16 mg of sucrose, 15.58
mg of 
hydrolyzed  porcine  gelatin,  3.99  mg  of  sodium  chloride,  0.62  mg  of  monosodium
L-glutamate, 0.57 mg of sodium 
phosphate dibasic, 0.10 mg of potassium phosphate monobasic, 0.10 mg of potassium
chloride; residual components of MRC-5 cells including 
DNA and protein; and trace quantities of neomycin and bovine calf serum. The product
contains no thimerosal or 
other preservatives.
 Zoster vaccine should be administered as a single 
0.65-mL dose subcutaneously in the deltoid region of the 
upper arm; a booster dose is not licensed for the vaccine. The vaccine should not be
injected intravascularly 
or intramuscularly and should only be reconstituted and 
injected using a sterile syringe free of preservatives, 
antiseptics, and detergents, which can inactivate the vaccine virus.
Storage and Handling
 To maintain potency, lyophilized zoster vaccine must be stored frozen at an average
temperature of 
<5°F  (<-15°C)  until  it  is  reconstituted  for  injection.  Any  freezer  that  has  a  separate
sealed freezer door and reliably maintains 
an average temperature of <5°F 
(<-15°C) is acceptable for storing zoster vaccine. Providers should check the adequacy 
of  their  freezer  by  verifying  its  temperature  before  obtaining  vaccine.  In  general,  the
freezer compartments of 
dormitory style units are incapable of reliably maintaining temperatures cold enough to
store zoster vaccine and are 
unacceptable  for  storage.  For  certain  refrigerator/freezer  models,  it  is  necessary  to
reduce the temperature to the coldest setting 
to maintain zoster vaccine at the correct temperature. However, this might reduce the
temperature in the 
refrigerator compartment and result in freezing of any vaccines or other pharmaceutical
products being refrigerated. As a result, 
both  the  refrigerator  and  freezer  temperatures  should  be  monitored  and  the
temperature recorded at least twice a day. 
Any out-of-range temperature readings require immediate and documented corrective
action. When a freezer is 
temporarily  unavailable  (e.g.,  during  transport  or  equipment  failure),  zoster  vaccine
should be stored in a suitable container (i.e., 
the original shipping container or a comparable container with a properly fitting lid) with
an adequate quantity of dry 
ice (i.e., a minimum of six pound per box) so that dry ice would persist in the container
if unreconstituted vaccine must 
be transported back to the freezer. Dry ice placed in a suitable container will maintain a
temperature of 
<5°F  (<-15°C).  The  diluent,  which  does  not  contain  preservative  or  other  antiviral
substances that could inactivate the vaccine virus, 
should  be  stored  separately,  either  at  room  temperature  or  in  the  refrigerator.  The
vaccine should be reconstituted according 
to  the  directions  in  the  package  label  and  only  with  the  diluent  supplied.  Before
reconstitution, zoster vaccine should 
be protected from light. Once reconstituted, the vaccine should be used immediately to
minimize loss of potency. 
The  vaccine  must  be  discarded  if  not  used  within  30  minutes  after  reconstitution.
Information regarding stability 
under conditions other than those recommended is available from the manufacturer at
800-637-2590.
Efficacy
 The  efficacy  of  zoster  vaccine  was  evaluated  in  a  phase  3  vaccine  trial  termed  the
Shingles Prevention Study, a 
double-blind randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving 38,546 healthy adults aged 
>60  years  who  had  a  history  of  varicella  or  at  least  30  years  of  residence  in  the
continental United States (as a marker of previous infection). Persons 
excluded  from  the  trial  included  those  with  a  history  of  zoster,  with  allergies  to
components of the vaccine, 
with  immunocompromising  conditions,  or  with  conditions  that  might  have  interfered
with study evaluations (e.g., 
cognitive  impairment,  <5  year  life  expectancy,  dermatologic  disorders,  chronic  pain,
hearing loss, or lack of mobility). The 
study population ranged in age from 59--99 years 
(median: 69.4 years), and comprised 41.0% females, 95.4% white, 
2.1% blacks, 1.3% Hispanics, and 1.2% other or unknown race/ethnicity. On enrollment,
approximately 90% of 
the participants had at least one underlying chronic medical condition.
 Persons were randomized to receive a single subcutaneous dose of zoster vaccine or
placebo; the mean duration 
of follow up was 3.1 years. Active case ascertainment was conducted through monthly
telephone contact supplemented 
by  a  close-out  interview.  Zoster  cases  were  confirmed  by  PCR  testing  (93%),  viral
culture (1%), or evaluation by a panel 
of five physicians with expertise in zoster diagnosis (6%). Patients with confirmed zoster
were followed for at least 182 
days 
to  assess  the  outcome  of  the  condition,  including  presence  and  severity  of  pain.
Approximately 95% of persons 
were  followed  to  completion  of  the  study.  Outcomes  evaluated  included  incidence  of
zoster, incidence of PHN (defined 
as pain level of three or more [on a numerical rating scale of 0-10] persisting at least 90
days after rash onset), and 
burden of illness (BOI), measured using a mean value of severity-by-duration index for
each treatment group, thus 
incorporating the incidence, severity, and duration 
of pain and discomfort from zoster). A total of 957 confirmed cases of 
zoster  occurred  among  study  participants:  315  among  vaccine  recipients  and  642
among placebo recipients. The proportion 
of vaccine and placebo recipients that received antiviral treatment within 72 hours of
rash onset, as clinically indicated, 
was 64.1% and 65.9%, respectively.
 The  vaccine  reduced  the  risk  for  developing  zoster  by  51.3%  (95%  CI  =  44.2--57.6;
p<0.001 
(Table  2)  (4).  The  vaccine  was  66.5%  (95%  CI  =  47.5--79.2;  p<0.001)  efficacious  for
preventing PHN. When the definition of PHN 
was  changed  from  30  days  of  pain  to  182  days  of  pain  following  rash  onset,  vaccine
efficacy increased from 58.9% to 
72.9%  (Table  3).  Zoster  vaccine  had  an  independent  effect  of  reducing  PHN  among
patients who developed zoster (39% 
[95% CI = 7%--59%]) (Table 2). The mean severity-by-duration of zoster was reduced
by 57% 
(p = 0.016) in vaccine recipients who developed PHN. Zoster vaccine reduced BOI by
61.1% (95% CI = 51.1--69.1; p<0.001) (Table 2). 
The vaccine reduced the degree of interference in activities of daily living (ADLI) caused
by zoster, in part because of 
the  reduction  in  zoster  itself,  but  also  because  of  a  decrease  in  ADLI  among  those
vaccine recipients who did develop 
zoster  (185).  No  evidence  indicated  that  vaccine  recipients  experiencing  zoster  were
protected from other sequelae such 
as scarring, bacterial superinfection, palsies, or ocular or visceral complications 
(186).
 In  general,  with  increasing  age  at  vaccination,  the  vaccine  retained  efficacy  against
severity of zoster better than 
against  zoster  itself.  Thus,  efficacy  for  the  prevention  of  zoster  was  highest  among
persons aged 60--69 years and declined 
with increasing age (Table 2). Declines in efficacy of preventing zoster were observed
with each 5-year increase in 
age throughout the age range of participants 
(187). However, no significant differences were observed among persons 
aged 60--69 years versus those aged >70 years in vaccine efficacy at reducing BOI or
PHN, probably 
because the independent effect of reducing PHN among patients who developed zoster
was greatest among persons aged 70--79 years (Table 2). For persons aged >80 years,
efficacy against zoster was 18% (Table 2), but efficacy against PHN (39%) was 
better retained (186). No significant differences by sex were observed in the efficacy of
the vaccine at reducing BOI, PHN, 
or zoster (4). No evidence indicated that the vaccine was less efficacious for prevention
of zoster (vaccine efficacy: 
51.6%; 95% CI = 41.4--60.1), PHN (vaccine efficacy: 60.9%; 95% CI = 31.3--78.7), or for
reduction in BOI (vaccine 
efficacy: 60.1%; 95% CI = 46.1--70.4) among subjects with functional limitations 
(188).
 Twelve clinical lots of zoster vaccine were used in the Shingles Prevention Study, nine
of which were heat treated 
to accelerate aging of the vaccine. Potency upon shipment to study sites ranged from
21,000--62,000 PFUs/dose, 
but potency and accelerated aging did not significantly influence vaccine efficacy with
regard to zoster, PHN, or 
BOI. 
Immunogencity
 A substudy of the Shingles Prevention Study was conducted among 1,395 persons to
assess VZV-specific 
immunity at baseline and 6 weeks following administration of zoster vaccine or placebo.
The longer-term duration of 
immunogenicity also was assessed. Anamnestic antibody response was evaluated using
gpELISA to measure increases in VZV 
antibody  levels  after  vaccination.  RCF  and  IFN-g  ELISPOT  were  used  to  measure  the
number of memory 
T-cells.  With  all  three  assays,  VZV-specific  immunity  measured  6  weeks  after
vaccination increased following receipt of vaccine but 
not placebo. In both vaccine and placebo recipients, immune responses were inversely
related to the risk for 
developing  zoster;  this  association  with  protection  was  greatest  for  anamnestic
antibody response following vaccination for 
which  gpELISA  Geometric  Mean  Titers  (GMTs)  increased  1.7-fold  (95%  CI  =  1.6--1.8).
However, for all three assays, 
no  threshold  level  of  immunity  that  predicted  complete  protection  from  zoster  was
observed.
 No clear dose response for increases in GMTs was 
observed; similar increases were achieved in 
vaccine recipients throughout the dosage range used in the Shingles Prevention Study 
(189). Peak CMI responses were present 1--3 weeks following vaccination 
(187,190,191), as would be expected for anamnestic responses that would occur 
in  persons  with  previous  VZV  infection.  The  impact  of  age  on  CMI  response  to
vaccination also was evaluated. RCF 
and  IFN-g  ELISPOT  responses  were  greater  in  persons  aged  60--69  years  than  in
persons aged 
>70 years (p<0.01) (192). The increase in GMTs as a measure of anamnestic antibody
response in persons aged 50--59 years was comparable 
to 
that in persons aged >60 years 
(193). In a prelicensure study, subjects aged 55--70 years acquired VZV-specific class 
I-restricted  and  unrestricted  cytotoxicity  following  vaccination  with  even  low  levels
(4,000 PFUs) of either live or 
heat-inactivated Oka/Merck strain of VZV 
(23). 
Duration of Efficacy and of Immunity 
 Vaccine  efficacy  for  zoster  prevention  declined  during  the  first  year  following
vaccination, but remained stable 
through  the  remaining  3  years  of  follow  up  (Figure  4).  Vaccine  efficacy  for  PHN
prevention had a similar pattern, with an 
initial decline and subsequent stabilization. After conclusion of the Shingles Prevention
Study, approximately 7,500 
vaccine recipients will be followed to extend observation to 10 years. Because placebo
recipients were offered zoster vaccine 
at the conclusion of the Shingles Prevention Study, zoster rates in these 7,500 persons
will be compared with 
historic controls. Increases in RCF and IFN-g ELISPOT 
responses persisted for 3--6 years following vaccination 
(192,194). 
Safety and Adverse Events 
 
Serious Adverse Events
 Adverse events were monitored in the Shingles Prevention Study population, with more
comprehensive 
ascertainment in a safety substudy comprising 6,616 persons (3,345 vaccine recipients
and 3,271 placebo recipients) 
(Table 4). In the Shingles Prevention Study population, the number and types of serious
adverse events 
(4) during the 42 days after receipt of vaccine or placebo were similar (1.4%). However,
rates of serious adverse events in the safety substudy 
were  higher  in  vaccine  recipients  (1.9%)  than  in  placebo  recipients  (1.3%),  with  a
relative risk of 1.5 (95% CI = 
1.0--2.3).  Nonetheless,  no  temporal  or  clinical  patterns  of  adverse  events  were
observed in vaccine recipients to suggest a 
causal relation (4,186). The incidence of death and hospitalizations was similar in the
two treatment groups throughout 
the observation time (4,186). 
 
Mild Local and Systemic Reactions
 In the Shingles Prevention Study safety substudy, self-reported injection site adverse
events (e.g., erythema, 
pain,  swelling,  warmth,  and  pruritis)  were  more  common  among  vaccine  recipients
(48.3%) than placebo recipients 
(16.6%)  (p<0.05)  (Table  4)  (4);  the  risk  for  these  events  was  higher  in  vaccine
recipients aged 60--69 years (58.3%) than 
in persons aged >70 years (41.3%) 
(189). Most injection site adverse events were mild and resolved within 4 days 
(187). Less-serious systemic adverse events, including headaches, were more common
in vaccine recipients (6.3%) than 
in placebo recipients (4.9%) (p<0.05) (Table 4) 
(4). The risk for fevers after vaccination did not differ between 
vaccine recipients and controls. 
 The safety and tolerability of zoster vaccine was evaluated in a separate study among
persons aged 50--59 
years, including 62 persons who received the standard potency (approximately 58,000
PFUs) and 123 persons 
who received high potency (approximately 207,000 PFUs) 
(195). Although the numbers of persons was small, both 
vaccines  were  safe  and  well  tolerated;  however,  injection  site  reactions  were  more
common (69.4% and 82.9%, 
respectively) than those observed in person aged 
>60 years in the Shingles Prevention Study (48.3%). 
 
Vaccine Virus Rash and Transmission
 Varicella-like  rashes,  including  injection  site  varicella-like  lesions,  generalized
varicella-like rashes, and 
zoster-like rashes, were evaluated in the Shingles Prevention Study during the first 42
days of observation (Table 4). Twenty 
vaccine  recipients  and  seven  placebo  recipients  had  lesions  at  the  injection  site
(p<0.05) 
(4); the lesions were tested for VZV by PCR in one of these persons in each group, and
results were negative in both. Among the vaccine 
recipients, lesions occurred a median of 3--4 days after 
vaccination and lasted a median of 5 days. 
 Generalized varicella-like rashes occurred at similar rates in the two groups (Table 4).
Zoster-like rashes were 
less common in vaccine versus placebo recipients during this 42-day period (p<0.05).
Oka/Merck strain VZV was 
not detected in any of 10 lesion specimens from vaccine recipients available for PCR
testing. In early studies conducted 
as  part  of  the  manufacturer's  clinical  program  for  development  of  zoster  vaccine,
samples from rashes in two 
vaccinated persons were confirmed to be Oka/Merck-strain VZV 
(186). Both experienced noninjection-site varicella-like rashes; 
one 
had 21 lesions on day 17 lasting 8 days and the other developed five lesions on day 8
that lasted 16 days. No 
varicella-like  rashes  were  documented  during  any  clinical  zoster  vaccine  trials  of
laboratory-confirmed zoster 
attributed to Oka/Merck strain VZV. In addition, no evidence existed of transmission of
vaccine virus from vaccine recipients to contacts.
The Economic Burden of Zoster and Cost-Effectiveness of Vaccination
 The economic burden of zoster in the elderly is substantial and includes direct costs
attributed to health-care use 
and  indirect  costs  attributed  to  losses  in  productivity  from  temporary  or  more
permanent disability. In addition, much of 
the economic burden of zoster is borne by individual patients as reduced quality of life
because of pain and 
suffering.  Certain  studies  provide  a  range  of  estimates  for  health-care  use  among
persons aged 
>60 years for treatment of zoster and PHN. The estimates vary widely 
because of differing assumptions regarding the risk for PHN and of 
complications  resulting  from  zoster.  Estimated  health-care  use  per  case  of  zoster
ranges from 1.3--3.1 for the number of 
outpatient visits, 0.005--0.12 for the number of emergency department visits, and 1--5
for the number of medications 
prescribed.  Approximately  1%--4%  of  zoster  episodes  result  in  hospitalization,  with  a
mean duration of 4.8 days. 
(196--199). Health-care use for zoster and PHN increases substantially with the age of
patients 
(196--198). 
 Costs associated with acute zoster have been evaluated. Among patients with acute
episodes of zoster, 
average  expenditures  ranged  from  $112--$287  per  episode  of  outpatient  care,
$73--$180 per antiviral treatment, and 
$3,221--$7,206  per  hospitalization  (2006  dollars).  Additional  costs  associated  with
managing non-PHN complications 
(e.g.,
 ocular,
 neurologic,
 and
 cutaneous)
 ranged
 from
 $1,158--$11,255
 per
complication, and from $566--$1,914 
per episode of PHN. Among the subset of patients with PHN persisting from 30 days to
12 months, annualized 
health-care costs, including costs of the acute episode, ranged from $2,159 to $5,387 
(200,201). Although indirect costs from death can occur with zoster, these costs 
result mostly from losses in work time caused by temporary or more 
permanent disability. Patients with zoster (including 
those progressing to PHN) lose an average of >129 hours of work per 
episode (197,198), including losses of 12 or more hours of work time and 69 hours of
leisure time during the first 30 
days (196). Data on the national economic impacts of zoster and its complications on 
quality of life have not been reported.
 Five studies have estimated the cost-effectiveness of a 
1-dose routine vaccination program of 
immunocompetent persons aged >60 years 
(196,197,199,202,203) (Table 5). One of these studies has not been published 
(196). All five studies used a Markov cohort model 
(105), followed a cost-utility analytic approach that included a societal 
perspective (204,205), and used quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) scores to assess the
incremental impact of the vaccine 
program on quality of life. Costs and health benefits were measured in 2005--2006 U.S.
dollars, and a 3% discount rate was used 
to adjust health outcomes and costs. Model assumptions varied regarding duration of
vaccine protection, the efficacy of 
the vaccine for preventing PHN among vaccine recipients who developed zoster, costs
associated with vaccine adverse 
events,  and  costs  attributed  to  losses  in  work  productivity.  None  of  the  five  models
incorporated costs for losses in leisure 
time.  Assuming  a  routine  vaccination  program  with  100%  coverage,  the  estimated
QALYs gained ranged from 0.0016 
(0.6 days) to 0.0087 (3 days). At a vaccine cost of $150 per dose, the societal costs of
routinely 
vaccinating immunocompetent persons aged 
>60 years range from $27,000 to $112,000 per QALY gained. In the 
sensitivity analyses, variables with the strongest 
influence on outcomes include vaccine costs, duration of vaccine efficacy, risks 
for PHN as a complication, and costs and QALY scores for zoster and its complications. 
 Although  costs  per  QALY  gained  are  most  appropriately  used  to  prioritize  among
competing programs for purposes 
of resource allocation, policymakers often decide whether or not to support programs
by comparing their cost per 
QALY  against  a  standard  threshold.  A  threshold  suggested  by  the  World  Health
Organization is three times the gross 
domestic product per capita, which would be $94,431 for the United States 
(206). Alternatively, policymakers often decide 
about supporting programs by comparing their cost per QALY with the values for other
widely accepted 
interventions.  Compilations  of  such  cost  effectiveness  data  have  been  published  and
maintained in on-line registries 
(207,208). The estimated cost per QALY for zoster vaccination covers a wide range that
appears acceptable in comparison to 
either  standard  thresholds  or  to  other  established  interventions,  but  it  is  at  the
intermediate-to-high end of that range.
Summary of Rationale for Zoster Vaccine Recommendations
 The  availability  of  a  safe  and  effective  vaccine  for  zoster  offers  an  opportunity  to
decrease the burden of this disease 
and its complications among persons with high levels of risk. In the United States, the
vaccine is licensed for use 
among  persons  aged  >60  years,  and  routine  vaccination  of  this  population  is
recommended for several reasons. First, 
zoster causes substantial morbidity in the United States, with approximately 1,000,000
new cases occurring annually 
(62). Many of these cases cause debilitating pain, and when PHN develops, the pain can
last for months or even years. 
Other complications include involvement of the eye that can threaten sight, bacterial
superinfections, and disfiguring 
facial scarring. Second, although effective antiviral medications for treatment of zoster
are available, administration must 
be initiated within 72 hours of rash onset for maximum benefit. Many patients might
not obtain such rapid diagnosis 
and  treatment,  and  even  when  they  do,  the  treatment  is  only  partially  effective  at
alleviating the symptoms and 
shortening their duration. Third, available treatments for PHN often do not completely
alleviate the pain and might be 
poorly tolerated by the older patients 
(31,33). Finally, available evidence suggests the cost-effectiveness of zoster vaccine 
is within the range of some other public health interventions. 
 In a large, placebo-controlled clinical trial, the zoster vaccine reduced BOI attributed to
zoster by 61.1 % and 
the incidence of PHN by 66.5 %. The vaccine reduced the overall incidence of zoster by
51.3 % and 
substantially reduced its associated pain 
(4). Although the vaccine was more efficacious in persons aged 60--69 years, 
substantial efficacy against zoster was observed in persons aged 
>70 years, and PHN was prevented in older age groups. 
Prevention of zoster and its sequelae is particularly important among the oldest persons
because they experience the 
highest incidence of zoster and PHN, they might be least able to seek medical attention
for zoster and PHN and to 
request treatment of ongoing pain, they might be least able to tolerate the medications
and procedures commonly used to 
treat PHN, they might have the least reserve to tolerate zoster and its complications,
and they are most likely to suffer 
social and psychological consequences from PHN.  
Recommendations for Use of Zoster Vaccine
Routine Vaccination of Persons Aged 
>60 Years
 ACIP recommends routine vaccination of all persons aged 
>60 years with 1 dose of zoster vaccine. Persons who 
report a previous episode of zoster and persons with chronic medical conditions (e.g.,
chronic renal failure, diabetes 
mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, and chronic pulmonary disease) can be vaccinated unless
those conditions are contraindications 
or  precautions.  Zoster  vaccination  is  not  indicated  to  treat  acute  zoster,  to  prevent
persons with acute zoster 
from developing PHN, or to treat ongoing PHN. Before routine administration of zoster
vaccine, it is not necessary to 
ask patients about their history of varicella (chickenpox) or to conduct serologic testing
for varicella immunity. 
Simultaneous Administration with Other Adult Vaccines 
 Immunogenicity  of  zoster  vaccine  and  trivalent  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  is  not
compromised when the 
two  vaccines  are  administered  simultaneously  (186).  However,  no  data  exist  on
administration of zoster vaccine with 
other vaccines routinely recommended for persons aged 
>60 years, which are all inactivated. In general, the 
simultaneous  administration  of  most  widely  used  live,  attenuated  and  inactivated
vaccines has not resulted in impaired 
immune response or an increased rate of adverse events 
(209). Therefore, zoster vaccine can be administered with 
other  indicated  vaccines  during  the  same  visit  (e.g.,  Td,  Tdap,  and  pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccines). Each vaccine 
must  be  administered  using  a  separate  syringe  at  a  different  anatomic  site.  If
simultaneous administration is not 
possible, zoster vaccine can be administered at any time before or after an inactivated
vaccine, but at least 4 weeks before or 
after another live, attenuated vaccine (209).
Groups for Which Vaccine is Not Licensed
 
Vaccination of Persons Aged <60 Years
 The vaccine is not licensed for persons aged <60 years, and no recommendation exists
for routine vaccination 
of persons aged <60 years. In the clinical trial, the zoster vaccine was evaluated among
persons aged 
>60 years. The vaccine was most effective and well tolerated in the youngest persons
(Table 1) 
(4). Although the vaccine would probably be 
safe  and  effective  in  persons  aged  <60  years,  data  are  insufficient  to  recommend
vaccination of these persons at this time. 
 
 
Vaccination of Persons Who Have Received Varicella Vaccine
 Zoster  vaccination  is  not  recommended  for  persons  of  any  age  who  have  received
varicella vaccine. However, 
health-care providers do not need to inquire about varicella vaccination history before
administering zoster vaccine because 
virtually all persons currently or soon to be in the recommended age group have not
received varicella vaccine. In the 
United States, varicella vaccination began in 1995. Since that time, few adults aged 
>40  years  would  have  been  susceptible  to  varicella  and  thus  eligible  to  receive
varicella vaccine 
(5). The number of persons eligible for zoster vaccination who 
have  received  varicella  vaccine  is  extremely  small  and  will  remain  so  for  at  least  a
decade.  
Special Groups and Circumstances
 
Persons with a Reported History of Zoster
 Persons with a reported history of zoster can be vaccinated. Repeated zoster has been
confirmed in 
immunocompetent persons soon after a previous episode 
(4). Although the precise risk for and severity of zoster as a function of 
time  following  an  earlier  episode  are  unknown,  some  studies  suggest  it  may  be
comparable to the risk in persons without 
a history of zoster (62,169). Furthermore, no laboratory evaluations exist to test for the
previous occurrence of zoster, 
and any reported diagnosis or history might be erroneous 
(4,64,65). Although the safety and efficacy of zoster vaccine 
have not been assessed in persons with a history of zoster, different safety concerns
are not expected in this group.  
 
Persons Anticipating Immunosuppression
 The  risk  for  zoster  and  its  severe  morbidity  and  mortality  is  much  greater  among
persons who are 
immunosuppressed. Review of vaccination status for zoster and other vaccines should
be a key component of the medical assessment 
for immunocompetent patients aged >60 years who might be anticipating initiation of
immunosuppressive treatments 
or  who  have  diseases  that  might  lead  to  immunodeficiency.  Such  patients  without  a
history of zoster vaccination 
should  receive  1  dose  of  zoster  vaccine  at  the  first  possible  clinical  encounter  while
their immunity is intact. Zoster 
vaccine should be administered at least 14 days before initiation of immunosuppressive
therapy, although some 
experts  advise  waiting  1  month  after  zoster  vaccination  to  begin  immunosuppressive
therapy if delay is possible 
(210). 
 
Persons Receiving Antiviral Medications
 Licensed  antiviral  medications  active  against  members  of  the  herpesvirus  family
include acyclovir, famciclovir, 
and valacyclovir. These agents might interfere with replication of the live, VZV-based
zoster vaccine. All three agents 
have relatively short serum half-lives and are quickly cleared from the body. Persons
taking chronic acyclovir, famciclovir, 
or  valacyclovir  should  discontinue  these  medications  at  least  24  hours  before
administration of zoster vaccine, if 
possible  (209).  These  medications  should  not  be  used  for  at  least  14  days  after
vaccination, by which time the 
immunologic effect should be established 
(209).
 
Persons Receiving Blood Products 
 Zoster vaccine can be administered to persons at any time before, concurrent with, or
after receiving blood or 
other  antibody-containing  blood  product  because  persons  with  a  history  of  varicella
indefinitely maintain high levels 
of antibody to VZV, and the levels are comparable to those found in donated blood and
antibody-containing 
blood products (e.g., whole blood, packed red blood cells, and plasma immune globulin,
hyperimmune globulin, 
and intravenous immune globulin) (192,211). 
 
Nursing Mothers
 Most live vaccines, including varicella vaccine, are not secreted in breast milk 
(209,212). Therefore, breast feeding is not a contraindication for zoster vaccination. 
However, this situation will be extremely rare in the target age group 
for this vaccine.
Contraindications
 
Allergy to Vaccine Components
 Zoster  vaccine  is  contraindicated  for  persons  who  have  a  history  of  anaphylactic
reaction to any component of 
the vaccine, including gelatin and neomycin. Neomycin allergy is usually manifested as
a contact dermatitis, 
which represents a delayed-type immune response. A history of contact dermatitis to
neomycin is not a contraindication 
for receiving zoster vaccine (209). 
 
Immunocompromised Persons
 Zoster  vaccine  should  not  be  administered  to  persons  with  primary  or  acquired
immunodeficiency including:
 
Pregnancy 
 Zoster vaccine is not recommended for use in pregnant women, although these women
are unlikely to be in 
the  vaccine  target  age  group.  The  effects  of  the  live,  attenuated  VZV-based  zoster
vaccine on the fetus are unknown. 
Women  should  avoid  becoming  pregnant  for  4  weeks  following  zoster  vaccination.
Having a pregnant household member is not 
a 
contraindication to zoster vaccination. If a pregnant woman is vaccinated or becomes
pregnant within 1 month 
of vaccination, she should be counseled about potential effects on the fetus. Wild-type
VZV poses a small risk to the 
fetus (3), and the fetal risk from the attenuated zoster vaccine is probably even lower.
Furthermore, virtually all 
persons receiving the vaccine will have preexisting VZV immunity, which is expected to
limit viral replication and 
presumably further reduce fetal risk. In most circumstances, the decision to terminate a
pregnancy should not be based on 
whether  zoster  vaccine  was  administered  during  pregnancy.  Merck  &  Co.,  Inc.,  in
collaboration with CDC, has established 
a pregnancy registry to monitor the maternal-fetal outcomes of pregnant women who
are inadvertently administered 
live-attenuated  VZV-based  vaccines  within  1  month  of  pregnancy  (telephone:
800-986-8999). Patients and 
health-care providers should report any exposure to zoster vaccine during pregnancy to
this registry.
Precautions
 
Moderate to Severe Illness
 Zoster vaccination of persons who have severe acute illness should be postponed until
recovery. The decision to 
delay vaccination depends on the severity of symptoms and the etiology of the disease.
Zoster vaccine can be administered 
to persons who have mild acute illnesses with or without 
fever (209).
Program Implementation Issues
 
Following Good Adult Vaccination Practices
 Zoster vaccine should be offered to patients aged 
>60 years at the first available clinical encounter with their 
provider.  The  average  adult  in  this  age  group  has  5--8  clinical  encounters  with  their
provider annually 
(213).  Strategies  to  promote  zoster  vaccination  include  linking  delivery  of  zoster
vaccine to delivery of other indicated adult vaccines 
(e.g., influenza) and preventive-health interventions 
(214--217), standing orders so that patients will automatically be 
offered indicated vaccines rather than requiring case-by-case physicians' orders 
(218), and practice-based audits and/or physician-reminder systems 
(218). Residents of nursing homes and other long-term--care facilities who are at least 
aged  60  years  and  without  contraindications  should  be  included  in  routine  zoster
vaccination activities. When 
administering  zoster  vaccine,  health-care  providers  should  review  the  patient's
vaccination status for all indicated adult 
vaccines (219,220).
 ACIP  recommends  that  health-care  providers  keep  permanent  documentation  of  all
administered vaccines, 
including zoster vaccine, in the vaccine recipient's permanent medical record 
(209). The type of the vaccine, 
manufacturer, anatomic site, route of delivery, date of administration, lot number, and
name of the administering facility should 
be  recorded.  To  help  avoid  the  administration  of  unnecessary  doses,  every  patient
should be given a record of 
the vaccination. 
 
Administration Errors 
 The zoster vaccine, ZOSTAVAX®, is a live, attenuated vaccine containing Oka/Merck
strain VZV. The vaccine 
is similar to the varicella vaccine, 
VARIVAX®, except the minimum PFU-content of the 
ZOSTAVAX® is at least 14-fold higher than the minimum PFU-content of 
VARIVAX®. Opportunities for administration errors are possible.  
 For  providers  who  serve  both  children  and  adults,  physical  separation  of  products,
careful visual inspection and 
reading of labels, and preparation of vaccine for patient use only at time of vaccination
can help prevent errors. If a 
provider  mistakenly  administers  high-potency  zoster  vaccine  to  a  child  indicated  for
varicella vaccine, the level of 
protection  against  varicella  would  probably  be  at  least  the  same  as  for  conventional
doses of varicella vaccine. This 
erroneous dose should count as a single valid dose of varicella vaccine. If the erroneous
dose was administered in lieu of the first dose 
of  varicella  vaccine,  a  second  dose  of  varicella  vaccine  is  required.  Administration
errors involving zoster vaccine should 
be reported to VAERS whether or not an adverse event occurs.  
 Early clinical trials for prevention of varicella were conducted in susceptible children
using a formulation of 
live-attenuated Oka/Merck strain VZV at doses of 17,430 PFU, approaching the range of
PFU in zoster vaccine 
(>19,400 PFU). This high-dose formulation was well tolerated and efficacious 
(221). The more recently licensed live, 
attenuated 
Oka-strain VZV vaccine (PROQUAD®) prepared in combination with measles, mumps,
and rubella vaccine 
(MMRV) is formulated with a broad range of titers that extend to over 60,000 PFU 
(222,223).
 Varicella vaccine (VARIVAX®) is not indicated for prevention of zoster. MMRV vaccine 
(PROQUAD®) is not licensed for use in persons aged 
>13 years. If a provider mistakenly administers varicella vaccine to persons indicated
for 
zoster  vaccine,  no  specific  safety  concerns  exists,  but  the  dose  should  not  be
considered valid and the 
patient should be administered a dose of zoster vaccine during that same visit. If the
error is not immediately detected, a dose of 
zoster vaccine should be administered as soon as possible but not within 28 days of the
varicella vaccine dose to 
prevent potential interference of 2 doses of live attenuated 
virus.
 
Risk for Transmission of Oka/Merck Strain after Receiving Zoster Vaccine 
 Persons having close household or occupational contact with persons at risk for severe
varicella need not take 
any precautions after receiving zoster vaccine except in rare 
instances in which a varicella-like rash develops, when 
standard contact precautions are adequate. Although 
transmission of Oka/Merck strain VZV has been documented 
following  varicella  vaccination,  such  transmission  is  rare  and  has  only  been
documented when the vaccine recipient first 
developed a varicella-like rash. Rates of varicella-like rash appear to be less common
following zoster vaccination than 
following varicella vaccination (4), and transmission of the Oka/Merck strain VZV from
recipients of zoster vaccine has not 
been detected. The risk for transmitting the attenuated 
vaccine virus to susceptible persons should be weighed against the 
risk for developing wild-type zoster that could be transmitted to a susceptible person. If
a susceptible, 
immunocompromised person is inadvertently exposed to a person who has a 
vaccine-related rash, VARIZIG™ need not be 
administered because disease associated with this type of transmission is expected to
be mild. Acyclovir, valacyclovir, and 
famciclovir are active against live-attenuated Oka/Merck strain VZV and can be used in
the unlikely situations in which a 
severe illness develops in the susceptible contact. 
 
Reporting of Adverse Events after Vaccination
 As  with  any  newly  licensed  vaccine,  surveillance  for  rare  adverse  events  associated
with administration of zoster 
vaccine  is  important  for  assessing  its  safety  in  widespread  use.  Vaccine  safety
surveillance in the age group for which 
zoster  vaccine  is  recommended  (aged  >60  years)  will  present  challenges  because  of
the high prevalence of chronic 
conditions,  the  frequent  use  of  multiple  medications,  and  the  common  occurrence  of
medical events. Coincident adverse events 
can be anticipated following zoster vaccination, but many of these could be caused by
the vaccine as well. All 
clinically significant adverse events should be reported to VAERS even if causal relation
to vaccination is not certain. 
VAERS reporting forms and information are available electronically at
http://www.vaers.hhs.gov or by telephone 
(800-822-7967). Web-based reporting is also available, and providers are encouraged
to report electronically at 
https://secure.vaers.org/VaersDataEntryintro.htm.  
Future Research and Directions
 Key  questions  remain  regarding  optimal  implementation  of  zoster  vaccination  and
preventing zoster and 
its complications. Areas that need particular focus include: 
 Additional  information  about  zoster  and  zoster  vaccine  is  available  from  several
sources, and new information will 
be available in the future. Updated information about zoster, PHN, and zoster vaccine is
available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd-vac/shingles/default.htm.
 
 Acknowledgments
 Gregory S. Wallace, MD, Mary Mulholland, MA, Immunization Services Division, National
Center for Immunization and 
Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC,  assisted  in  writing  the  section  on  vaccine  storage  and
handling. Meredith Reynolds, PhD, Division of Viral Diseases, 
National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC,  assisted  with
compiling and preparing data on economics. Aisha O. Jumaan, 
PhD, MPH, Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, CDC, assisted in writing material related to 
the risk of postherpetic neuralgia. Sandra S. Chaves, M.D., M.Sc., assisted in preparing
the section on adverse events from zoster vaccine. 
Jessica Leung, MPH, and Adriana Lopez, Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC, helped 
with graphs and tables. 
 
References
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Shingles Work Group
 Chair: John Treanor, MD, Rochester, New York.
Members:  Members:  William  L.  Atkinson,  MD,  MPH,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Jeffrey  I.  Cohen,
MD, Bethesda, Maryland; Robert H. Dworkin, 
PhD, Rochester, New York;  Sandra Gambescia, Atlanta, Georgia; Paul M. Gargiullo, PhD,
Atlanta, Georgia; Anne A. Gershon, MD, New York, New 
York;  John  W.  Glasser,  PhD,  MPH,  Atlanta,  Georgia;   Dalya  Güris,  MD,  MPH,  Atlanta,
Georgia; Penina Haber, MPH, Atlanta, Georgia; Rafael 
Harpaz,  MD,  MPH,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Beth  F.  Hibbs,  MPH,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  John  K.
Iskander, MD, MPH, Atlanta, Georgia; Samuel L. Katz, MD, 
Durham,  North  Carolina;  Philip  R.  Krause,  MD,  Bethesda  Maryland;  Phillip  S.  LaRussa,
MD, New York, New York; Myron J. Levin, MD, Denver, 
Colorado;  Tracy  A.  Lieu,  MD,  MPH,  Boston,  Massachusetts;  Mona  E.  Marin,  MD,  MPH,
Atlanta, Georgia; Kathleen M. Neuzil, MD, MPH, 
Seattle Washington; Kristin Nichol, MD, MPH, MBA, Minneapolis, Minnesota;  Ismael R.
Ortega- Sánchez, PhD, Atlanta, Georgia; Gregory A. Poland, 
MD,  Rochester,  Minnesota;  Sara  Rosenbaum,  JD,  Washington,  DC;  Tammy  A.
Santibanez, PhD;  William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; Kenneth 
E. Schmader, MD, Durham, North Carolina; D. Scott Schmid, PhD, Atlanta, Georgia; Jane
Seward, MBBS, MPH, Atlanta, Georgia; Heather 
Stafford,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  Ray  Strikas,  MD,  Washington,  DC;  Gregory  S.
Wallace, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; Barbara Watson, MB ChB, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
 
 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Membership List, June 2007
 Chairman:  Jon  S.  Abramson,  MD,  Wake  Forest  University  School  of  Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Executive Secretary: Larry K. Pickering, MD, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members:  Ban  Mishu  Allos,  MD,  Vanderbilt  University  School  of  Medicine,  Nashville,
Tennessee; Carol Baker, MD, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas; Robert L. Beck, JD, Palmyra, Virginia; Janet R. Gilsdorf, MD,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Harry Hull, 
MD,  Minnesota  Department  of  Health,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota;  Susan  Lett,  MD,  MPH,
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Jamaica 
Plain,  Massachusetts;  Tracy  Lieu,  MD,  MPH,  Harvard  Pilgrim  Health  Care  and  Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusettes; Dale L. Morse, MD, 
New  York  State  Department  of  Health,  Albany,  New  York;  Julia  Morita,  MD,  Chicago
Department of Public Health, Chicago, Illinois; Kathleen 
Neuzil,  MD,  MPH,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  Patricia  Stinchfield,
Children's Hospitals and Clinics, St. Paul, Minnesota; Ciro 
Valent  Sumaya,  MD,  MPH,   Texas  A&M  University  System  Health   Science  Center,
College Station, Texas; John J. Treanor, MD, University of 
Rochester, Rochester, New York; and Robin J. Womeodu, MD, University of Tennessee
Health Science Center, Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee.
Ex-Officio  Members:  James  Cheek,  MD,  Indian  Health  Service,  Albuquerque,  New
Mexico; Wayne Hachey, DO, Department of Defense, 
Falls  Church,  Virginia;  Geoffrey  S.  Evans,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services
Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Bruce Gellin, MD, National 
Vaccine  Program  Office,  Washington,  DC;  Linda  Murphy,  Centers  for  Medicare  and
Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; George T. Curlin, MD, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Norman Baylor, PhD, U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland; and Kristin Lee 
Nichol, MD, Department of Veterans Affairs, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians, Jonathan Temte, MD,
Madison, Wisconsin, and Doug Campos-Outcalt, 
MD, Phoenix, Arizona; American Academy of Pediatrics, Keith Powell, MD, Akron, Ohio,
and Carol Baker, MD, Houston, Texas; America's 
Health  Insurance  Plans,  Andrea  Gelzer,  MD,  Hartford,  Connecticut;  American  College
Health Association, James C. Turner, MD, Charlottesville, 
Virginia;  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,  Stanley  Gall,  MD,
Louisville, Kentucky; American College of Physicians, Kathleen M. 
Neuzil,  MD,  Seattle,  Washington;  American  Medical  Association,  Litjen  Tan,  PhD,
Chicago, Illinois; American Pharmacists Association, Stephan L. 
Foster, PharmD, Memphis, Tennessee; Association of Teachers of Preventive Medicine,
W. Paul McKinney, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; Biotechnology 
Industry  Organization,  Clement  Lewin,  PhD,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Canadian
National Advisory Committee on Immunization, Monica Naus, 
MD,  Vancouver,  British  Columbia;  Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory
Committee, Steve Gordon, MD, Cleveland, Ohio; Infectious 
Diseases  Society  of  America,  Samuel  L.  Katz,  MD,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  London
Department of Health, David Salisbury, MD, London, United 
Kingdom; National Association of County and City Health Officials, Nancy Bennett, MD,
Rochester, New York, and Jeffrey S. Duchin, MD, 
Seattle,  Washington;  National  Coalition  for  Adult  Immunization,  David  A.  Neumann,
PhD, Alexandria, Virginia; National Foundation for Infectious 
Diseases, William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; National Immunization Council
and Child Health Program, Romeo S. Rodriquez, Mexico City, 
Mexico;  National  Medical  Association,  Patricia  Whitley-Williams,  MD,  New  Brunswick,
New Jersey; National Vaccine Advisory Committee, Gary Freed, 
MD,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania,  and  Peter  Paradiso,  PhD,  Collegeville,  Pennsylvinia;
Society for Adolescent Medicine, Amy B. Middleman, MD, 
Houston,  Texas;  Pharmaceutical  Research  and  Manufacturers  of  America,  Damian  A.
Araga, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania.
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from typeset documents.
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. 
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Date  last  reviewed:
5/15/2008
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr57e0515a1.htm
