A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Frequently  asked  questions  about  the  prevention  and  response  to  novel  &  targeted
multidrug-resistant  organisms  (MDROs).  Several  reports,  summarized  below,  describe
decreases  in  MDROs  following  implementation  of  prevention  strategies  in  healthcare
facilities across a region. These prevention interventions targeted different MDROs and
were  applied  in  regions  with  different  health  systems  and  epidemiology  but  had
common elements that include enhanced surveillance, education, communication, and
improving infection prevention and control practices. In 1997, following a rapid increase
in  vancomycin-resistant  enterococci  (VRE)  in  the  Siouxland  region  of  Iowa,  Nebraska,
and  South  Dakota,  Siouxland  health  officials  created  a  task  force  to  prevent  further
spread. In collaboration with CDC, the task force assessed the regional prevalence of
VRE  and  implemented  a  coordinated  response  with  a  bundle  of  interventions  that
included  colonization  screening,  infection  control  assessments,  use  of  isolation  and
Transmission-Based Precautions for VRE carriers, and education, across 32 healthcare
facilities in the region. The overall VRE prevalence at participating facilities decreased
from 2.2% in 1997 to 1.4% in 1998, and to 0.5% in 1999 (p = 0.001). The results of the
study  show  that  comprehensive  efforts  to  identify  and  isolate  patients  with  VRE  can
reduce  transmission.1  In  2006,  Israeli  acute-care  hospitals  (ACHs)  faced  clonal
outbreaks  of  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  carbapenemase-producing  Klebsiella  pneumoniae
that were not controlled by individual hospital measures. The Israeli Ministry of Health
launched  a  nationwide  intervention  to  limit  further  spread  of  antimicrobial-resistant
bacteria  in  hospitals  through  creation  of  a  national  task  force  on  antimicrobial
resistance  and  infection  control  and  targeted  interventions  for  carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacterales  (CRE),  which  included  centralized  reporting,  isolation  and  Contact
Precautions for known carriers, geographic separation for hospitalized carriers of CRE,
and ACH site visits to assess infection control policies and laboratory methods for CRE
identification.  The  national  monthly  incidence  of  CRE  decreased  from  55.5  cases  per
100,000 patient-days prior to the intervention to 11.7 cases per 100,000 patient-days
(p< .001) in just over a year but did not return to pre-intervention baseline2. In 2008,
after  identifying  that  approximately  40%  of  CRE  carriers  in  ACHs  were  discharged  to
long-term care facilities (LTCFs), the intervention was expanded to LTCFs, where similar
interventions  to  those  used  in  ACHs  and  early  detection  of  carriers  by  serial  point
prevalence surveys (PPS) were implemented. The intervention decreased the incidence
of CRE acquisition by approximately 50% across all LTCF types combined (p< 0.001).3
In response to an outbreak of Verona integron-encoded metallo-β-lactamase–producing
carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (VIM-CRPA) across multiple healthcare
facilities  in  West  Texas  in  2017-2018,  CDC  and  state  and  local  health  department
partners implemented a regional prevention plan to slow the spread of VIM-CRPA in the
area.4  The  prevention  plan  included  (1)  a  baseline  assessment  of  facility  infection
prevention and control (IPC) practices and point prevalence surveys (PPS) (baseline PPS
conducted at 2 ACHs in medical and burn intensive care units [ICUs], a long-term acute
care  hospital  [LTACH],  a  ventilator-capable  skilled  nursing  facility  [vSNF],  a  skilled
nursing  facility  that  does  not  care  for  ventilated  residents  [SNF],  and  an  inpatient
rehabilitation  facility  [IRF]);  (2)  a  regional  meeting  of  healthcare  facilities  to  provide
information  and  education;  (3)  periodic  PPS  and  targeted  admission  screening;  (4)
recurring onsite facility IPC assessments; (5) mandating use of an interfacility transfer
form; and (6) a monthly educational webinar series on MDRO prevention topics. Of the
16  ACHs,  long-term  care  facilities,  and  IRFs  in  West  Texas  that  were  targeted  for
prevention  activities  based  on  patient  transfer  networks,  10  attended  the  regional
meeting,  9  had  an  initial  onsite  IPC  assessment,  and  5  agreed  to  participate  in  the
prevention  plan  of  which  all  5  had  cared  for  VIM-CRPA  patients.  One  additional
long-term care facility agreed to participate after the regional meeting and baseline IPC
assessments  were  completed.  Objective  improvements  in  hand  hygiene  and
thoroughness of environmental cleaning were observed at each facility during follow up
IPC assessments, and PPS were successful in identifying multiple colonized individuals.
Following  implementation  of  the  prevention  plan  in  2018,  healthcare-associated
VIM-CRPA infections per hospital admission declined by 9.8% per month (95% CI -0.156
to -0.0399, P=0.001) through November 2019. Lee et al. (2016) modeled the impact of
implementing the 2012 CDC CRE toolkit interventions on the spread of CRE throughout
Orange  County,  California  healthcare  facilities.5  Using  an  agent-based  simulation
model, the researchers predicted the spread of CRE under three scenarios: no specific
control  measures,  uncoordinated  facility-level  infection  control  measures,  and  a
coordinated regional effort. Control measures evaluated included admission screening
and Contact Precautions for CRE carriers. Coordinated regional efforts were consistently
more  effective  than  uncoordinated  facility-level  interventions,  which  were  more
effective  than  scenarios  with  no  infection  control  intervention.  Slayton  et  al.  (2015)
demonstrated that a coordinated response to reduce CRE transmission, in which CRE
carrier status was shared with a centralized public health authority and communicated
to facilities upon patient transfer, resulted in a 74% reduction in CRE acquisitions over 5
years  compared  to  an  independent  approach  using  an  agent-based  model  in  10
inter-connected  healthcare  facilities.6  Other  modeling  studies  have  assessed  the
impact of interventions targeted to specific facility types. Lee et al. (2021) evaluated
the impact of a prevention bundle targeted to ACHs and LTACHs on the prevalence of
CRE  in  the  Chicago  area  using  an  agent-based  model.7  The  prevention  bundle
consisted  of  admission  screening,  isolation  or  cohorting,  and  Contact  Precautions  for
CRE carriers, a hand hygiene campaign, and daily chlorhexidine bathing. Results from
this study demonstrated a 5% reduction in CRE prevalence at 3 years when intervening
in ACH ICUs compared to no intervention; a 4.6%– 17.1% reduction when intervening in
LTACHs;  and  a  21%  reduction  when  intervening  in  ACH  ICUs  and  LTACHs.  Using  a
similar  model  and  bundle  of  interventions,  Lee  et  al.  (2021)  concluded  that  targeting
vSNFs and LTACHs resulted in the largest reductions in CRE prevalence (21% reduction
compared to no intervention).8 CDC performed modeling studies to assess the relative
impact of different bundles of prevention interventions, implemented in different facility
types
 and
 at
 different
 time
 points
 in
 a
 regional
 outbreak,
 on
 regional
carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacterales  (CRE)  prevalence.  We  adapted  a  previously
published  compartmental,  regional  transmission  mode9l  to  estimate  the  impact  of
interventions  on  total  CRE  prevalence  across  networks  of  connected  healthcare
facilities. Findings are described in a published abstract and online pre-print.10 Briefly,
we  assessed  the  effect  of  combinations  of  interventions  to  detect  colonization  (point
prevalence  surveys  [PPS]  and  admission  screening)  and  prevent  transmission
(enhanced
 infection
 prevention
 and
 control
 [IPC]
 practices
 and
 interfacility
communication) at different facility types (acute care hospitals [ACH], long-term acute
care hospitals [LTACHs], ventilator-capable skilled nursing facilities [vSNFs], and skilled
nursing  facilities  that  do  not  care  for  ventilated  residents  [SNFs])  and  at  time  points
before  and  after  the  importation  of  CRE.  By  evaluating  the  relative  impact  of
combinations  of  interventions  at  different  points  in  the  epidemic  we  developed
evidence-based  recommendations,  with  the  strongest  recommendations  for  those
interventions  associated  with  the  greatest  reductions  in  regional  prevalence.  We  also
assessed  implementation  tradeoffs  in  our  model  by  estimating  the  testing  efficiency
(i.e., screening tests per positive) of identifying new positives with admission screening
compared to PPS screening and quantifying the relative benefit of admission screening
at  many  facilities  vs  PPS  at  fewer  facilities.  We  found  that  bundles  with  PPS  and
enhanced infection prevention and control practices in LTACHs and vSNFs had a greater
effect  on  network  prevalence  than  admission  screening  in  ACHs,  LTACHs,  and  vSNFs
and interfacility communication. Improving detection, through PPS and enhanced IPC in
vSNFs  and  LTACHs,  reduced  transmission  at  all  facility  types  in  the  region.
Implementing prevention interventions after CRE introduction decreased transmissions
and  regional  prevalence  relative  to  no  intervention  but  was  less  impactful  than  if
interventions were in place before introduction. These findings informed the prevention
strategy's  focus  on  improving  detection  and  infection  control  in  influential  facilities
(LTACHs and vSNFs) and initiating activities before an MDRO spread widely in a region.
While CRE was used to model the impact of prevention interventions on transmission
and  regional  prevalence  due  to  the  availability  of  robust  data,  these  general  findings
likely also apply to other emerging MDROs primarily transmitted in healthcare settings,
such  Candida  auris,  although  there  may  be  some  pathogen-specific  differences.
Facilities  with  longer  lengths  of  stay  that  care  for  high-acuity  individuals  often
disproportionately  influence  regional  MDRO  prevalence  relative  to  their  facility
populations.  LTACHs  and  vSNFs  are  facilities  that  often  have  these  traits;  however,
other  facility  types  and  units  may  share  these  characteristics.  Health  departments  in
jurisdictions  without  vSNFs  or  LTACHs  should  consider  which  facility  types  in  their
jurisdiction care for high-acuity patients with long average lengths of stay, or if there
are  other  facilities  that  could  be  considered  influential  facilities  in  the  region  (e.g.,
based  on  frequent  MDRO  outbreaks).  Examples  of  approaches  to  strengthen
jurisdictional  clinical  laboratory  surveillance  include:  *Note:  The  Council  of  State  and
Territorial  Epidemiologists  (CSTE)  has  recommended  that  all  States  and  Territories
enact policies to make carbapenemase-producing organisms (CPOs) reportable in their
jurisdiction  CSTE  CPO  Position  Statement.  The  clinical  laboratory  evaluation  ideally
identifies  topics  or  laboratories  for  targeted  education  or  recommends  strategic
improvements.  Examples  of  evaluation  questions  include:  A  PPS  performed  for
multidrug-resistant organism (MDRO) prevention and in accordance with "Public Health
Strategies  to  Prevent  the  Spread  of  Novel  and  Targeted  MDROs"  is  a  public  health
intervention and is not generally considered to be human subjects research; therefore,
IRB  approval  is  not  required  under  human  research  regulations.  However,  individual
institutional policies may vary. Before testing, we recommend that verbal consent for
screening be obtained from the patient/resident, unless facility policy requires written
consent.
 This
 process
 should
 include
 explaining
 colonization
 screening
 to
patients/residents (or their legal medical proxy) in a manner that they can understand,
describe  the  process  of  collecting  a  swab,  and  convey  possible  risks,  benefits,  and
actions  that  might  result  from  their  decision  to  either  agree  to  or  decline  screening.
Provide the patient/resident with enough time to ask questions and a written copy of
the  "Patient  Screening  FAQs"  (Patient  Screening  FAQ  and  example  verbal  consent
script: Public Health Departments | CRE | HAI | CDC; C. auris screening FAQ: Frequently
asked Questions about Screening for Candida auris | Candida auris | Fungal Diseases |
CDC). Admission screening is the use of colonization screening to identify an individual
with  a  multidrug-resistant  organism  (MDRO)  at  the  time  of  admission  to  a  new
healthcare facility or unit within the same facility to ensure timely infection prevention
and control (IPC) action. Admission screening for carbapenemase-producing organisms
(CPOs):  CDC  recommends  that  individuals  with  a  history  of  an  overnight  stay  in  a
healthcare facility or invasive procedure outside the United States in at least the past 6
months at minimum are screened for CPOs (rectal swab).111213 Ideally, these patients
should be placed in Contact Precautions (or Enhanced Barrier Precautions, for nursing
home residents when Contact Precautions do not otherwise apply) while awaiting the
results of screening tests, however this should not preclude screening. Identification of
any  CPO  (including  the  presence  of  a  carbapenemase-encoding  gene,  without  an
organism identified) during admission screening should result the patient being placed
in Contact Precautions. Admission screening for Candida auris: CDC recommends that
individuals  with  a  history  of  an  overnight  stay  in  a  healthcare  facility  or  invasive
procedure  outside  the  United  States  in  the  past  12  months  are  screened  for  C.  auris
(axilla/groin composite swab) (Screening for Candida auris Colonization | Candida auris |
Fungal Diseases | CDC). Ideally, these patients should be placed in Contact Precautions
(or Enhanced Barrier Precautions, for nursing home residents when Contact Precautions
do  not  otherwise  apply)  while  awaiting  the  results  of  screening  tests,  however  this
should  not  preclude  screening.  For  patients  with  a  history  of  an  overnight  stay  in  a
healthcare facility or invasive procedures outside the United States in the last 6 months
(for  carbapenemase-producing  organisms  [CPO]  admission  screening)  or  the  last  12
months  (for  Candida  auris  admission  screening),  CDC  recommends  using  Contact
Precautions (or Enhanced Barrier Precautions, for nursing home residents when Contact
Precautions do not otherwise apply) and placing the patient/resident in a private room
when available while awaiting admission screening results. When performing admission
screening for other indications, Contact Precautions (or Enhanced Barrier Precautions,
for  nursing  home  residents  when  Contact  Precautions  do  not  otherwise  apply)  and  a
private room are not required while awaiting test results. However, in certain situations
facilities  may  decide  to  implement  these  measures  due  to  the  high  probability  of  a
positive test result. For instance, an acute care hospital may use Contact Precautions
and private room placement for patients transferred from a facility or unit with a known
outbreak  or  high  baseline  multidrug-resistant  organism  (MDRO)  prevalence  while
awaiting  laboratory  results.  If  preemptive  Contact  Precautions  (or  Enhanced  Barrier
Precautions) are not used, take steps to limit the risk of possible transmission to others,
such as avoiding frequent room transfers and maintaining high levels of adherence to
hand  hygiene,  environmental  cleaning  and  disinfection,  and  Standard  Precautions.
Whenever  individuals  are  roomed  together,  precautions  should  be  taken  to  prevent
transmission  of  infectious  organisms  between  them,  regardless  of  known  MDRO
colonization or infection status. These include: CLIA-validated screening tests for CPOs
and C. auris are available through CDC's Antimicrobial Resistance Laboratory Network
(AR Lab Network) and include Screening for C. auris colonization should be conducted
using  a  composite  swab  of  the  patient's  bilateral  axilla  and  groin.  The  preferred
specimen source for CPO colonization screening is a rectal swab. When screening for
carbapenemase-producing  carbapenem-resistant  Acinetobacter  baumannii  (CRAB)  or
carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (CRPA), health departments may wish
to  sample  additional  body  sites  to  increase  sensitivity;  these  sites  can  include
respiratory  specimens,  wounds,  and  the  skin  (e.g.  axilla/groin;  for  CRAB  only).  The
epidemiology of known cases and the performance characteristics of the available tests
should  inform  the  selection  of  additional  sites.  For  example,  if  several  clinical  cases
were identified from respiratory cultures from patients on a ventilator unit, the addition
of respiratory screening cultures could be considered. While the sensitivity of different
specimen  sources  for  CRAB  colonization  screening  varies  in  the  literature,  one  study
demonstrated that culture-based screening of the skin using sponge swabs to sample
large  surface  areas  had  the  highest  yield  for  A.  baumanii  (92%)  compared  to  other
anatomic sites alone; where testing skin using sponge swabs is available, this site may
be  used  alone  or  in  combination  with  rectal  swabs.[i]  When  considering  colonization
screening for CPOs at non-rectal sites, consult with the laboratory that will conduct the
screening  to  determine  what  specimen  types  are  validated  and  the  recommended
approach  based  on  the  context  for  screening  (e.g.,  acute  outbreak  vs  prevention,
setting in which screening will be performed). [i] Nutman A, Temkin E, Lellouche J, Ben
David  D,  Schwartz  D,  Carmeli  Y.  Detecting  carbapenem-resistant  Acinetobacter
baumannii  (CRAB)  carriage:  Which  body  site  should  be  cultured?  Infect  Control  Hosp
Epidemiol. 2020 Aug;41(8):965-967. The primary method of CPO colonization screening
available  through  CDC’s  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Laboratory  Network  utilizes
culture-independent diagnostic testing, which identifies targeted carbapenemase genes
but  does  not  identify  the  organism(s)  harboring  these  genes.  To  identify  associated
organisms, laboratories must culture the carbapenemase gene-positive swab, a process
known as organism recovery.  Organism recovery may be useful in a variety of different
circumstances,  including  for  surveillance  and  outbreak  purposes  to  ascertain  which
organisms
 are
 associated
 with
 carbapenemase-production
 and,
 if
 further
characterization  is  performed,  to  understand  the  molecular  epidemiology  of  those
organisms  (e.g.,  MLST,  carbapenemase  gene  variants,  and  relatedness).  Decisions  to
perform organism recovery should be made through discussion with epidemiology and
laboratory  partners.  When  resources  are  limited,  screening  additional  individuals  for
prevention  and  response  activities  should  be  prioritized  over  organism  recovery.  In
general,  CDC  does  not  recommend  screening  individuals  with  a  history  of  CPO
colonization  or  infection  to  assess  for  decolonization  to  inform  discontinuation  of
vertical infection control measures (e.g., Isolation and Contact Precautions in acute care
settings  and  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  in  long  term  care  settings).  Among  CPO
carriers,  colonization  rates  generally  decrease  over  time  following  hospital  discharge,
but can be prolonged, especially among individuals with repeated hospitalizations.[i] In
a
 meta-analysis
 evaluating
 the
 natural
 history
 of
 carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacterales (CRE) colonization, the pooled colonization proportion of patients with
CRE  was  74%  and  55%  one-  and  six-months  following  initial  identification,
respectively.[ii]  Among  individuals  in  long-term  care  settings,  duration  of  colonization
may  be  even  longer,  with  half  of  colonized  long-term  acute  care  hospital  (LTACH)
patients  still  colonized  when  readmitted  after  9  months.[iii]  Across  multiple  studies,
predictors  of  prolonged  CRE  carriage  have  been  found  to  include  exposure  to
antimicrobials,  presence  of  an  invasive  device,  higher  Charlson  Comorbidity  Index
scores, number of hospital admissions, and admission from or discharge to a long-term
care facility.14,[iv],[v] Presence of these predictors should be considered when deciding
whether  to  rescreen  an  individual.  The  rare  situations  when  assessing  for  CPO
colonization  clearance  could  be  considered  should  be  limited  to  those  in  which  the
patient has improved clinically and moved to progressively lower levels of care or has
resided  in  the  community  without  hospitalization  or  long-term  care  for  an  extended
period  (>6  months)  since  a  CPO  was  identified  (e.g.,  a  recovered  trauma  patient).  In
these situations, a decision to assess for decolonization should be made in consultation
with public health. Generally, the minimum criteria for assessing for decolonization are:
6 months have elapsed since the individual's last positive culture, negative screening
results from all relevant body sites (i.e., commonly colonized body sites and the original
site of infection), collected when the patient has been off antibiotics at least 7-10 days,
on  at  least  two  separate  occasions  a  minimum  of  7  days  apart.  [i]  Zimmerman  FS,
Assous MV, Bdolah-Abram T, Lachish T, Yinnon AM, Wiener-Well Y. Duration of carriage
of  carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacteriaceae  following  hospital  discharge.  Am  J  Infect
Control. 2013;41(3):190-4. [ii] Bar-Yoseph H, Hussein K, Braun E, Paul M. Natural history
and  decolonization  strategies  for  ESBL/carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacteriaceae
carriage:
 systematic
 review
 and
 meta-analysis.
 J
 Antimicrob
 Chemother.
2016;71(10):2729-39. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkw221 [iii] Haverkate MR, Weiner S, Lolans K,
Moore  NM,  Weinstein  RA,  Bonten  MJ,  et  al.  Duration  of  Colonization  With  Klebsiella
pneumoniae Carbapenemase-Producing Bacteria at Long-Term Acute Care Hospitals in
Chicago,  Illinois.  Open  Forum  Infect  Dis.  2016;3(4):ofw178.  [iv]  Feldman  N,  Adler  A,
Molshatzki  N,  Navon-Venezia  S,  Khabra  E,  Cohen  D,  Carmeli  Y.  Gastrointestinal
colonization  by  KPC-producing  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  following  hospital  discharge:
duration  of  carriage  and  risk  factors  for  persistent  carriage.  Clin  Microbiol  Infect.
2013;19(4):E190-6  [v]  Schechner  V,  Kotlovsky  T,  Tarabeia  J,  Kazma  M,  Schwartz  D,
Navon-Venezia  S,  et  al.  Predictors  of  rectal  carriage  of  carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae  (CRE)  among  patients  with  known  CRE  carriage  at  their  next
hospital  encounter.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol.  2011;32(5):497-503  CDC  does  not
recommend  rescreening  of  C.  auris  carriers  to  assess  for  clearance.  For  C.  auris,
long-term  follow-up  of  colonized  patients  in  healthcare  facilities,  especially  those
patients  who  continue  to  require  complex  medical  care,  such  as  ventilator  support,
suggests colonization persists for a prolonged period. Repeat colonization swabs have
shown  intermittent  C.  auris  positivity;  in  a  publication  by  Pacilli  et  al.  (2020),  among
patients who had a positive C. auris screening result followed by one or more negative
screening  results,  more  than  50%  had  a  subsequent  positive  screening  result.[i]
Colonization is prolonged; surveillance has identified patients who remained colonized
for longer than 2 years.in [i] Pacilli M, Kerins JL, Clegg WJ, Walblay KA, Adil H, Kemble
SK, et al. Regional Emergence of Candida auris in Chicago and Lessons Learned From
Intensive  Follow-up  at  1  Ventilator-Capable  Skilled  Nursing  Facility.  Clin  Infect  Dis.
2020;71(11):e718-e725.  A  patient  should  generally  not  be  re-screened  if  they  have
prior colonization or infection with the organism that is the focus of the response (e.g.,
a patient with a history of C. auris bloodstream infection should not be screened for C.
auris  as  part  of  a  point  prevalence  survey;  a  patient  colonized  with  NDM  [organism
genus  unknown]  should  not  be  rescreened  during  contact  screening  in  response  to
detection of NDM-producing Escherichia coli). An individual with known colonization or
infection with a CPO or C. auris may be rescreened as part of a public health response
to identification of a targeted multidrug-resistant organism (MDRO) if the organism or
mechanism that is the focus of the response differs from the organism and mechanism
they are known to be colonized or infected with (e.g., a patient known to be colonized
with  a  KPC-producing  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  may  be  screened  as  part  of  a
VIM-producing  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  outbreak).  If  an  individual  with  a  history  of
CPO  or  C.  auris  colonization  or  infection  is  re-screened  as  part  of  a  public  health
prevention  or  response  activity  and  is  found  to  be  negative  for  all  organisms  or
mechanisms,
 this
 result
 should
 generally
 not
 be
 used
 to
 discontinue
Transmission-Based  Precautions  or  initiate  assessment  of  decolonization,  due  to  the
potential  for  a  false  negative  result  (see  FAQ  11  and  12  for  more  information).
Chlorhexidine  gluconate  (CHG)  is  the  most  commonly  used  topical  antiseptic  in
decolonization*  and  source  control**  regimens,  and  CHG  bathing  in  combination  with
use of anti-staphylococcal intranasal agents has been demonstrated to be effective at
preventing  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)  infections  and  central
line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSIs) in large clinical trials.[i],[ii],[iii] Several
studies have examined the impact of CHG bathing on skin concentrations of C. auris,
carbapenemase-producing  organisms  (CPOs),  and  Gram-negative  bacteria.  In  vitro,
CHG has been shown to be effective against CPOs and Candida auris; however, the skin
concentrations  needed  to  effectively  suppress  CPOs  and  C.  auris  appear  to  be  much
higher  than  those  required  for  S.  aureus,  128  ug/mL  and  625  ug/mL,  respectively,
compared  to  18.75  ug/mL  for  MRSA,  although  it  can  be  difficult  to  compare  across
studies.[iv],[v],[vi]  Another  study  from  Nadimpalli  et  al.  (2019)  found  no  association
between  CHG  skin  concentration  and  bacterial  bioburden  of  MDROs.[vii]  Skin
concentrations needed for suppression of CPOs and C. auris may be difficult to achieve
in clinical practice. In a study of routine CHG bathing among ventilator-capable skilled
nursing  facility  residents  to  control  C.  auris  transmission,  only  7.3%  of  skin  sites
sampled had a concentration of 625 ug/mL or higher.25 In a second study of routine
CHG  bathing  to  control  CPOs  among  long-term  acute  care  hospital  (LTACH)  patients,
74%  of  skin  sites  sampled  achieved  a  concentration  of  128  ug/mL  immediately
following  a  CHG  bath;  however,  that  number  decreased  to  40%  immediately  prior  to
their  next  CHG  bath.23  High  skin  concentrations  of  CHG  were  not  associated  with
deleterious  disruptions  of  commensal  skin  organisms.  Several  studies  have  assessed
the  impact  of  CHG  bathing  on  colonization  and  infection  by  multidrug-resistant
Gram-negative bacteria. In a single center interventional cohort study among patients
admitted  to  an  intensive  care  unit  with  endemic  levels  of  multidrug-resistant
Gram-negative  bacteria  in  Spain,  researchers  added  routine  CHG  bathing  for  all
mechanically ventilated patients and patients colonized with MDROs. The intervention
reduced the incidence of MDRO colonization by Gram-negative bacteria from 19.9% to
16.8% (p=0.02), however there were no reductions in hospital-onset infections caused
by MDROs.[viii] In a multicenter stepped wedge interventional study by Hayden et al.
(2015), researchers implemented a bundled intervention that included universal daily
CHG bathing, admission screening, serial point prevalence surveys, Contact Precautions
and  geographic  isolation,  healthcare-worker  education,  and  adherence  monitoring  to
determine  the  effect  on  colonization  by  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  carbapenemase
(KPC)-producing Enterobacterales in LTACHs.[ix] The primary outcome of KPC-producing
Enterobacterales  rectal  colonization  prevalence  declined  from  45.8%,  during  the
preintervention  period,  to  34.3%  postintervention  (P  <  0.001);  however,  it  is  not
possible to estimate the impact that CHG bathing alone had on this decline. In addition,
preliminary  results  from  two  interventional  studies  of  universal  CHG  bathing  in
combination with nasal iodophor (povidone-iodine) compared to routine care in multiple
LTACHs  and  nursing  homes  without  bundled  interventions  did  not  show  significant
reductions  in  carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacterales  (CRE)  colonization  prevalence,
although  the  number  of  CRE  carriers  identified  was  too  small  to  draw  meaningful
conclusions.[x],[xi]  Furthermore,  two  recent  meta-analyses  assessing  the  impact  of
CHG  bathing  on  Gram-negative  bacteria  did  not  identify  any  significant  reductions  in
infections  caused  by  these  organisms.[xii],[xiii]  Finally,  while  in  vitro  studies  suggest
that CHG bathing has the potential to reduce colonization burden by C. auris and CPOs,
there are examples of continued C. auris and CPO outbreaks in ACH and vSNF settings
despite enhanced infection prevention and control (IPC) practices that included the use
of  chlorhexidine  bathing.19,[xiv],[xv]  Considering  the  evidence  above,  CHG  bathing
may be considered for the prevention and control of CPOs or C. auris; however, it is not
routinely recommended solely for this purpose alone and should be implemented with
other  infection  control  interventions.  Healthcare  facilities  that  choose  to  incorporate
CHG  bathing  for  CPO  or  C.  auris  prevention  should  provide  ongoing  training  and
adherence  monitoring  to  ensure  appropriate  application.  Healthcare  facilities  that
routinely conduct CHG bathing as part of prevention programs for other HAIs such as
MRSA and CLABSI should continue to do so; however, if severe outbreaks of CPOs or C.
auris occur, facilities should review these practices as part of a comprehensive review
of  IPC  practices  to  ensure  suboptimal  application  is  not  contributing  to  transmission.
When conducting colonization screening of skin sites, samples should be collected as
long  as  possible  after  a  patient's  last  CHG  bath  to  avoid  false  negative  screening
results. ** Source control is the use of antimicrobials and/or antiseptics to reduce the
burden  of  colonization  in  individuals  without  complete  elimination  the  organism.  [i]
Climo MW, Yokoe DS, Warren DK, Perl TM, Bolon M, Herwaldt LA, et al. Effect of daily
chlorhexidine bathing on hospital-acquired infection. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(6):533-42.
[ii]  Huang  SS,  Septimus  E,  Kleinman  K,  Moody  J,  Hickok  J,  Avery  TR,  et  al.  Targeted
versus
 universal
 decolonization
 to
 prevent
 ICU
 infection.
 N
 Engl
 J
 Med.
2013;368(24):2255-65. [iii] Huang SS, Singh R, McKinnell JA, Park S, Gombosev A, Eells
SJ, et al. Decolonization to Reduce Postdischarge Infection Risk among MRSA Carriers. N
Engl J Med. 2019;380(7):638-650. [iv] Lin MY, Lolans K, Blom DW, Lyles RD, Weiner S,
Poluru  KB,  et  al;  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  Epicenter  Program.  The
effectiveness  of  routine  daily  chlorhexidine  gluconate  bathing  in  reducing  Klebsiella
pneumoniae
 carbapenemase-producing
 Enterobacteriaceae
 skin
 burden
 among
long-term
 acute
 care
 hospital
 patients.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol.
2014;35(4):440-2. [v] Popovich KJ, Lyles R, Hayes R, Hota B, Trick W, Weinstein RA, et
al.  Relationship  between  chlorhexidine  gluconate  skin  concentration  and  microbial
density  on  the  skin  of  critically  ill  patients  bathed  daily  with  chlorhexidine  gluconate.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2012;33(9):889-96. [vi] Proctor DM, Dangana T, Sexton
DJ,  Fukuda  C,  Yelin  RD,  Stanley  M,  et  al.  Integrated  genomic,  epidemiologic
investigation  of  Candida  auris  skin  colonization  in  a  skilled  nursing  facility.  Nat  Med.
2021  ;27(8):1401-1409  [vii]  Nadimpalli  G,  O'Hara  LM,  Leekha  S,  Calfee  DP,  Miller  LG,
Pineles  L,  et  al.  Association  between  chlorhexidine  gluconate  concentrations  and
resistant
 bacterial
 bioburden
 on
 skin.
 Infect
 Control
 Hosp
 Epidemiol.
2019;40(12):1430-1432.  [viii]  Ruiz  J,  Ramirez  P,  Villarreal  E,  Gordon  M,  Saez  I,
Rodríguez
 A,
 et
 al.
 Daily
 bathing
 strategies
 and
 cross-transmission
 of
multidrug-resistant  organisms:  Impact  of  chlorhexidine-impregnated  wipes  in  a
multidrug-resistant  gram-negative  bacteria  endemic  intensive  care  unit.  American
Journal  of  Infection  Control.  2017;45(10):1069-73.  [ix]  Hayden  MK,  Lin  MY,  Lolans  K,
Weiner  S,  Blom  D,  Moore  NM,  et  al.  Prevention  of  Colonization  and  Infection  by
Klebsiella  pneumoniae  Carbapenemase–Producing  Enterobacteriaceae  in  Long-term
Acute-Care Hospitals. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2015;60(8):1153-61 [x] McKinnell JA,
Singh R, Miller LG, Saavedra R, Heim L, Gussin G, et al. 893. The SHIELD Orange County
Project:  A  Decolonization  Strategy  in  35  Hospitals  and  Nursing  Homes  Reduces
Multi-Drug-Resistant  Organism  (MDRO)  Prevalence  in  a  Southern  California  Region.
Open  Forum  Infect  Dis.  2019;6(Suppl  2):S23-S4.  [xi]  Miller  LG,  McKinnell  JA,  Singh  R,
Gussin  G,  Kleinman  K,  Saavedra  R,  et  al.  894.  Universal  Decolonization  in  Nursing
Homes:  Effect  of  Chlorhexidine  and  Nasal  Povidone–Iodine  on  Prevalence  of
Multi-Drug-Resistant Organisms (MDROs) in the PROTECT Trial. Open Forum Infect Dis.
2019;6(Supplement_2):S24-S.
 [xii]
 Afonso
 E,
 Blot
 K,
 Blot
 S.
 Prevention
 of
hospital-acquired bloodstream infections through chlorhexidine gluconate-impregnated
washcloth  bathing  in  intensive  care  units:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of
randomised  crossover  trials.  Euro  Surveill.  2016;21(46):30400.  [xiii]  Patel  A,  Parikh  P,
Dunn AN, Otter JA, Thota P, Fraser TG, Donskey CJ, Deshpande A. Effectiveness of daily
chlorhexidine  bathing  for  reducing  gram-negative  infections:  A  meta-analysis.  Infect
Control  Hosp  Epidemiol.  2019;40(4):392-399.  [xiv]  Schelenz  S,  Hagen  F,  Rhodes  JL,
Abdolrasouli  A,  Chowdhary  A,  Hall  A,  et  al.  First  hospital  outbreak  of  the  globally
emerging  Candida  auris  in  a  European  hospital.  Antimicrobial  Resistance  &  Infection
Control. 2016;5(1):35. [xv] Stein C, Vincze S, Kipp F, Makarewicz O, Al Dahouk S, Pletz
MW. Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae with low chlorhexidine susceptibility.
Lancet  Infect  Dis.  2019;19(9):932-933.  doi:  10.1016/S1473-3099(19)30427-X.  PMID:
31478517. The impact of antimicrobial stewardship on the prevention of colonization or
infection by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria has been assessed in multiple
studies,  primarily  at  acute  care  hospitals.  Several  demonstrated  reductions  in  the
incidence of colonization or infection following antimicrobial stewardship interventions;
however,  many  of  these  were  smaller  quasi-experimental  "before  and  after"  studies
and/or  ecological  analyses  that  included  antimicrobial  stewardship  as  part  of  larger
prevention
 bundles.[i],[ii],[iii],[iv],[v],[vi]
 Specific
 antimicrobial
 stewardship
interventions associated with reductions in multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria
include  antibiotic  preauthorization,  prospective  audits  and  feedback,  clinical  decision
support,  treatment  recommendations,  and  education  and  training;  the  magnitude  of
reductions  in  colonization  and  infections  reported  was  highly  variable.  In  a  2017
systematic review and meta-analysis, Baur et al. evaluated the effect of antimicrobial
stewardship
 on
 antimicrobial-resistant
 bacteria
 and
 C.
 difficile,
 finding
 that
antimicrobial stewardship programs were associated with a 51% reduction (p<0.0001)
in  the  incidence  of  multidrug-resistant  Gram-negative  bacteria  infections  and
colonization.34  Many  studies  included  in  this  meta-analysis  implemented  stewardship
activities as part of prevention bundles that included infection prevention and control
interventions; studies which included stewardship as part of a larger infection control
bundles had a greater impact on the incidence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria and C.
difficile  than  those  with  antimicrobial  stewardship  interventions  alone  (31%  vs  19%).
There  is  little  to  no  evidence  on  the  impact  of  stewardship  interventions  for  the
prevention  of  Candida  auris  infections  or  colonization,  however  one  study  found  that
exposure  to  carbapenems  and  systemic  antifungals  was  associated  with  C.  auris
colonization.[vii]  More  research  is  needed  to  clarify  the  direct  impact  and  the  most
effective
 antimicrobial
 stewardship
 interventions
 for
 carbapenemase-producing
organism and C. auris prevention. Based on current evidence, antimicrobial stewardship
remains  a  critical  part  of  healthcare  patient  safety  efforts.  Antimicrobial  stewardship
practices  should  be  assessed  during  MDRO  prevention  or  response-focused  infection
control  assessment  and  response  consultations  at  healthcare  facilities.  [i]  Baur  D,
Gladstone  BP,  Burkert  F,  Carrara  E,  Foschi  F,  Döbele  S,  et  al.  Effect  of  antibiotic
stewardship  on  the  incidence  of  infection  and  colonisation  with  antibiotic-resistant
bacteria and Clostridium difficile infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The
Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2017;17(9):990-1001. [ii] Carrara E, Conti M, Meschiari M,
Mussini C. The role of antimicrobial stewardship in preventing KPC-producing Klebsiella
pneumoniae. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2021;76(Suppl 1):i12-i18. [iii] Cipko K, Cuenca J,
Wales  E,  Harris  J,  Bond  S,  Newton  P,  Miyakis  S.  Implementation  of  an  antimicrobial
stewardship  programme  and  reduction  in  carbapenemase-producing  Enterobacterales
in  an  Australian  local  health  district.  JAC  Antimicrob  Resist.  2020;2(3):dlaa041.  [iv]
Giacobbe DR, Del Bono V, Mikulska M, Gustinetti G, Marchese A, Mina F, et al. Impact of
a  mixed  educational  and  semi-restrictive  antimicrobial  stewardship  project  in  a  large
teaching  hospital  in  Northern  Italy.  Infection.  2017;45(6):849-856.  [v]  Giacobbe  DR,
Salsano  A,  Del  Puente  F,  Campanini  F,  Mariscalco  G,  Marchese  A,  et  al.  Reduced
Incidence of Carbapenem-Resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae Infections in Cardiac Surgery
Patients  after  Implementation  of  an  Antimicrobial  Stewardship  Project.  Antibiotics
(Basel).  2019  Aug  28;8(3):132.  [vi]  Rodríguez-Baño  J,  Pérez-Moreno  MA,  Peñalva  G,
Garnacho-Montero J, Pinto C, Salcedo I, et al. Outcomes of the PIRASOA programme, an
antimicrobial  stewardship  programme  implemented  in  hospitals  of  the  Public  Health
System  of  Andalusia,  Spain:  an  ecologic  study  of  time-trend  analysis.  Clin  Microbiol
Infect. 2020;26(3):358-365. [vii] Rossow J, Ostrowsky B, Adams E, Greenko J, McDonald
R, Vallabhaneni S. Factors Associated With Candida auris Colonization and Transmission
in Skilled Nursing Facilities With Ventilator Units, New York, 2016-2018. Clin Infect Dis.
2021;72(11):e753-e760. Tier 1 organisms or mechanisms are those that have never (or
very rarely) been identified in the United States and for which experience is extremely
limited.  For  these  organisms,  environmental  sampling  can  inform  the  extent  of
environmental contamination and the role the environment plays in transmission. For
this  reason,  the  threshold  to  perform  environmental  sampling  for  Tier  1  responses  is
lower than for organisms and mechanisms in Tiers 2-4. The role of the environment in
transmission of organisms in Tiers 2-4 is generally well-understood, and environmental
sampling during public health responses to these MDROs is most often conducted when
there  is  a  suspected  point  source  (e.g.,  a  persistently  contaminated  device)  or  when
transmission  continues  despite  improvements  in  infection  control  practices  and  the
underlying  epidemiology  suggests  an  environmental  point  source.  When  performed
during public health responses to MDROs in Tiers 2-4, environmental sampling should
be  hypothesis  driven.  When  considering  whether  to  pursue  environmental  sampling,
consult  with  a  laboratory  that  has  experience  processing  environmental  samples.
Environmental testing methods differ from standard clinical microbiology practices and
require specialized expertise. Consult with the laboratory prior to sampling to plan an
informative  environmental  sampling  strategy.  Design  the  sampling  strategy  to  test
specific  hypotheses  and/or  to  inform  specific  infection  prevention  and  control
recommendations. Upon completion of environmental sampling, consult with experts to
interpret results. Negative results may reflect the limitations of the sampling or testing
approach rather than the true absence of environmental contamination, and this should
be  communicated  with  the  healthcare  facility  prior  to  sampling.  HAIs  are  associated
with  medical  devices,  complications  following  surgery,  transmission  between  patients
and healthcare workers, antibiotic overuse, and more. Languages Language Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/php/preventing-mdros/preventing-mdros-faqs.html
