A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Preventing  transmission  of  respiratory
pathogens including MERS-CoV in hospitals requires the application of infection control
procedures
 and
 protocols
 including
 environmental
 and
 engineering
 controls,
administrative controls, safer work practices, and personal protective equipment (PPE). 
Measures that enhance early detection and prompt triage and isolation of patients who
should be evaluated for MERS-CoV are critical to ensuring effective implementation of
infection  control  measures.  Successful  implementation  of  many,  if  not  all,  of  these
strategies  is  dependent  on  the  presence  of  clear  administrative  policies  and
organizational
 leadership
 that
 promote
 and
 facilitate
 adherence
 to
 these
recommendations  among  the  various  people  within  the  healthcare  setting,  including
patients,  visitors,  and  HCP.  Though  these  recommendations  focus  on  the  hospital
setting  (a  setting  where  MERS-CoV  transmission  has  been  reported  from  some
international  locations),  the  recommendations  for  PPE,  source  control  (i.e.,  placing  a
facemask on potentially infected patients when outside of an airborne infection isolation
room), and environmental infection control measures are applicable to any healthcare
setting. This guidance does not apply to non-healthcare settings (e.g., schools) OR to
persons  outside  of  healthcare  settings.  This  guidance  also  does  not  provide
recommendations  for  clinical  management,  air  or  ground  medical  transport,  or
laboratory  settings.  Ensure  facility  policies  and  practices  are  in  place  to  minimize
exposures  to  respiratory  pathogens  including  MERS-CoV.  Measures  should  be
implemented  before  patient  arrival,  upon  arrival,  and  throughout  the  duration  of  the
affected patient's presence in the healthcare setting. Standard precautions assume that
every  person  is  potentially  infected  or  colonized  with  a  pathogen  that  could  be
transmitted in the healthcare setting. Elements of standard precautions that apply to
patients  with  respiratory  infections,  including  those  caused  by  MERS-CoV,  are
summarized below. Attention should be paid to training and proper donning (put on),
doffing  (take  off),  and  disposal  of  any  personal  protective  equipment.  All  aspects  of
standard precautions (e.g., injection safety) are not emphasized in this document but
can be found in the guideline titled Isolation Precautions Guideline. All HCP (see section
7 for measures for non-HCP visitors) who enter the room of a patient with suspected or
confirmed  MERS-CoV  should  adhere  to  Standard,  Contact,  and  Airborne  precautions,
including the following: N95 Respirators, FDA Facemasks, FDA Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome  (MERS)  is  a  viral  respiratory  illness  caused  by  a  coronavirus  called  Middle
East  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  (MERS-CoV).  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mers/hcp/infection-control/index.html
