Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Each year, an estimated 20,000
infants are born to hepatitis
B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive women in the United States.
These infants are at high risk for perinatal hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection, chronic HBV infection, and associated
complications of chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma. All vaccine advisory groups recommend
that all pregnant women be routinely tested for HBsAg during an
early prenatal visit during each pregnancy to determine whether
their newborns will require immunoprophylaxis for the prevention of
perinatal HBV infection (1-4). Administration of appropriate
immunoprophylaxis is approximately 90% effective in preventing HBV
infection among children born to HBsAg-positive mothers (5). In
1985, the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program of Northern
California (KP) -- a health-maintenance organization (HMO)
 providing
care to 2.5 million members and delivering 30,000 infants annually
 --
implemented HBsAg screening of all pregnant women. After
initiating the program, KP estimated that at least 25% of the
infants born to HBsAg-positive women were not receiving appropriate
post-exposure prophylaxis. In response, KP implemented a tracking
and follow-up program in 1988. This report describes an assessment
of the impact of this program, which indicates that a centralized
case-management and tracking system can substantially improve
levels of post-exposure prophylaxis.  The perinatal hepatitis B program is a component
of the KP
perinatal section that screens, tracks, and manages test results
for HBsAg, syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and
alphafetoprotein in pregnant women, as well as the state-mandated
screening tests for their newborns. A central database is linked to
32 prenatal clinics, 11 obstetric hospitals, 30 local laboratories,
a  central  laboratory,  and  32  pediatric  clinics.   The  perinatal  hepatitis  B  program
maintains a database of all
HBsAg-positive pregnant women, including their estimated dates of
confinement and designated prenatal clinic health-care providers.
A list of the HBsAg-positive pregnant women expected to deliver
during the next 3 months is produced weekly and reviewed daily at
the central office for patient admission to obstetric hospitals.
Staff from the perinatal hepatitis B program verify that
appropriate prophylaxis is provided to at-risk infants at birth
(hepatitis B immune globulin {HBIG} and first dose of hepatitis B
vaccine) by direct communication with the medical staff at the
obstetrics hospitals or by review of a faxed copy of the infant's
medical record. They continue to track infants using an online
vaccination tracking system to verify that follow-up doses of
hepatitis B vaccine are administered at ages 1 and 6 months.
Reminder letters are sent to pediatric providers before an infant's
vaccination visit to ensure administration of the second and third
doses of hepatitis B vaccine. The hepatitis B nurse coordinator
consults with pediatric providers or designated staff members to
schedule follow-up with patients who do not receive vaccines
according to the recommended schedule.  Of the 188,498 infants delivered through the
KP health-care
system from 1990 through 1995, a total of 1712 (0.9%) were born to
HBsAg-positive women. Almost all of these infants (1708 {99.8%})
received HBIG and hepatitis B vaccine before hospital discharge. Of
the 1511 infants who remained in the KP health plan, 94% completed
the three-dose hepatitis B vaccine series by age 6-8 months, and
all infants except one were completely vaccinated by age 24 months.
KP conducts postvaccination serologic testing to determine whether
infants responded to the vaccine or became infected with HBV;
however, these results are not tracked through the perinatal
program.  Reported by: E Schoen, MD, D Cohen, MPH, S Black, MD, C Limata,
MSN, Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program of Northern California,
Oakland. Hepatitis Br, Div of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases,
National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.   Editorial  Note:  Prevention  of  perinatal
HBV infection requires the
coordinated transfer of information between outpatient and
hospital-based providers to ensure that 1) pregnant women are
screened for HBsAg and the results are transmitted to the delivery
hospital, 2) infants of HBsAg-positive women receive HBIG and the
appropriate dose of vaccine at birth, 3) infant vaccination is
completed by age 6-8 months, and 4) the infant is tested after
vaccination at age 9-15 months. Prevention programs without
intensive case management and tracking have been only moderately
successful in ensuring that children of HBsAg-positive mothers are
identified and complete the vaccine series by age 6-8 months.  Before the initiation of
federal funding of perinatal
hepatitis B prevention programs in 1990, only 45% of infants born
to HBsAg-positive mothers received appropriate prophylaxis at
birth, and few (35%) had completed the vaccine series by age 6-8
months (6,7). In 1990, perinatal hepatitis B prevention programs
were implemented nationwide. Despite these programs, only an
estimated 40% of the approximately 20,000 births to HBsAg-positive
women are identified each year and entered into tracking systems.
Of the infants who are tracked, approximately 90% receive
appropriate prophylaxis at birth, and 60%-70% complete the vaccine
series by age 6-8 months (8). Thus, only 5000-6000 of the 8000
infants who are tracked receive appropriate and timely follow-up;
the number of infants who are not tracked and who receive
appropriate and timely follow-up is probably even lower.  Because the risk for perinatal
HBV infection is increased for
infants born to HBsAg-positive women and who have not started the
series at birth or who have not completed the vaccine series by age
6-8 months, the appropriate doses of HBIG and vaccine should be
provided in a timely manner (9,10). In addition, because of the
continuing risk for exposure among infants of HBsAg-positive
mothers, postvaccination testing should be used to identify those
infants who may not have responded to the initial three-dose series
and  who  may  require additional  doses  of  vaccine.   The experience at KP  emphasizes
the importance of a
centralized management and tracking system for perinatal hepatitis
B programs; this approach can improve identification, follow-up,
and vaccination completion rates of infants born to HBsAg-positive
mothers. Centralization ensures that all health-care providers and
institutions have access to screening and tracking information -- a
need especially important when different health-care providers and
institutions provide the prenatal and perinatal care for the
pregnant woman, delivery of the newborn, and follow-up care for the
infant. In addition to this centralized approach, other important
components include dedicated staff, computerized tracking systems,
and provider-reminder and/or patient-recall systems (8). As with
the prevention of perinatal HBV infection, intensive case
management of mothers and their newborns, including centralized
case management and tracking, may be useful in preventing other
perinatal infectious diseases, including HIV infection, group B
streptococcal disease, and congenital syphilis.  References  
    Committee on Obstetrics, Maternal and Fetal Medicine.
 Guidelines
    for hepatitis B virus screening and vaccination during
 pregnancy.
    Washington, DC: American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
    1990.  
    CDC. Protection against viral hepatitis: recommendations of the
    Immunization Practices Advisory Committee. MMWR 1990;39(no.
 RR-2).  
    Committee on Infectious Diseases. Report of the Committee on
    Infectious Diseases. 22nd ed. Elk Grove Village, Illinois:
 American
    Academy of Pediatrics, 1991:238-55.  
    American Academy of Family Physicians. Recommendations for
    hepatitis B preexposure vaccination and postexposure
 prophylaxis.
    Kansas City, Missouri: American Academy of Family Physicians,
    August 1992; order no. 966.  
    Stevens CE, Taylor PE, Tong MJ, et al. Yeast-recombinant
    hepatitis B vaccine: efficacy with hepatitis B immune globulin
 in
    prevention of perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission. JAMA
    1987;257:2612-6.  
    Birnbaum JM, Bromberg K. Evaluation of prophylaxis against
    hepatitis B in a large municipal hospital. Am J Infect Control
    1992;20:172-6.  
    Klontz K. A program to provide hepatitis B immunoprophylaxis to
    infants born to HBsAg-positive Asian and Pacific Island women.
 West
    J Med 1987;146:195-9.  
    CDC. Prevention of perinatal hepatitis B through enhanced
    case-management -- Connecticut, 1994-95, and United States,
 1994.
    MMWR 1996;45:584-7.  
    Kohn MA, Farley TA, Scott C. The need for more aggressive
    follow-up of children born to hepatitis B surface antigen
 positive
    mothers: lessons learned from the Louisiana Perinatal Hepatitis
 B
    Immunization Program. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1996;15:535-40.  
    Marion SA, Pastore MT, Pi DW, Mathias RG. Long term follow-up
    of hepatitis B vaccine in infants of carrier mothers. Am J
    Epidemiol 1994;140:734-46.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 09/19/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00047437.htm
