Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. The following statement updates
all previous recommendations on
protection against viral hepatitis, including use of hepatitis B
vaccine and hepatitis B immune globulin for prophylaxis of
hepatitis B (MMWR 1985;34:313-24,329-35 and MMWR 1987,36:353-66),
universal screening of pregnant women to prevent perinatal
hepatitis B transmission (MMWR 1988;37:341-46,51), and use of
immune globulin to prevent other types of viral hepatitis (MMWR
1985;34:313-24,329-35).  INTRODUCTION  The term "viral hepatitis" is commonly used
for several
clinically similar diseases that are etiologically and
epidemiologically distinct (1). Two of these, hepatitis A
(formerly called infectious hepatitis) and hepatitis B (formerly
called serum hepatitis), have been recognized as separate
entities since the early 1940s and can be diagnosed with specific
serologic tests. A third category, currently known as non-A,
non-B hepatitis, includes two epidemiologically distinct types of
hepatitis: parenterally transmitted and enterically transmitted
non-A, non-B hepatitis. Parenterally transmitted non-A, non-B
hepatitis is associated with both posttransfusion and sporadic
cases of acute hepatitis and may be caused by at least two
different agents. Part of the genome for one of these agents has
recently been cloned, and a candidate serologic assay for
antibody to this virus (proposed as hepatitis C virus) has been
developed (2,3). Enterically transmitted non-A, non-B hepatitis,
which is spread by the fecal-oral route and is different from the
types seen in the United States, has been reported in parts of
Asia, Africa, and Mexico (4). Another distinct type of hepatitis,
delta hepatitis, is an infection dependent on the hepatitis B
virus. It may occur as a coinfection with acute hepatitis B
infection  or  as  superinfection  of  a  hepatitis  B  carrier  (5).   HEPATITIS  SURVEILLANCE  
Approximately 28,500 cases of hepatitis A, 23,200 cases of
hepatitis B, 2,620 cases of non-A, non-B hepatitis, and 2,470
cases of hepatitis type unspecified were reported in 1988 in the
United States. Most cases of each type occur among young adults.
Since reporting from many localities is incomplete, the actual
number of hepatitis cases occurring annually is thought to be
several  times  the  reported  number.   IMMUNE  GLOBULINS   Immune  globulins  are
important tools for preventing infection
and disease before or after exposure to hepatitis viruses. Immune
globulins used in medical practice are sterile solutions of
antibodies (immunoglobulins) from human plasma. They are prepared
by cold ethanol fractionation of large plasma pools and contain
10%-18% protein. In the United States, plasma is primarily
obtained from paid donors. Only plasma shown to be free of
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and antibody to human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is used to prepare immune globulins.  Immune globulin
(IG) (formerly called immune serum globulin,
ISG, or gamma globulin) produced in the United States contains
antibodies against the hepatitis A virus (anti-HAV) and the HBsAg
(anti-HBs). Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) is an IG prepared
from plasma containing high titers of anti-HBs.  There is no evidence that hepatitis B
virus (HBV), HIV (the
causative agent of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)), or
other viruses have ever been transmitted by IG or HBIG
commercially available in the United States (6). Since late April
1985, all plasma units for preparation of IGs have been screened
for antibody to HIV, and reactive units are discarded. No
instances of HIV infection or clinical illness have occurred that
can be attributed to receiving IG or HBIG, including lots
prepared before April 1985. Laboratory studies have shown that
the margin of safety based on the removal of HIV infectivity by
the fractionation process is extremely high (7). Some HBIG lots
prepared before April 1985 have detectable HIV antibody. Shortly
after being given HBIG, recipients have occasionally been noted
to have low levels of passively acquired HIV antibody, but this
reactivity  does  not  persist  (8).   Serious  adverse  effects  from  IGs  administered  as
recommended
have been rare. IGs prepared for intramuscular administration
should be used for hepatitis prophylaxis. IGs prepared for
intravenous administration to immunodeficient and other selected
patients are not intended for hepatitis prophylaxis. IG and HBIG
are not contraindicated for pregnant or lactating women.  HEPATITIS A  Hepatitis A is
caused by the hepatitis A virus (HAV), a 27-nm
ribonucleic acid (RNA) agent that is classified as a
picornavirus. Patients with illness caused by HAV
characteristically have abrupt onsets of symptoms including
fever, malaise, anorexia, nausea, abdominal discomfort, dark
urine, and jaundice. Severity is related to age. Among children,
most infections are asymptomatic, and illness is usually not
accompanied by jaundice. Most infected adults become
symptomatically ill with jaundice. The case-fatality rate among
reported cases is about 0.6%.  Hepatitis A is primarily transmitted by person-to-person
contact, generally through fecal contamination and oral
ingestion. Transmission is facilitated by poor personal hygiene,
poor sanitation, and intimate (intrahousehold or sexual) contact.
In recent years, cases of hepatitis A among intravenous drug
users, most likely due to person-to-person contact, have been
reported with increasing frequency (9). Common-source epidemics
from contaminated food and water also occur. Sharing utensils or
cigarettes or kissing is not believed to transmit the hepatitis A
virus.  The incubation period of hepatitis A is 15-50 days (average
28). High concentrations of HAV (108 particles/g) are found in
stool specimens from infected persons. Virus in the feces reaches
its highest concentration late in the incubation period and early
in the prodromal phase of illness, and it diminishes rapidly once
jaundice appears. Greatest infectivity is during the 2-week
period immediately before the onset of jaundice. Viremia probably
occurs during the period that the virus is shed in feces. Virus
has not been found in urine. A chronic carrier state with HAV in
blood or feces has not been demonstrated. Transmission of HAV by
blood  transfusion  has  been  reported  but  is  uncommon  (10).   The  diagnosis  of  acute
hepatitis A is confirmed by finding IgM
anti-HAV in serum collected during the acute or early
convalescent phase of the disease. IgG anti-HAV, which appears in
the convalescent phase of the disease and remains detectable in
serum thereafter, confers enduring protection against the
disease. Commercial tests are available to detect IgM anti-HAV
and total anti-HAV in serum.  Although the incidence of hepatitis A in the United States
in
the 1980s was lower than that in the 1970s, a 26% increase in
incidence was observed between 1983 and 1988. It is still a
common infection among older children and young adults. In 1988,
50% of reported cases of hepatitis in this country were
attributable  to  hepatitis  A.   Recommendations  for  IG  Prophylaxis  for  Hepatitis  A  
Numerous field studies conducted in the past 4 decades confirm
that IG given before exposure or during the incubation period of
hepatitis A is protective against clinical illness (11-13). Its
prophylactic value is greatest (80%-90%) when given early in the
incubation period and declines thereafter (13). Recent tests have
shown slightly decreased titers of anti-HAV in current IG lots
compared with lots tested 8 years previously; however, no
differences in IG efficacy have been noted.  Preexposure Prophylaxis  The major group
for whom preexposure prophylaxis is recommended
is international travelers. The risk of hepatitis A for U.S.
citizens traveling abroad varies with living conditions, length
of stay, and the incidence of hepatitis A infection in areas
visited (14-16). In general, travelers to developed areas of
North America, western Europe, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand
are at no greater risk of infection than they would be in the
United States. For travelers to developing countries, risk of
infection increases with duration of travel and is highest for
those who live in or visit rural areas, trek in back country, or
frequently eat or drink in settings of poor sanitation.
Nevertheless, recent studies have shown that many cases of
travel-related hepatitis A occur in travelers with "standard"
tourist itineraries, accommodations, and food and beverage
consumption behaviors (16 and CDC unpublished data). In
developing countries, travelers should minimize their exposure to
hepatitis A and other enteric diseases by avoiding potentially
contaminated water or food. Travelers should avoid drinking water
(or beverages with ice) of unknown purity and eating uncooked
shellfish or uncooked fruits or vegetables that they did not
prepare.  IG is recommended for all susceptible travelers to developing
countries (17). IG is especially important for persons who will
be living in or visiting rural areas, eating or drinking in
settings of poor or uncertain sanitation, or who will have close
contact with local persons (especially young children) in
settings with poor sanitary conditions. Persons who plan to
reside in developing areas for long periods should receive IG
regularly.  For travelers, a single dose of IG of 0.02 ml/kg of body weight
is recommended if travel is for less than 3 months. For prolonged
travel or residence in developing countries, 0.06 ml/kg should be
given every 5 months. For persons who require repeated IG
prophylaxis, screening for total anti-HAV before travel is useful
to define susceptibility and eliminate unnecessary doses of IG
for those who are immune. IG produced in developing countries may
not meet the standards for purity required in most developed
countries. Persons needing repeat doses overseas should use
products  that  meet  U.S.  license  requirements.   Postexposure  Prophylaxis   Hepatitis  A
cannot be reliably diagnosed on clinical
presentation alone, and serologic confirmation of index patients
is recommended before contacts are treated. Serologic screening
of contacts for anti-HAV before they are given IG is not
recommended because screening is more costly than IG and would
delay its administration.  For postexposure IG prophylaxis, a single intramuscular dose
of
0.02 ml/kg is recommended. IG should be given as soon as possible
after last exposure; giving IG more than 2 weeks after exposure
is not indicated.  Specific recommendations for IG prophylaxis for hepatitis A
depend on the nature of the HAV exposure.  
    Close personal contact. IG is recommended for all household
 and
    sexual contacts of persons with hepatitis A.  
    Day-care centers. Day-care facilities attended by children
 in
    diapers can be important settings for HAV transmission
 (18-20). IG
    should be administered to all staff and attendees of
 day-care
    centers or homes if a) one or more children or employees
 are
    diagnosed as having hepatitis A, or b) cases are recognized
 in two
    or more households of center attendees. When an outbreak
 (hepatitis
    cases in three or more families) occurs, IG should also be
    considered for members of households that have children
 (center
    attendees) in diapers. In centers not enrolling children in
    diapers, IG need only be given to classroom contacts of an
 index
    patient.  
    Schools. Contact at elementary and secondary schools is
 usually not
    an important means of transmitting hepatitis A. Routine
    administration of IG is not indicated for pupils and
 teachers in
    contact with a patient. However, when an epidemiologic
    investigation clearly shows the existence of a school- or
    classroom-centered outbreak, IG may be given to persons who
 have
    close contact with patients.  
    Institutions for custodial care. Living conditions in some
    institutions, such as prisons and facilities for the
    developmentally disabled, favor transmission of hepatitis
 A. When
    outbreaks occur, giving IG to residents and staff who have
 close
    contact with patients with hepatitis A may reduce the
 spread of
    disease. Depending on the epidemiologic circumstances,
 prophylaxis
    can be limited or can involve the entire institution.  
    Hospitals. Routine IG prophylaxis for hospital personnel is
 not
    indicated. Rather, sound hygienic practices should be
 emphasized.
    Staff education should point out the risk of exposure to
 hepatitis
    A and should emphasize precautions regarding direct contact
 with
    potentially  infective  materials  (21).   Outbreaks  of  hepatitis  A  occur  occasionally
among
 hospital
    staff, usually in association with an unsuspected index
 patient who
    is fecally incontinent. Large outbreaks have occurred from
 contact
    with infected infants in neonatal intensive care units
 (10). In
    outbreaks, prophylaxis of persons exposed to feces of
 infected
    patients may be indicated.  
    Offices and factories. Routine IG administration is not
 indicated
    under the usual office or factory conditions for persons
 exposed to
    a fellow worker with hepatitis A. Experience shows that
 casual
    contact in the work setting does not result in virus
 transmission.  
    Common-source exposure. IG use might be effective in
 preventing
    foodborne or waterborne hepatitis A if exposure is
 recognized in
    time. However, IG is not recommended for persons exposed to
 a
    common source of hepatitis infection after cases have begun
 to
    occur, since the 2-week period during which IG is effective
 will
    have been exceeded.  If a food handler is diagnosed as having hepatitis A,
    common-source transmission is possible but uncommon. IG
 should be
    administered to other food handlers but is usually not
 recommended
    for patrons (22). However, IG administration to patrons may
 be
    considered if all of the following conditions exist: a) the
    infected person is directly involved in handling, without
 gloves,
    foods that will not be cooked before they are eaten, and b)
 the
    hygienic practices of the food handler are deficient or the
 food
    handler has had diarrhea, and c) patrons can be identified
 and
    treated within 2 weeks of exposure. Situations in which
 repeated
    exposures may have occurred, such as in institutional
 cafeterias,
    may warrant stronger consideration of IG use.  HEPATITIS B  Hepatitis B infection is
caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV),
a 42-nm, double-shelled deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) virus of the
class hepadnaviridae. Several well-defined antigen-antibody
systems are associated with HBV infection (Table_1). HBsAg is
found on the surface of the virus and is also produced in excess
amounts, circulating in blood as 22-nm spherical and tubular
particles. HBsAg can be identified in serum 30-60 days after
exposure to HBV and persists for variable periods. Anti-HBs
develops after a resolved infection and is responsible for
long-term immunity. Antibody to the core antigen (anti-HBc)
develops in all HBV infections and persists indefinitely. IgM
anti-HBc appears early in infection and persists for greater than
or equal to 6 months. It is a reliable marker of acute or recent
HBV infection. A third antigen, hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg),
may be detected in samples from persons with acute or chronic HBV
infection. The presence of HBeAg correlates with viral
replication and high infectivity. Antibody to HBeAg (anti-HBe)
develops in most HBV infections and correlates with the loss of
replicating virus and with lower infectivity.  The incubation period of hepatitis B is long
(45-160 days;
average = 120), and the onset of acute disease is generally
insidious. Clinical symptoms and signs include anorexia, malaise,
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and jaundice. Extrahepatic
manifestations of disease -- such as skin rashes, arthralgias, and
arthritis -- can also occur. The case-fatality rate for reported
cases is approximately 1.4%.  A variable proportion of individuals infected with HBV will
become chronically infected with the virus. The HBV carrier is
central to the epidemiology of HBV transmission. A carrier is
defined as a person who is either HBsAg-positive on at least two
occasions (at least 6 months apart) or who is HBsAg-positive and
IgM anti-HBc negative when a single serum specimen is tested.
Although the degree of infectivity is best correlated with
HBeAg-positivity, any person positive for HBsAg is potentially
infectious. The likelihood of becoming chronically infected with
HBV varies inversely with the age at which infection occurs. HBV
transmitted from HBsAg-positive mothers to their newborns results
in HBV carriage for up to 90% of infants. Between 25% and 50% of
children infected before 5 years of age become carriers, whereas
only  6%-10%  of  acutely  infected  adults  become  carriers.   Carriers  and  persons  with
acute infection have the highest
concentrations of HBV in blood and serous fluids. A lower
concentration is present in other body fluids, such as saliva and
semen. Transmission occurs via percutaneous or permucosal routes,
and infective blood or body fluids can be introduced at birth,
through sexual contact, or by contaminated needles. Infection can
also occur in settings of continuous close personal contact (such
as in households or among children in institutions for the
developmentally disabled), presumably via inapparent or unnoticed
contact of infective secretions with skin lesions or mucosal
surfaces. Transmission of infection by transfusion of blood or
blood products is rare because of routine screening of blood for
HBsAg and because of current donor selection procedures.
Transmission of HBV from infected health-care workers to patients
is uncommon but has been documented during types of invasive
procedures (e.g., oral and gynecologic surgery) (23,24).
HBsAg-positive health-care workers need not be restricted from
patient contact unless they have been epidemiologically
associated with HBV transmission. Rather, they should be educated
about the potential mechanisms of HBV transmission. Adherence to
aseptic techniques minimizes the risk of transmission. HBV is not
transmitted via the fecal-oral route.  Worldwide, HBV infection is a major cause of acute
and chronic
hepatitis, cirrhosis, and primary hepatocellular carcinoma. The
frequency of HBV infection and patterns of transmission vary
markedly in different parts of the world. In the United States,
Western Europe, and Australia, it is a disease of low endemicity,
with infection occurring primarily during adulthood and with only
0.2%-0.9% of the population being chronically infected. In
contrast, HBV infection is highly endemic in China and Southeast
Asia, most of Africa, most Pacific Islands, parts of the Middle
East, and in the Amazon Basin. In these areas, most persons
acquire infection at birth or during childhood, and 8%-15% of the
population are chronically infected with HBV. In other parts of
the world, HBV infection is moderately endemic, with 2%-7% of the
population being HBV carriers. Prevention strategies for
populations in which HBV infection is highly endemic are directed
at vaccinating infants with hepatitis B vaccine, usually
beginning at birth, to prevent both perinatal and childhood
transmission of infection (25). Recommendations for hepatitis B
prophylaxis in other areas should be designed to maximize the
interruption of HBV transmission in accordance with local
patterns of transmission. The recommendations that follow are
intended for use in the United States.  Hepatitis B Virus Infection in the United States 
Each year, an estimated 300,000 persons, primarily young
adults, are infected with HBV. One-quarter become ill with
jaundice, more than 10,000 patients require hospitalization, and
an average of 250 die of fulminant disease. The United States
currently contains an estimated pool of 750,000-1,000,000
infectious carriers. Approximately 25% of carriers develop
chronic active hepatitis, which often progresses to cirrhosis.
Furthermore, HBV carriers have a risk of developing primary liver
cancer that is 12-300 times higher than that of other persons. An
estimated 4,000 persons die each year from hepatitis B-related
cirrhosis, and more than 800 die from hepatitis B-related liver
cancer.  Serologic surveys demonstrate that, although HBV infection is
uncommon among adults in the general population, it is highly
prevalent in certain groups. Those at risk, based on the
prevalence of serologic markers of infection, are described in
Table_2. Persons born in areas of high HBV endemicity and their
descendents remain at high risk of infection, as do certain
populations in which HBV is highly endemic (Alaskan Natives and
Pacific Islanders). Certain lifestyles (e.g., homosexual
activity, intravenous drug abuse) result in early acquisition of
HBV infection and high rates of infection. Persons who have
heterosexual activity with multiple partners are at significant
risk of infection. Inmates of prisons have a high prevalence of
HBV markers, usually because of parenteral drug abuse before or
during imprisonment. Patients in custodial institutions for the
developmentally disabled are also at increased risk of having HBV
infection. Household contacts and sexual partners of HBV carriers
are at increased risk, as are hemodialysis patients and
recipients of certain plasma-derived products that have not been
inactivated  (e.g.,  anti-hemophilic  factor).   Those  at  occupational  risk  of  HBV  infection
include medical and
dental workers, related laboratory and support personnel, and
public service employees who have contact with blood, as well as
staff  in  institutions  or  classrooms  for  the  mentally  retarded.   Hepatitis  B  Prevention
Strategies  in  the  United  States   The  incidence  of  reported  acute  hepatitis  B  cases
increased
steadily over the past decade and reached a peak in 1985 (11.50
cases/105/year), despite the introduction of hepatitis B vaccine
3 years previously. Incidence decreased modestly (18%) by 1988,
but still remains higher than a decade ago. This minimal impact
of hepatitis B vaccine on disease incidence is attributable to
several factors. The sources of infection for most cases include
intravenous drug abuse (28%), heterosexual contact with infected
persons or multiple partners (22%), and homosexual activity (9%).
In addition, 30% of patients with Hepatitis B deny any of the
recognized risk factors for infection.  The present strategy for hepatitis B prevention is
to vaccinate
those individuals at high risk of infection. Most persons
receiving vaccine as a result of this strategy have been persons
at risk of acquiring HBV infection through occupational exposure,
a group that accounts for approximately 4% of cases. The major
deterrents to vaccinating the other high-risk groups include
their lack of knowledge about the risk of disease and its
consequences, the lack of public-sector programs, the cost of
vaccine, and the inability to access most of the high-risk
populations.  For vaccine to have an impact on the incidence of hepatitis B,
a comprehensive strategy must be developed that will provide
hepatitis B vaccination to persons before they engage in
behaviors or occupations that place them at risk of infection.
Universal HBsAg screening of pregnant women was recently
recommended to prevent perinatal HBV transmission. The previous
recommendations for selective screening failed to identify most
HBsAg-positive pregnant women (27). As an alternative to
high-risk-group vaccination, universal vaccination of infants and
adolescents needs to be examined as a possible strategy to
control the transmission of disease.  Hepatitis B Prophylaxis  Two types of products are
available for prophylaxis against
hepatitis B. Hepatitis B vaccines, first licensed in 1981,
provide active immunization against HBV infection, and their use
is recommended for both preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis.
HBIG provides temporary, passive protection and is indicated only
in certain postexposure settings.  HBIG  HBIG is prepared from plasma preselected to
contain a high
titer of anti-HBs. In the United States, HBIG has an anti-HBs
titer of greater than 100,000 by radioimmunoassay (RIA). Human
plasma from which HBIG is prepared is screened for antibodies to
HIV; in addition, the Cohn fractionation process used to prepare
this product inactivates and eliminates HIV from the final
product.There is no evidence that the causative agent of AIDS
(HIV) has been transmitted by HBIG (6).  Hepatitis B Vaccine  Two types of hepatitis B
vaccines are currently licensed in the
United States. Plasma-derived vaccine consists of a suspension of
inactivated, alum-adsorbed, 22-nm, HBsAg particles that have been
purified from human plasma by a combination of biophysical
(ultracentrifugation) and biochemical procedures. Inactivation is
a threefold process using 8M urea, pepsin at pH 2, and 1:4,000
formalin. These treatment steps have been shown to inactivate
representatives of all classes of viruses found in human blood,
including HIV (28). Plasma-derived vaccine is no longer being
produced in the United States, and use is now limited to
hemodialysis patients, other immunocompromised hosts, and persons
with known allergy to yeast.  Currently licensed recombinant hepatitis B vaccines are
produced by Saccharomyces cerevisiae (common baker's yeast), into
which a plasmid containing the gene for the HBsAg has been
inserted. Purified HBsAg is obtained by lysing the yeast cells
and separating HBsAg from yeast components by biochemical and
biophysical techniques. These vaccines contain more than 95%
HBsAg protein. Yeast-derived protein constitutes no more than 5%
of the final product.  Hepatitis B vaccines are packaged to contain 10-40 ug HBsAg
protein/ml and are adsorbed with aluminum hydroxide (0.5 mg/ml).
Thimerosal  (1:20,000  concentration)  is  added  as  a  preservative.   The  recommended
series of three intramuscular doses of
hepatitis B vaccine induces an adequate antibody response * in
greater than 90% of healthy adults and in greater than 95%of
infants, children, and adolescents from birth through 19 years of
age (29-31). The deltoid (arm) is the recommended site for
hepatitis B vaccination of adults and children; immunogenicity of
vaccine for adults is substantially lower when injections are
given in the buttock (32). Larger vaccine doses (two to four
times normal adult dose) or an increased number of doses (four
doses) are required to induce protective antibody in a high
proportion of hemodialysis patients and may also be necessary for
other immunocompromised persons (such as those on
immunosuppressive  drugs  or  with  HIV  infection)  (33,34).   Field  trials  of  the  vaccines
licensed in the United States have
shown 80%-95% efficacy in preventing infection or clinical
hepatitis among susceptible persons (31,35). Protection against
illness is virtually complete for persons who develop an adequate
antibody response after vaccination. The duration of protection
and need for booster doses are not yet fully defined. Between 30%
and 50% of persons who develop adequate antibody after three
doses of vaccine will lose detectable antibody within 7 years,
but protection against viremic infection and clinical disease
appears to persist (36-38). Immunogenicity and efficacy of the
licensed vaccines for hemodialysis patients are much lower than
in normal adults. Protection in this group may last only as long
as  adequate  antibody  levels  persist  (33).   Vaccine  Usage   Primary  vaccination
comprises three intramuscular doses of
vaccine, with the second and third doses given 1 and 6 months,
respectively, after the first. Adults and older children should
be given a full 1.0 ml divided by ose, while children less than
11 years of age should usually receive half (0.5 ml) this dose.
See Table_3 for complete information on age-specific dosages of
currently available vaccines. An alternative schedule of four
doses of vaccine given at 0, 1, 2, and 12 months has been
approved for one vaccine for postexposure prophylaxis or for more
rapid induction of immunity. However, there is no clear evidence
that this regimen provides greater protection than the standard
three-dose series. Hepatitis B vaccine should be given only in
the deltoid muscle for adults and children or in the
anterolateral  thigh  muscle  for  infants  and  neonates.   For  patients  undergoing
hemodialysis and for other
immunosuppressed patients, higher vaccine doses or increased
numbers of doses are required. A special formulation of one
vaccine is now available for such persons (Table_3). Persons
 with
HIV infection have an impaired response to hepatitis B vaccine.
The immunogenicity of higher doses of vaccine is unknown for this
group, and firm recommendations on dosage cannot be made at this
time (34).  Vaccine doses administered at longer intervals provide equally
satisfactory protection, but optimal protection is not conferred
until after the third dose. If the vaccine series is interrupted
after the first dose, the second and third doses should be given
separated by an interval of 3-5 months. Persons who are late for
the third dose should be given this dose when convenient.
Postvaccination testing is not considered necessary in either
situation.  In one study, the response to vaccination by the standard
schedule using one or two doses of one vaccine, followed by the
remaining doses of a different vaccine, was comparable to the
response to vaccination with a single vaccine. Moreover, because
the immunogenicities of the available vaccines are similar, it is
likely that responses in such situations will be comparable to
those induced by any of the vaccines alone.  The immunogenicity of a series of three
low doses (0.1 standard
dose) of plasma-derived hepatitis B vaccine administered by the
intradermal route has been assessed in several studies. The
largest studies of adults show lower rates of developing adequate
antibody (80%-90%) and twofold to fourfold lower antibody titers
than with intramuscular vaccination with recommended doses (39
and CDC unpublished data). Data on immunogenicity of low doses of
recombinant vaccines given intradermally are limited. At this
time, intradermal vaccination of adults using low doses of
vaccine should be done only under research protocol, with
appropriate informed consent and with postvaccination testing to
identify persons with inadequate response who would be eligible
for revaccination. Intradermal vaccination is not recommended for
infants or children.  All hepatitis B vaccines are inactivated (noninfective)
products, and there is no evidence of interference with other
simultaneously administered vaccines.  Data are not available on the safety of hepatitis
B vaccines
for the developing fetus. Because the vaccines contain only
noninfectious HBsAg particles, there should be no risk to the
fetus. In contrast, HBV infection of a pregnant woman may result
in severe disease for the mother and chronic infection of the
newborn. Therefore, pregnancy or lactation should not be
considered a contraindication to the use of this vaccine for
persons who are otherwise eligible.  Vaccine storage and shipment  Vaccine should be
shipped and stored at 2 C-8 C but not frozen.
Freezing destroys the potency of the vaccine.  Side effects and adverse reactions  The
most common side effect observed following vaccination with
each of the available vaccines has been soreness at the injection
site. Postvaccination surveillance for 3 years after licensure of
the plasma-derived vaccine showed an association of borderline
significance between Guillain-Barre syndrome and receipt of the
first vaccine dose (40). The rate of this occurrence was very low
(0.5/100,000 vaccinees) and was more than compensated by disease
prevented by the vaccine even if Guillain-Barre syndrome is a
true side effect. Such postvaccination surveillance information
is not available for the recombinant hepatitis B vaccines. Early
concerns about safety of plasma-derived vaccine have proven to be
unfounded, particularly the concern that infectious agents such
as HIV present in the donor plasma pools might contaminate the
final product.  Effect of vaccination on carriers and immune persons  Hepatitis B vaccine
produces neither therapeutic nor adverse
effects for HBV carriers (41). Vaccination of individuals who
possess antibodies against HBV from a previous infection is not
necessary but will not cause adverse effects. Such individuals
will have a postvaccination increase in their anti-HBs levels.
Passively acquired antibody, whether acquired from HBIG or IG
administration or from the transplacental route, will not
interfere  with  active  immunization  (42).   Prevaccination  serologic  testing  for
susceptibility  The decision to test potential vaccine recipients for prior
infection is primarily a cost-effectiveness issue and should be
based on whether the costs of testing balance the costs of
vaccine saved by not vaccinating individuals who have already
been infected. Estimation of cost-effectiveness of testing
depends on three variables: the cost of vaccination, the cost of
testing for susceptibility, and the expected prevalence of immune
individuals in the group.  Testing in groups with the highest risk of HBV infection (HBV
marker prevalence greater than 20%, Table_2) is usually
cost-effective unless testing costs are extremely high.
Cost-effectiveness of screening may be marginal for groups at
intermediate risk. For groups with a low expected prevalence of
HBV serologic markers, such as health professionals in their
training years, prevaccination testing is not cost-effective.  For routine testing, only one
antibody test is necessary
(either anti-HBc or anti-HBs). Anti-HBc identifies all previously
infected persons, both carriers and those who are not carriers,
but does not differentiate members of the two groups. Anti-HBs
identifies persons previously infected, except for carriers.
Neither test has a particular advantage for groups expected to
have carrier rates of less than 2%, such as health-care workers.
Anti-HBc may be preferred to avoid unnecessary vaccination of
carriers for groups with higher carrier rates. If RIA is used to
test for anti-HBs, a minimum of 10 sample ratio units should be
used to designate immunity (2.1 is the usual designation of a
positive test). If EIA is used, the positive level recommended by
manufacturers  is  appropriate.   Postvaccination  testing  for  serologic  response  and
revaccination
of nonresponders  Hepatitis B vaccine, when given in the deltoid, produces
protective antibody (anti-HBs) in greater than 90% of healthy
persons. Testing for immunity after vaccination is not
recommended routinely but is advised for persons whose subsequent
management depends on knowing their immune status (such as
dialysis patients and staff). Testing for immunity is also
advised for persons for whom a suboptimal response may be
anticipated, such as those who have received vaccine in the
buttock, persons greater than or equal to 50 years of age, and
persons known to have HIV infection. Postvaccination testing
should also be considered for persons at occupational risk who
may have needle-stick exposures necessitating postexposure
prophylaxis. When necessary, postvaccination testing should be
done between 1 and 6 months after completion of the vaccine
series to provide definitive information on response to the
vaccine.  Revaccination of persons who do not respond to the primary
series (nonresponders) produces adequate antibody in 15%-25%
after one additional dose and in 30%-50% after three additional
doses when the primary vaccination has been given in the deltoid
(36). For persons who did not respond to a primary vaccine series
given in the buttock, data suggest that revaccination in the arm
induces adequate antibody in greater than 75%. Revaccination with
one or more additional doses should be considered for persons who
fail to respond to vaccination in the deltoid and is recommended
for those who have failed to respond to vaccination in the
buttock.   Need  for  vaccine  booster  doses   Available  data  show  that  vaccine-induced
antibody levels
decline steadily with time and that up to 50% of adult vaccinees
who respond adequately to vaccine may have low or undetectable
antibody levels by 7 years after vaccination. Nevertheless, both
adults and children with declining antibody levels are still
protected against hepatitis B disease. Current data also suggest
excellent protection against disease for 5 years after
vaccination among infants born to hepatitis B-carrier mothers.
For adults and children with normal immune status, booster doses
are not routinely recommended within 7 years after vaccination,
nor is routine serologic testing to assess antibody levels
necessary for vaccine recipients during this period. For infants
born to hepatitis B-carrier mothers, booster doses are not
necessary within 5 years after vaccination. The possible need for
booster doses after longer intervals will be assessed as
additional  information  becomes  available.   For  hemodialysis  patients,  for  whom
vaccine-induced protection
is less complete and may persist only as long as antibody levels
remain above 10 mIU/ml, the need for booster doses should be
assessed by annual antibody testing, and booster doses should be
given when antibody levels decline to less than 10 mIU/ml.  Groups recommended for
preexposure vaccination  Persons at substantial risk of HBV infection who are
demonstrated or judged likely to be susceptible should be
vaccinated. They include the following:  
    Persons with occupational risk. HBV infection is a major
    infectious occupational hazard for health-care and
 public-safety
    workers. The risk of acquiring HBV infection from
 occupational
    exposures is dependent on the frequency of percutaneous and
    permucosal exposures to blood or blood products. Any
 health-care or
    public-safety worker may be at risk for HBV exposure
 depending on
    the tasks that he or she performs. If those tasks involve
 contact
    with blood or blood-contaminated body fluids, such workers
 should
    be vaccinated. Vaccination should be considered for other
 workers
    depending on the nature of the task (43).  Risks among health-care professionals
vary during the
 training
    and working career of each individual but are often highest
 during
    the professional training period. For this reason, when
 possible,
    vaccination should be completed during training in schools
 of
    medicine, dentistry, nursing, laboratory technology, and
 other
    allied health professions before workers have their first
 contact
    with blood.  
    Clients and staff of institutions for the developmentally
 disabled.
    Susceptible clients in institutions for the developmentally
    disabled should be vaccinated. Staff who work closely with
 clients
    should also be vaccinated. The risk in institutional
 environments
    is associated not only with blood exposure but may also be
    consequent to bites and contact with skin lesions and other
    infective secretions. Susceptible clients and staff who
 live or
    work in smaller (group) residential settings with known HBV
    carriers should also receive hepatitis B vaccine. Clients
    discharged from residential institutions into community
 settings
    should be screened for HBsAg so that the community programs
 may
    take appropriate measures to prevent HBV transmission.
 These
    measures should include both environmental controls and
 appropriate
    use of vaccine.  Staff of nonresidential day-care programs (e.g.,
 schools,
    sheltered workshops for the developmentally disabled)
 attended by
    known HBV carriers have a risk of HBV infection comparable
 to that
    among health-care workers and therefore should be
 vaccinated (44).
    The risk of HBV infection for clients appears to be lower
 than the
    risk for staff. Vaccination of clients in day-care programs
 may be
    considered. Vaccination of classroom contacts is strongly
    encouraged if a classmate who is an HBV carrier behaves
    aggressively or has special medical problems that increase
 the risk
    of exposure to his/her blood or serous secretions.  
    Hemodialysis patients. Hepatitis B vaccination is
 recommended  for
    susceptible hemodialysis patients. Although seroconversion
 rates
    and anti-HBs titers are lower than those for healthy
 persons, for
    those patients who do respond, hepatitis B vaccine will
 protect
    them from HBV infection and reduce the necessity for
 frequent
    serologic screening (45). Some studies have shown higher
    seroconversion rates and antibody titers for patients with
 uremia
    who were vaccinated before they required dialysis (46).
    Identification of patients for vaccination early in the
 course of
    their renal disease is encouraged.  
    Sexually active homosexual men. Susceptible sexually active
    homosexual men should be vaccinated regardless of their age
 or the
    duration of their homosexual practices. Persons should be
    vaccinated as soon as possible after their homosexual
 activity
    begins. Homosexual and bisexual men known to have HIV
 infection
    should be tested for anti-HBs response after completion of
 the
    vaccine series and should be counseled accordingly.  
    Users of illicit injectable drugs. All users of illicit
  injectable
    drugs who are susceptible to HBV should be vaccinated as
 early as
    possible after their drug abuse begins.  
    Recipients of certain blood products. Patients with
 clotting
    disorders who receive clotting-factor concentrates have an
    increased risk of HBV infection. Vaccination is recommended
 for
    these persons, and it should be initiated at the time their
    specific clotting disorder is identified. Prevaccination
 testing is
    recommended for patients who have already received multiple
    infusions of these products.  
    Household and sexual contacts of HBV carriers. Household
 contacts
    of HBV carriers are at high risk of HBV infection. Sexual
 contacts
    appear to be at greatest risk. When HBV carriers are
 identified
    through routine screening of donated blood, diagnostic
 testing in
    hospitals, prenatal screening, screening of refugees from
 certain
    areas, or other screening programs, they should be notified
 of
    their status. All household and sexual contacts should be
 tested
    and susceptible contacts vaccinated.  
    Adoptees from countries of high HBV endemicity. Families
 accepting
    orphans or unaccompanied minors from countries of high or
    intermediate HBV endemicity should have the children
 screened for
    HBsAg. If the children are HBsAg-positive, family members
 should be
    vaccinated (47).  
    Other contacts of HBV carriers. Persons in casual contact
 with
    carriers in settings such as schools and offices are at
 minimal
    risk of HBV infection, and vaccine is not routinely
 recommended for
    them. At child-care centers, HBV transmission between
 children or
    between children and staff has rarely been documented.
 Unless
    special circumstances exist, such as behavior problems
 (biting or
    scratching) or medical conditions (severe skin disease)
 that might
    facilitate transmission, vaccination of contacts of
 carriers in
    child care is not indicated.  
    Populations with high endemicity of HBV infection. In
 certain U.S.
    populations, including Alaskan Natives, Pacific Islanders,
 and
    refugees from HBV-endemic areas, HBV infection is highly
 endemic,
    and transmission occurs primarily during childhood. In such
 groups,
    universal hepatitis B vaccination of infants is recommended
 to
    prevent disease transmission during childhood. In addition,
 more
    extensive programs of "catch-up" childhood vaccination
 should be
    considered  if  resources  are  available.   Immigrants  and  refugees  from  areas  with
highly endemic
 HBV
    disease (particularly Africa and eastern Asia) should be
 screened
    for HBV markers upon resettlement in the United States. If
 an HBV
    carrier is identified, all susceptible household contacts
 should be
    vaccinated. Even if no HBV carriers are found within a
 family,
    vaccination should be considered for susceptible children
 less than
    7 years of age because of the high rate of interfamilial
 HBV
    infection that occurs among these children (48).
 Vaccination is
    recommended for all infants of women who were born in areas
 in
    which infection is highly endemic.  
    Inmates of long-term correctional facilities. The prison
    environment may provide a favorable setting for the
 transmission of
    HBV because of the use of illicit injectable drugs and
 because of
    male homosexual practices. Moreover, it provides an access
 point
    for vaccination of percutaneous drug abusers. Prison
 officials
    should consider undertaking screening and vaccination
 programs
    directed at inmates with histories of high-risk behaviors.  
    Sexually active heterosexual persons. Sexually active
 heterosexual
    persons with multiple sexual partners are at increased risk
 of HBV
    infection. Risk increases with increasing numbers of sexual
    partners. Vaccination is recommended for persons who are
 diagnosed
    as having recently acquired other sexually transmitted
 diseases,
    for prostitutes, and for persons who have a history of
 sexual
    activity with multiple partners in the previous 6 months.  
    International travelers. Vaccination should be considered
 for
    persons who plan to reside for more than 6 months in areas
 with
    high levels of endemic HBV and who will have close contact
 with the
    local population. Vaccination should also be considered for
    short-term travelers who are likely to have contact with
 blood from
    or sexual contact with residents of areas with high levels
 of
    endemic disease. Ideally, hepatitis B vaccination of
 travelers
    should begin at least 6 months before travel to allow for
    completion of the full vaccine series. Nevertheless, a
 partial
    series will offer some protection from HBV infection. The
    alternative four-dose schedule may provide better
 protection during
    travel if the first three doses can be delivered before
 travel
    (second and third doses given 1 and 2 months, respectively,
 after
    first).  Postexposure Prophylaxis for Hepatitis B  Prophylactic treatment to prevent
hepatitis B infection after
exposure to HBV should be considered in the following situations:
perinatal exposure of an infant born to an HBsAg-positive mother,
accidental percutaneous or permucosal exposure to HBsAg-positive
blood, sexual exposure to an HBsAg-positive person, and household
exposure of an infant less than 12 months of age to a primary
care  giver  who  has  acute  hepatitis  B.   Various  studies  have  established  the  relative
efficacies of
HBIG and/or hepatitis B vaccine in different exposure situations.
For an infant with perinatal exposure to an HBsAg-positive and
HBeAg-positive mother, a regimen combining one dose of HBIG at
birth with the hepatitis B vaccine series started soon after
birth is 85%-95% effective in preventing development of the HBV
carrier state (35, 49-51). Regimens involving either multiple
doses of HBIG alone, or the vaccine series alone, have 70%-85%
efficacy (52,53).  For accidental percutaneous exposure, only regimens including
HBIG and/or IG have been studied. A regimen of two doses of HBIG,
one given after exposure and one a month later, is about 75%
effective in preventing hepatitis B in this setting (54,55). For
sexual exposure, a single dose of HBIG is 75% effective if given
within 2 weeks of last sexual exposure (56). The efficacy of IG
for postexposure prophylaxis is uncertain. IG no longer has a
role in postexposure prophylaxis of hepatitis B because of the
availability  of  HBIG  and  the  wider  use  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine.   Recommendations  on
postexposure prophylaxis are based on
available efficacy data and on the likelihood of future HBV
exposure of the person requiring treatment. In all exposures, a
regimen combining HBIG with hepatitis B vaccine will provide both
short- and long-term protection, will be less costly than the
two-dose HBIG treatment alone, and is the treatment of choice.  Perinatal Exposure and
Recommendations  Transmission of HBV from mother to infant during the perinatal
period represents one of the most efficient modes of HBV
infection and often leads to severe long-term sequelae. Infants
born to HBsAg-positive and HBeAg-positive mothers have a 70%-90%
chance of acquiring perinatal HBV infection, and 85%-90% of
infected infants will become chronic HBV carriers. Estimates are
that greater than 25% of these carriers will die from primary
hepatocellular carcinoma (PHC) or cirrhosis of the liver (57).
Infants born to HBsAg-positive and HBeAg-negative mothers have a
lower risk of acquiring perinatal infection; however, such
infants have had acute disease, and fatal fulminant hepatitis has
been reported (58,59). Based on 1987 data in the United States,
an estimated 18,000 births occur to HBsAg-positive women each
year, resulting in approximately 4,000 infants who become chronic
HBV carriers. Prenatal screening of all pregnant women identifies
those who are HBsAg-positive and allows treatment of their
newborns with HBIG and hepatitis B vaccine, a regimen that is
85%-95% effective in preventing the development of the HBV
chronic carrier state. The following are perinatal
recommendations:  
    All pregnant women should be routinely tested for HBsAg
 during an
    early prenatal visit in each pregnancy. This testing should
 be done
    at the same time that other routine prenatal screening
 tests are
    ordered. In special situations (e.g., when acute hepatitis
 is
    suspected, when a history of exposure to hepatitis has been
    reported, or when the mother has a particularly high-risk
 behavior,
    such as intravenous drug abuse), an additional HBsAg test
 can be
    ordered later in the pregnancy. No other HBV marker tests
 are
    necessary for the purpose of maternal screening, although
    HBsAg-positive mothers identified during screening may have
    HBV-related acute or chronic liver disease and should be
 evaluated
    by their physicians.  
    If a woman has not been screened prenatally or if test
 results are
    not available at the time of admission for delivery, HBsAg
 testing
    should be done at the time of admission, or as soon as
 possible
    thereafter. If the mother is identified as HBsAg-positive
 greater
    than 1 month after giving birth, the infant should be
 tested for
    HBsAg. If the results are negative, the infant should be
 given HBIG
    and hepatitis B vaccine.  
    Following all initial positive tests for HBsAg, a repeat
 test for
    HBsAg should be performed on the same specimen, followed by
 a
    confirmatory test using a neutralization assay. For women
 in labor
    who did not have HBsAg testing during pregnancy and who are
 found
    to be HBsAg-positive on first testing, initiation of
 treatment of
    their infants should not be delayed by more than 24 hours
 for
    repeat or confirmatory testing.  
    Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers should receive HBIG
 (0.5 ml)
    intramuscularly once they are physiologically stable,
 preferably
    within 12 hours of birth (Table_4). Hepatitis B vaccine
 should
    be administered intramuscularly at the appropriate infant
 dose. The
    first dose should be given concurrently with HBIG but at a
    different site. If vaccine is not immediately available,
 the first
    dose should be given as soon as possible. Subsequent doses
 should
    be given as recommended for the specific vaccine. Testing
 infants
    for HBsAg and anti-HBs is recommended when they are 12-15
 months of
    age to monitor the success or failure of therapy. If HBsAg
 is not
    detectable and anti-HBs is present, children can be
 considered
    protected. Testing for anti-HBc is not useful, since
 maternal
    anti-HBc can persist for greater than 1 year. HBIG and
 hepatitis B
    vaccination do not interfere with routine childhood
 vaccinations.
    Breast-feeding poses no risk of HBV infection for infants
 who have
    begun prophylaxis.  
    Household members and sexual partners of HBV carriers
 identified
    through prenatal screening should be tested to determine
    susceptibility to HBV infection, and, if susceptible,
 should
    receive hepatitis B vaccine.  
    Obstetric and pediatric staff should be notified directly
 about
    HBsAg-positive mothers so that neonates can receive therapy
 without
    delay after birth and follow-up doses of vaccine can be
 given.
    Programs to coordinate the activities of persons providing
 prenatal
    care, hospital-based obstetrical services, and pediatric
 well-baby
    care must be established to assure proper follow-up and
 treatment
    both of infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers and of other
    susceptible household and sexual contacts.  
    In those populations under U.S. jurisdiction in which
 hepatitis B
    infection is highly endemic (including certain Alaskan
 Natives,
    Pacific Island groups, and refugees from highly endemic
 areas
    accepted for resettlement in the United States), universal
    vaccination of newborns with hepatitis B vaccine is the
 recommended
    strategy for hepatitis B control. HBsAg screening of
 mothers and
    use of HBIG for infants born to HBV-carrier mothers may be
 added to
    routine hepatitis B vaccination when practical, but
 screening and
    HBIG alone will not adequately protect children from HBV
 infection
    in endemic areas. In such areas, hepatitis B vaccine doses
 should
    be integrated into the childhood vaccination schedule. More
    extensive programs of childhood hepatitis B vaccination
 should be
    considered  if  resources  are  available.   Acute  Exposure  to  Blood  That  Contains  (or
Might Contain) HbsAg  For accidental percutaneous (needle stick, laceration, or bite)
or permucosal (ocular or mucous-membrane) exposure to blood, the
decision to provide prophylaxis must include consideration of
several factors: a) whether the source of the blood is available,
b) the HBsAg status of the source, and c) the hepatitis B
vaccination and vaccine-response status of the exposed person.
Such exposures usually affect persons for whom hepatitis B
vaccine is recommended. For any exposure of a person not
previously  vaccinated,  hepatitis  B  vaccination  is  recommended.   Following  any  such
exposure, a blood sample should be obtained
from the person who was the source of the exposure and should be
tested for HBsAg. The hepatitis B vaccination status and anti-HBs
response status (if known) of the exposed person should be
reviewed. The outline below and Table_5 summarize prophylaxis
 for
percutaneous or permucosal exposure to blood according to the
HBsAg status of the source of exposure and the vaccination status
and  vaccine  response  of  the  exposed  person.   For  greatest  effectiveness,  passive
prophylaxis with HBIG, when
indicated, should be given as soon as possible after exposure
(its value beyond 7 days after exposure is unclear).  
    Source of exposure HBsAg-positive  
        Exposed person has not been vaccinated or has not
 completed
        vaccination. Hepatitis B vaccination should be
 initiated. A
        single dose of HBIG (0.06 ml/kg) should be given as
 soon as
        possible after exposure and within 24 hours, if
 possible. The
        first dose of hepatitis B vaccine (Table_3) should
 be given
        intramuscularly at a separate site (deltoid for adults)
 and can
        be given simultaneously with HBIG or within 7 days of
 exposure.
        Subsequent doses should be given as recommended for the
        specific vaccine. If the exposed person has begun but
 not
        completed vaccination, one dose of HBIG should be given
        immediately, and vaccination should be completed as
 scheduled.  
        Exposed person has already been vaccinated against
 hepatitis B,
        and anti-HBs response status is known.
        (1) If the exposed person is known to have had adequate
  response in the past, the anti-HBs level should be
 tested
        unless an adequate level has been demonstrated
 within the
        last 24 months. Although current data show that
        vaccine-induced protection does not decrease as
 antibody
        level wanes, most experts consider the following
 approach
        to be prudent.  
            If anti-HBs level is adequate, no treatment is
            necessary.  
            If anti-HBs level is inadequate, ** a booster
 dose of
            hepatitis B vaccine should be given.  (2) If the exposed person is known not to
have
 responded to the  primary vaccine series, the exposed person should
 be given
        either a single dose of HBIG and a dose of
 hepatitis B
        vaccine as soon as possible after exposure, or two
 doses of
        HBIG (0.06 ml/kg), one given as soon as possible
 after
        exposure and the second 1 month later. The latter
 treatment
        is preferred for those who have failed to respond
 to at
        least four doses of vaccine.  
        Exposed person has already been vaccinated against
 hepatitis B,
        and the anti-HBs response is unknown. The exposed
 person should
        be tested for anti-HBs.
        (1) If the exposed person has adequate antibody, no
 additional  treatment is necessary.
        (2) If the exposed person has inadequate antibody on
 testing,  one dose of HBIG (0.06 ml/kg) should be given
 immediately
        and a standard booster dose of vaccine
 (Table_3) given
        at a different site.  
    Source of exposure known and HBsAg-negative  
        Exposed person has not been vaccinated or has not
 completed
        vaccination. If unvaccinated, the exposed person should
 be
        given the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine within 7
 days of
        exposure, and vaccination should be completed as
 recommended.
        If the exposed person has not completed vaccination,
        vaccination should be completed as scheduled.  
        Exposed person has already been vaccinated against
 hepatitis B.
        No treatment is necessary.  
    Source of exposure unknown or not available for testing  
        Exposed person has not been vaccinated or has not
 completed
        vaccination. If unvaccinated, the exposed person should
 be
        given the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine within 7
 days of
        exposure and vaccination completed as recommended. If
 the
        exposed person has not completed vaccination,
 vaccination
        should be completed as scheduled.  
        Exposed person has already been vaccinated against
 hepatitis B,
        and anti-HBs response status is known.
        (1) If the exposed person is known to have had adequate
  response in the past, no treatment is necessary.
        (2) If the exposed person is known not to have
 responded to the  vaccine, prophylaxis as described earlier in
 section
        l.b.(2) under "Source of exposure HBsAg-positive"
 may be
        considered if the source of the exposure is known
 to be at
        high risk of HBV infection.  
        Exposed person has already been vaccinated against
 hepatitis
        B, and the anti-HBs response is unknown. The exposed
 person
        should be tested for anti-HBs.
        (1) If the exposed person has adequate anti-HBs, no
 treatment  is necessary.
        (2) If the exposed person has inadequate anti-HBs, a
 standard  booster dose of vaccine should be given.  Sexual Partners of Persons with
Acute HBV Infection  Sexual partners of HBsAg-positive persons are at increased risk
of acquiring HBV infection, and HBIG has been shown to be 75%
effective in preventing such infections (56). Because data are
limited, the period after sexual exposure during which HBIG is
effective is unknown, but extrapolation from other settings makes
it unlikely that this period would exceed 14 days. Before
treatment, testing of sexual partners for susceptibility is
recommended if it does not delay treatment beyond 14 days after
last exposure. Testing for anti-HBc is the most efficient
prescreening  test  to  use  in  this  population.   All  susceptible  persons  whose  sexual
partners have acute
hepatitis B infection or whose sexual partners are discovered to
be hepatitis B carriers should receive a single dose of HBIG
(0.06 ml/kg) and should begin the hepatitis B vaccine series if
prophylaxis can be started within 14 days of the last sexual
contact, or if ongoing sexual contact with the infected person
will occur. Giving the vaccine with HBIG may improve the efficacy
of postexposure treatment. The vaccine has the added advantage of
conferring  long-lasting  protection.   An  alternative  treatment  for  persons  who  are  not
from a
high-risk group for whom vaccine is routinely recommended and
whose regular sexual partners have acute HBV infection is to give
one dose of HBIG (without vaccine) and retest the sexual partner
for HBsAg 3 months later. No further treatment is necessary if
the sexual partner becomes HBsAg-negative. If the sexual partner
remains HBsAg-positive, a second dose of HBIG should be given and
the hepatitis B vaccine series started.  Household Contacts of Persons with Acute HBV
Infection  Since infants have close contact with primary care givers and
they have a higher risk of becoming HBV carriers after acute HBV
infection, prophylaxis of an infant less than 12 months of age
with HBIG (0.5 ml) and hepatitis B vaccine is indicated if the
mother or primary care giver has acute HBV infection. Prophylaxis
for other household contacts of persons with acute HBV infection
is not indicated unless they have had identifiable blood exposure
to the index patient, such as by sharing toothbrushes or razors.
Such exposures should be treated similarly to sexual exposures.
If the index patient becomes an HBV carrier, all household
contacts should be given hepatitis B vaccine.  DELTA HEPATITIS  The delta virus (also
known as hepatitis D virus (HDV)) is a
defective virus that may cause infection only in the presence of
active HBV infection. The HDV is a 35- to 37-nm viral particle,
consisting of single-stranded RNA (mw 500,000) and an internal
protein antigen (delta antigen (HDAg)), coated with HBsAg as the
surface protein (5). Infection may occur as either coinfection
with HBV or superinfection of an HBV carrier, each of which
usually causes an episode of clinical acute hepatitis.
Coinfection usually resolves, whereas superinfection frequently
causes chronic HDV infection and chronic active hepatitis. Both
types of infection may cause fulminant hepatitis.  HDV infection may be diagnosed by
detecting HDAg in serum
during early infection and by the appearance of total or
IgM-specific delta antibody (anti-HDV) during or after infection.
A test for detection of total anti-HDV is commercially available.
Other tests (HDAg, IgM anti-HDV) are available only in research
laboratories.  Routes of transmission of HDV are similar to those of HBV. In
the United States, HDV infection most commonly affects persons at
high risk of HBV infection, particularly parenteral drug abusers
and  persons  with  hemophilia.   Since  HDV  is  dependent  on  HBV  for  replication,
prevention of
hepatitis B infection, either preexposure or postexposure, will
suffice to prevent HDV infection for a person susceptible to
hepatitis B. Known episodes of perinatal, sexual, or percutaneous
exposure to serum or exposure to persons known to be positive for
both HBV and HDV should be treated exactly as such exposures to
HBV alone.  Persons who are HBsAg carriers are at risk of HDV infection,
especially if they participate in activities that put them at
high risk of repeated exposure to HBV (parenteral drug abuse,
male homosexual activity). However, at present no products are
available that might prevent HDV infection in HBsAg carriers
either  before  or  after  exposure.   NON-A,  NON-B  HEPATITIS   Parenterally  Transmitted
(PT) Non-A, Non-B Hepatitis  Parenterally transmitted non-A, non-B hepatitis accounts
for
20%-40% of acute viral hepatitis in the United States and has
epidemiologic characteristics similar to those of hepatitis B
(60). Recently, a portion of the genome of a virus thought to be
responsible for PT non-A, non-B hepatitis was cloned (2). A
candidate serologic assay for antibody to this virus (proposed as
hepatitis C virus) has been developed. This assay appears to
detect a substantial number of persons with chronic infection and
is being evaluated for screening potential blood donors (3).
Although PT non-A, non-B hepatitis has traditionally been
considered a transfusion-associated disease, most reported cases
have not been associated with blood transfusion (61-64). Groups
at high risk of acquiring this disease include transfusion
recipients, parenteral drug users, and dialysis patients (62,63).
Health-care work that entails frequent contact with blood,
personal contact with others who have had hepatitis in the past,
and contact with infected persons within households have also
been documented in some studies as risk factors for acquiring PT
non-A, non-B hepatitis (63-65). However, the role of
person-to-person contact in disease transmission has not been
well defined, and the importance of sexual activity in the
transmission  of  this  type  of  hepatitis  is  unclear.   Multiple  episodes  of  non-A,  non-B
hepatitis have been observed
among the same individuals and may be due to different bloodborne
agents. An average of 50% of patients who have acute PT non-A,
non-B hepatitis infection later develop chronic hepatitis (66).
Experimental studies of chimpanzees have confirmed the existence
of a carrier state, which may be present in 1%-3% of the
population (67,68).  The risk and consequences of perinatal transmission of PT
non-A, non-B hepatitis are not well defined. Only one small study
has been published in which infants born of 12 women who had
acute PT non-A, non-B hepatitis during pregnancy were followed.
Six infants developed transient alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
elevations at 4-8 weeks of age (69).  The results have been equivocal in several studies
attempting
to assess the value of prophylaxis with IGs against PT non-A,
non-B hepatitis (70-72). For persons with percutaneous exposure
to blood from a patient with PT non-A, non-B hepatitis, it may be
reasonable to administer IG (0.06 ml/kg) as soon as possible
after exposure. In other circumstances, no specific
recommendations can be made.  Enterically Transmitted (ET) Non-A, Non-B Hepatitis  A
distinct type of non-A, non-B hepatitis acquired by the
fecal-oral route was first identified through investigations of
large waterborne epidemics in developing countries. This ET
non-A, non-B hepatitis, which has occurred in epidemics or
sporadically in parts of Asia, North and West Africa, and Mexico,
is serologically distinct from other known hepatitis viruses
(4,73). Young to middle-aged adults are most often affected, with
an unusually high mortality among pregnant women. The disease has
been transmitted to experimental animals, and candidate viruses
have been identified; however, no serologic tests have yet been
developed (74).  ET non-A, non-B hepatitis has not been recognized as an endemic
disease in the United States or Western Europe, and it is unknown
whether the causative agent is present in these areas. Cases have
been documented, however, among persons returning from travel to
countries in which this disease occurs (75).  Travelers to areas having ET non-A, non-B
hepatitis may be at
some risk of acquiring this disease by close contact with
infected persons or by consuming contaminated food or water.
There is no evidence that U.S.-manufactured IG will prevent this
infection. As with hepatitis A and other enteric infections, the
best means of preventing ET non-A, non-B hepatitis is avoiding
potentially contaminated food or water.  
    An adequate antibody response is greater than or equal to 10
    milliInternational Units (mIU)/ml, approximately equivalent to 10
    sample ratio units (SRU) by RIA or positive by enzyme immunoassay
    (EIA), measured 1-6 months after completion of the vaccine
    series.
    ** An adequate antibody level is greater than or equal to 10
    milliInternational Units (mIU)/ml, approximately equivalent to 10
    sample ratio units (SRU) by RIA or positive by EIA.  References 
    Francis DP, Maynard JE. The transmission and outcome of
 hepatitis A, B,
    and non-A, non-B: a review. Epidemiol Rev 1979;1:17-31. 
    Choo Q-L, Kuo G, Weiner AJ, et al. Isolation of a cDNA clone
 derived
    from a blood-borne non-A, non-B hepatitis genome. Science
 1989;244:
    359-62. 
    Kuo G, Choo Q-L, Alter HJ, et al. An assay for circulating
 antibodies
    to a major etiologic virus of human non-A, non-B hepatitis.
 Science
    1989;244:362-4. 
    Ramalingaswami V, Purcell RH. Waterborne non-A, non-B
 hepatitis. Lancet
    1988;1:571-3. 
    Rizzetto M. The delta agent. Hepatology 1983;3:729-37. 
    CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with
 respect to
    transmission of human T-lymphotropic virus type
 III/lymphadenopathy-
    associated virus infection. MMWR 1986;35:231-3. 
    Wells MA, Wittek AE, Epstein JS, et al. Inactivation and
 partition of
    human T-cell lymphotropic virus, type III, during ethanol
 fractionation
    of plasma. Transfusion 1986;26:210-3. 
    Tedder RS, Uttley A, Cheingsong-Popov R. Safety of
 immunoglobulin
    preparation containing anti-HTLV-III (Letter). Lancet
 1985;1:815. 
    CDC. Hepatitis A among drug abusers. MMWR 1988;37:297-300,305. 
    Noble RC, Kane MA, Reeves SA, et al. Posttransfusion hepatitis
 A in a
    neonatal intensive care unit. JAMA 1984;252:2711-5. 
    Kluge I. Gamma-globulin in the prevention of viral hepatitis: a
 study
    of the effect of medium-size doses. Acta Med Scand
 1963;174:469-77. 
    Stokes J Jr, Neefe JR. Prevention and attenuation of infectious
    hepatitis by gamma globulin; preliminary note. JAMA
 1945;127:144-5. 
    Mosley JW, Reisler DM, Brachott D, Roth D, Weiser J. Comparison
 of two
    lots of immune serum globulin for prophylaxis of infectious
 hepatitis.
    Am J Epidemiol 1968;87:539-50. 
    Woodson RD, Cahill KM. Viral hepatitis abroad. Incidence in
 Catholic
    missionaries. JAMA 1971;219:1191-3. 
    Woodson RD, Clinton JJ. Hepatitis prophylaxis abroad.
 Effectiveness of
    immune serum globulin in protecting Peace Corps volunteers.
 JAMA 1969;
    209:1053-8. 
    Steffen R, Rickenbach M, Wilhelm U, Helminger A, Schar M.
 Health
    problems after travel to developing countries. J Infect Dis
 1987;156:
    84-91. 
    CDC. Health information for international travel 1989. Atlanta:
 CDC,
    1989; HHS publication no. (CDC) 89-8280. 
    Storch G, McFarland LM, Kelso K, Heilman CJ, Caraway CT. Viral
    hepatitis associated with day-care centers. JAMA
 1979;242:1514-8. 
    Hadler SC, Webster HM, Erben JJ, Swanson JE, Maynard JE.
 Hepatitis A in
    day-care centers. A community-wide assessment. N Engl J Med
 1980;302:
    1222-7. 
    Hadler SC, Erben JJ, Matthews D, Starko K, Francis DP, Maynard
 JE.
    Effect of immunoglobulin on hepatitis A in day care centers.
 JAMA
    1983;249:48-53. 
    Favero MS, Maynard JE, Leger RT, Graham DR, Dixon RE.
 Guidelines for
    the care of patients hospitalized with viral hepatitis. Ann
 Intern Med
    1979;91:872-6. 
    Carl M, Francis DP, Maynard JE. Food-borne hepatitis A:
 recommendations
    for control. J Infect Dis 1983;148:1133-5. 
    Lettau LA, Smith JD, Williams D, et al. Transmission of
 hepatitis B
    with resultant restriction of surgical practice. JAMA
 1986;255:934-7. 
    Kane MA, Lettau L. Transmission of HBV from dental personnel to
    patients. JADA 1985;110:634-6. 
    Maynard JE, Kane MA, Hadler SC. Global control of hepatitis B
 through
    vaccination: role of hepatitis B vaccine in the expanded
 programme on
    immunization. Rev Infect Dis 1989;11(S3):S574-8. 
    McQuillan GM, Townsend TR, Fields HA, et al. Seroepidemiology
 of
    hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: 1976 to 1980.
 Am J
    Med 1989;87(3A):5S-10S. 
    CDC. Prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus:
    prenatal screening of all pregnant women for hepatitis B
 surface
    antigen. MMWR 1988;37:341-6,351. 
    Francis DP, Feorino PM, McDougal S, et al. The safety of
 hepatitis B
    vaccine: inactivation of the AIDS virus during routine vaccine
    manufacture. JAMA 1986;256:869-72. 
    Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of
 clinical
    studies with hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J
 Infect
    1986;13(suppl A):39-45. 
    Andre FE, Safary A. Clinical experience with a yeast-derived
 hepatitis
    B vaccine. In: Zuckerman AJ, ed. Viral hepatitis and liver
 disease. New
    York, Alan R. Liss, 1988:1023-30. 
    Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine:
    demonstration of efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a
 high-risk
    population in the United States. N Engl J Med 1980;303:833-41. 
    CDC. Suboptimal response to hepatitis B vaccine given by
 injection into
    the buttock. MMWR 1985;34:105-13. 
    Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in
 patients
    receiving hemodialysis. Immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J
 Med
    1984;311:496-501. 
    Collier AC, Corey L, Murphy VL, Handsfield HH. Antibody to
 human
    immunodeficiency virus and suboptimal response to hepatitis B
    vaccination. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:101-5. 
    Stevens CE, Taylor PE, Tong MJ, et al. Yeast-recombinant
 hepatitis B
    vaccine: efficacy with hepatitis B immune globulin in
 prevention of
    perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission. JAMA 1987;257:2612-6.
 
    Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long term
 immunogenicity and
    efficacy of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med
 1986;
    315:209-14. 
    Wainwright RB, McMahon BJ, Bulkow LR, et al. Duration of
 immunogenicity
    and efficacy of hepatitis B vaccine in a Yupik Eskimo
 population. JAMA
    1989;261:2362-6. 
    Hadler SC. Are booster doses of hepatitis B vaccine necessary?
 Ann
    Intern Med 1988;109:457-8. 
    Redfield RR, Innis BL, Scott RM, Cannon HG, Bancroft WH.
 Clinical
    evaluation of low-dose intradermally administered hepatitis B
 vaccine,
    a cost reduction strategy. JAMA 1985;254:3203-6. 
    Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance
 for
    neurologic adverse events reported after hepatitis B
 vaccination.
    Experience of the first three years. Am J Epidemiol
 1988;127:337-52. 
    Dienstag JL, Stevens CE, Bhan AK, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine
    administered to chronic carriers of hepatitis B surface
 antigen. Ann
    Intern Med 1982;96:575-9. 
    Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Oleszko WR, et al. Passive-active
 immunization
    against hepatitis B: immunogenicity studies in adult Americans.
 Lancet
    1981;1:575-7. 
    CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and
    public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(no.S-6). 
    Breuer B, Friedman SM, Millner ES, et al. Transmission of
 hepatitis B
    in school contacts of retarded HBsAg carriers. JAMA
 1985;254:3190-5. 
    CDC. Routine screening for viral hepatitis in chronic
 hemodialysis
    centers. Hepatitis Surveillance Report No. 49. Atlanta: CDC,
 1985:5-6. 
    Seaworth B, Drucker J, Starling J, Drucker R, Stevens C,
 Hamilton J.
    Hepatitis B vaccine in patients with chronic renal failure
 before
    dialysis. J Infect Dis 1988;157:332-7. 
    Hershow RC, Hadler SC, Kane MA,: Adoption of children from
 countries
    with endemic hepatitis B: transmission risks and medical
 issues.
    Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:431-7. 
    Franks AL, Berg CJ, Kane MA, et al. Hepatitis B virus infection
 among
    children born in the United States to Southeast Asian refugees.
 N Engl
    J Med 1989;321:1301-5. 
    Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee GC, et al. Prevention of perinatally
    transmitted hepatitis B virus infections with hepatitis B
 immune
    globulin and hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1983;2:1099-102. 
    Wong VCW, Ip HMH, Reesink HW, et al. Prevention of the HBsAg
 carrier
    state in newborn infants of mothers who are chronic carriers of
 HBsAg
    and HBeAg by administration of hepatitis-B vaccine and
 hepatitis-B
    immunoglobulin: double-blind randomised placebo-controlled
 study.
    Lancet 1984;1:921-6. 
    Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus
    transmission in the United States: prevention by passive-active
    immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740-5. 
    Beasley RP, Hwang LY, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis
 B immune
    globulin for prevention of perinatal transmission of the
 hepatitis B
    virus carrier state: final report of a randomized double-blind,
    placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983:3:135-41. 
    Xu ZY, Liu CB, Francis DP, et al. Prevention of perinatal
 acquisition
    of hepatitis B virus carriage using vaccine: preliminary report
 of a
    randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled and comparative
 trial.
    Pediatrics 1985;76:713-8. 
    Seeff LB, Wright EC, Zimmerman HJ, et al. Type B hepatitis
 after
    needlestick exposure: prevention with hepatitis B immune
 globulin.
    Final report of the Veterans Administration Cooperative Study.
 Ann
    Intern Med 1978;88:285-93. 
    Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin
 for
    accidental exposures among medical personnel: final report of a
    multicenter controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1978;138:625-38. 
    Redeker AG, Mosley JW, Gocke DJ, McKee AP, Pollack W. Hepatitis
 B
    immune globulin as a prophylactic measure for spouses exposed
 to acute
    type B hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1055-9. 
    Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y. Epidemiology of hepatocellular
 carcinoma. In:
    Vyas GN, Dienstag JL, Hoofnagle JH, eds. Viral hepatitis and
 liver
    disease. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1984:209-24. 
    Sinatra FR, Shah P, Weissman JY, Thomas DW, Merritt RJ, Tong
 MJ.
    Perinatal transmitted acute icteric hepatitis B in infants born
 to
    hepatitis B surface antigen-positive and anti-hepatitis
 Be-positive
    carrier mothers. Pediatrics 1982;70:557-9. 
    Delaplane D, Yogev R, Crussi F, Schulman ST. Fatal hepatitis B
 in early
    infancy: the importance of identifying HBsAg-positive pregnant
 women
    and providing immunoprophylaxis to their newborns. Pediatrics
    1983;72:176-80. 
    Alter MJ, Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE. The epidemiology
 of non-A,
    non-B hepatitis in the United States. In: Dodd RY, Barker LF,
 eds.
    Infection, immunity, and blood transfusion. New York: Alan R.
 Liss,
    Inc, 1985:71-9. 
    Alter HJ, Purcell RH, Holland PV, et al. Clinical and
 serological
    analysis of transfusion-associated hepatitis. Lancet
 1975;2:838-41. 
    Dienstag JL. Non-A, non-B hepatitis. I. Recognition,
 epidemiology, and
    clinical features. Gastroenterology 1983;85:439-62. 
    Alter MJ, Gerety RJ, Smallwood LA, et al. Sporadic non-A, non-B
    hepatitis: frequency and epidemiology in an urban U.S.
 population. J
    Infect Dis 1982;145:886-93. 
    Alter MJ, Coleman PJ, Alexander WJ, et al., Importance of
 heterosexual
    activity in the transmission of hepatitis B and non-A, non-B
 hepatitis.
    JAMA 1989;262:1201-5. 
    Guyer B, Bradley DW, Bryan JA, Maynard JE. Non-A, non-B
 hepatitis among
    participants in a plasmapheresis stimulation program. J Infect
 Dis
    1979; 139:634-40. 
    Dienstag JL, Alter HJ. Non-A, non-B hepatitis: evolving
 epidemiologic
    and clinical perspectives. Semin Liver Dis 1986;6:67-81. 
    Tabor E, Seeff LB, Gerety RJ. Chronic non-A, non-B hepatitis
 carrier
    state: transmissible agent documented in one patient over a
 six-year
    period. N Engl J Med 1980;303:140-3. 
    Aach RD, Szmuness W, Mosley JW, et al. Serum alanine
 aminotransferase
    of donors in relation to the risk of non-A, non-B hepatitis in
    recipients: the Transfusion-Transmitted Viruses Study. N Engl J
 Med
    1981;304:989-94. 
    Tong MJ, Thursby M, Rakela J, et al. Studies on the
 maternal-infant
    transmission of the viruses which cause acute hepatitis.
    Gastroenterology 1981;80:999-1003. 
References 70 through 75 may be obtained by writing to the
 Hepatitis
Branch, Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, Center for
 Infectious
Diseases, Mailstop A33, Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, Ga.
 30333. Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 1. Hepatitis nomenclature
====================================================
====================================================
===========
                 Abbreviation   Term                          Definition/Comments
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. Hepatitis A   HAV            Hepatitis A virus             Etiologic agent of "infectious"
hepatitis; a
                                                              picornavirus; single serotype.
                 Anti-HAV       Antibody to HAV               Detectable at onset of symptoms;
lifetime
                                                              persistence.
                 IgM            IgM class antibody            Indicates recent infection with hepatitis
A;
                 anti-HAV       to HAV                        detectable for 4-6 months after infection.
B. Hepatitis B   HBV            Hepatitis B virus             Etiologic agent of "serum" hepatitis;
also known
                                                              as Dane particle.
                 HBsAg          Hepatitis B surface           Surface antigen(s) of HBV detectable
in large
                                antigen                       quantity in serum; several subtypes
identified.
                 HBeAg          Hepatitis B e antigen         Soluble antigen; correlates with HBV
replication,
                                                              high titer HBV in serum, and infectivity of serum.
                 HBcAG          Hepatitis B core antigen      No commercial test available.
                 Anti-HBs       Antibody to HBsAg             Indicates past infection with and
immunity to
                                                              HBV, passive antibody from HBIG, or immune
                                                              response from HB vaccine.
                 Anti-HBe       Antibody to HBeAg             Presence in serum of HBsAg carrier
indicates
                                                              lower titer of HBV.
                 Anti-HBc       Antibody to HBcAg             Indicates prior infection with HBV at
some
                                                              undefined time.
                 IgM            IgM class antibody            Indicates recent infection with HBV;
detectable for
                 anti-HBc       to HBcAg                      4-6 mos. after infection.
C. Delta         HDV            Hepatitis D virus             Etiologic agent of delta hepatitis; can
cause
hepatitis                                                     infection only in presence of HBV.
                 HDAg           Delta antigen                 Detectable in early acute delta
infection.
                 Anti-HDV       Antibody to delta antigen     Indicates present or past infection
with delta
                                                              virus.
D. Non-A,        PT-NANB        Parenterally transmitted      Diagnosis by exclusion. At least
two candidate
non-B                                                         viruses, one of which has been proposed as
hepatitis                                                     hepatitis C virus; shares epidemiologic
features
                                                              with hepatitis B.
                 ET-NANB        Enterically transmitted       Diagnosis by exclusion. Causes
large epidemics
                                                              in Asia, Africa, and Mexico; fecal-oral or
                                                              waterborne.
E. Immune        IG             Immune globulin (previously   Contains antibodies to HAV,
low-titer antibodies
globulins                       ISG, immune serum globulin,   to HBV.
                                or gamma globulin)
                 HBIG           Hepatitis B immune globulin   Contains high-titer antibodies to
HBV.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
====================================================
====================================================
===========
Return to top.Table_2
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 2. Prevalence of hepatitis B serologic markers in various population groups
====================================================
=============================
                                                Prevalence of serologic markers
                                                       of HBV infection
                                                -------------------------------
Population group                                  HBsAg (%)   Any marker (%)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Immigrants/refugees from areas of
  high HBV endemicity                                13           70-85
Alaskan Natives/Pacific Islanders                  5-15           40-70
Clients in institutions for the developmentally
  disabled                                        10-20           35-80
Users of illicit parenteral drugs                     7           60-80
Sexually active homosexual men                        6           35-80
Household contacts of HBV carriers                  3-6           30-60
Patients of hemodialysis units                     3-10           20-80
Health-care workers --
  frequent blood contact                            1-2           15-30
Prisoners (male)                                    1-8           10-80
Staff of institutions for the developmentally
  disabled                                            1           10-25
Heterosexuals with multiple partners                  0.5          5-20
Health-care workers --
  no or infrequent blood contact                      0.3          3-10
General population (NHANES II) *
  Blacks                                              0.9            14
  Whites                                              0.2             3
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (26).
====================================================
=============================
Return to top.Table_3
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 3. Recommended doses and schedules of currently licensed HB vaccines
====================================================
====================================================
=======
                                                        Vaccine
                                       -------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Heptavax-B *,+      Recombivax HB *        Engerix-B *,&
Group                                  Dose (ug)  (ml)     Dose (ug)  (ml)      Dose (ug)  (ml)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Infants of HBV-carrier mothers            10     (0.5)        5      (0.5)         10     (0.5)
Other infants and children <11 years      10     (0.5)        2.5    (0.25)        10     (0.5)
Children and adolescents 11-19 years      20     (1.0)        5      (0.5)         20     (1.0)
Adults > 19 years                         20     (1.0)       10      (1.0)         20     (1.0)
Dialysis patients and other               40     (2.0) @     40      (1.0) **      40     (2.0) @,++
  immunocompromised persons
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 * Usual schedule: three doses at 0, 1, 6 months.
 +  Available  only  for  hemodialysis  and  other  immunocompromised  patients  and  for
persons with known allergy to
   yeast.
 & Alternative schedule: four doses at 0, 1, 2, 12 months.
 @ Two 1.0-ml doses given at different sites.
** Special formulation for dialysis patients.
++ Four-dose schedule recommended at 0, 1, 2, 6 months.
====================================================
====================================================
=======
Return to top.Table_4
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 4. Hepatitis B virus postexposure recommendations
====================================================
====================================================
==========
                                HBIG                                        Vaccine
             ------------------------------------------     ----------------------------------------
Exposure     Dose            Recommended timing             Dose          Recommended
timing
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Perinatal    0.5 ml IM       Within 12 hours of birth       0.5 ml IM *   Within 12 hours of
birth +
Sexual       0.06 ml/kg IM   Single dose within 14 days     1.0 ml IM *   First dose at time
of
                             of last sexual contact                       HBIG treatment +
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* For appropriate age-specific doses of each vaccine, see Table 3.
+ The first dose can be given the same time as the HBIG dose but in a different site;
subsequent doses should be
  given as recommended for specific vaccine.
====================================================
====================================================
==========
Return to top.Table_5
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table  5.  Recommendations  for  hepatitis  B  prophylaxis  following  percutaneous  or
permucosal
exposure
====================================================
====================================================
=======
                                                Treatment when source is found to be:
                        -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                 Source not tested
Exposed person          HBsAg-positive                   HBsAg-negative             or unknown
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unvaccinated            HBIG x 1 * and                   Initiate HB vaccine +   Initiate HB
vaccine +
                        initiate HB vaccine +
Previously  vaccinated    Test  exposed  for  anti-Hbs         No  treatment             No
treatment
  Known responder       1. If adequate, & no treatment
                        2. If inadequate, HB vaccine
                           booster dose
  Known nonresponder    HBIG x 2 or                      No treatment            If known
high-risk source,
                        HBIG x 1 plus 1 dose                                     may treat as if source
                        HB vaccine                                               were HBsAg-positive
  Response unknown      Test exposed for anti-Hbs        No treatment            Test
exposed for anti-HBs
                        1. If inadequate, &                                      1. If inadequate &, HB
                           HBIG x 1 plus HB vaccine                                 vaccine booster dose
                           booster dose                                          2. If adequate, no treatment
                        2. If adequate, no treatment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* HBIG dose 0.06 ml/kg IM.
+ HB vaccine dose -- see Table 3.
& Adequate anti-HBs is >= 10 SRU by RIA or positive by EIA.
====================================================
====================================================
=======
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.**Questions  or  messages
regarding  errors  in  formatting  should  be  addressed  to  mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 08/05/98
 
    Francis DP, Maynard JE. The transmission and outcome of
 hepatitis A, B,
    and non-A, non-B: a review. Epidemiol Rev 1979;1:17-31.  
    Choo Q-L, Kuo G, Weiner AJ, et al. Isolation of a cDNA clone
 derived
    from a blood-borne non-A, non-B hepatitis genome. Science
 1989;244:
    359-62.  
    Kuo G, Choo Q-L, Alter HJ, et al. An assay for circulating
 antibodies
    to a major etiologic virus of human non-A, non-B hepatitis.
 Science
    1989;244:362-4.  
    Ramalingaswami V, Purcell RH. Waterborne non-A, non-B
 hepatitis. Lancet
    1988;1:571-3.  
    Rizzetto M. The delta agent. Hepatology 1983;3:729-37.  
    CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with
 respect to
    transmission of human T-lymphotropic virus type
 III/lymphadenopathy-
    associated virus infection. MMWR 1986;35:231-3.  
    Wells MA, Wittek AE, Epstein JS, et al. Inactivation and
 partition of
    human T-cell lymphotropic virus, type III, during ethanol
 fractionation
    of plasma. Transfusion 1986;26:210-3.  
    Tedder RS, Uttley A, Cheingsong-Popov R. Safety of
 immunoglobulin
    preparation containing anti-HTLV-III (Letter). Lancet
 1985;1:815.  
    CDC. Hepatitis A among drug abusers. MMWR 1988;37:297-300,305.  
    Noble RC, Kane MA, Reeves SA, et al. Posttransfusion hepatitis
 A in a
    neonatal intensive care unit. JAMA 1984;252:2711-5.  
    Kluge I. Gamma-globulin in the prevention of viral hepatitis: a
 study
    of the effect of medium-size doses. Acta Med Scand
 1963;174:469-77.  
    Stokes J Jr, Neefe JR. Prevention and attenuation of infectious
    hepatitis by gamma globulin; preliminary note. JAMA
 1945;127:144-5.  
    Mosley JW, Reisler DM, Brachott D, Roth D, Weiser J. Comparison
 of two
    lots of immune serum globulin for prophylaxis of infectious
 hepatitis.
    Am J Epidemiol 1968;87:539-50.  
    Woodson RD, Cahill KM. Viral hepatitis abroad. Incidence in
 Catholic
    missionaries. JAMA 1971;219:1191-3.  
    Woodson RD, Clinton JJ. Hepatitis prophylaxis abroad.
 Effectiveness of
    immune serum globulin in protecting Peace Corps volunteers.
 JAMA 1969;
    209:1053-8.  
    Steffen R, Rickenbach M, Wilhelm U, Helminger A, Schar M.
 Health
    problems after travel to developing countries. J Infect Dis
 1987;156:
    84-91.  
    CDC. Health information for international travel 1989. Atlanta:
 CDC,
    1989; HHS publication no. (CDC) 89-8280.  
    Storch G, McFarland LM, Kelso K, Heilman CJ, Caraway CT. Viral
    hepatitis associated with day-care centers. JAMA
 1979;242:1514-8.  
    Hadler SC, Webster HM, Erben JJ, Swanson JE, Maynard JE.
 Hepatitis A in
    day-care centers. A community-wide assessment. N Engl J Med
 1980;302:
    1222-7.  
    Hadler SC, Erben JJ, Matthews D, Starko K, Francis DP, Maynard
 JE.
    Effect of immunoglobulin on hepatitis A in day care centers.
 JAMA
    1983;249:48-53.  
    Favero MS, Maynard JE, Leger RT, Graham DR, Dixon RE.
 Guidelines for
    the care of patients hospitalized with viral hepatitis. Ann
 Intern Med
    1979;91:872-6.  
    Carl M, Francis DP, Maynard JE. Food-borne hepatitis A:
 recommendations
    for control. J Infect Dis 1983;148:1133-5.  
    Lettau LA, Smith JD, Williams D, et al. Transmission of
 hepatitis B
    with resultant restriction of surgical practice. JAMA
 1986;255:934-7.  
    Kane MA, Lettau L. Transmission of HBV from dental personnel to
    patients. JADA 1985;110:634-6.  
    Maynard JE, Kane MA, Hadler SC. Global control of hepatitis B
 through
    vaccination: role of hepatitis B vaccine in the expanded
 programme on
    immunization. Rev Infect Dis 1989;11(S3):S574-8.  
    McQuillan GM, Townsend TR, Fields HA, et al. Seroepidemiology
 of
    hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: 1976 to 1980.
 Am J
    Med 1989;87(3A):5S-10S.  
    CDC. Prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus:
    prenatal screening of all pregnant women for hepatitis B
 surface
    antigen. MMWR 1988;37:341-6,351.  
    Francis DP, Feorino PM, McDougal S, et al. The safety of
 hepatitis B
    vaccine: inactivation of the AIDS virus during routine vaccine
    manufacture. JAMA 1986;256:869-72.  
    Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of
 clinical
    studies with hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J
 Infect
    1986;13(suppl A):39-45.  
    Andre FE, Safary A. Clinical experience with a yeast-derived
 hepatitis
    B vaccine. In: Zuckerman AJ, ed. Viral hepatitis and liver
 disease. New
    York, Alan R. Liss, 1988:1023-30.  
    Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine:
    demonstration of efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a
 high-risk
    population in the United States. N Engl J Med 1980;303:833-41.  
    CDC. Suboptimal response to hepatitis B vaccine given by
 injection into
    the buttock. MMWR 1985;34:105-13.  
    Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in
 patients
    receiving hemodialysis. Immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J
 Med
    1984;311:496-501.  
    Collier AC, Corey L, Murphy VL, Handsfield HH. Antibody to
 human
    immunodeficiency virus and suboptimal response to hepatitis B
    vaccination. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:101-5.  
    Stevens CE, Taylor PE, Tong MJ, et al. Yeast-recombinant
 hepatitis B
    vaccine: efficacy with hepatitis B immune globulin in
 prevention of
    perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission. JAMA 1987;257:2612-6.
  
    Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long term
 immunogenicity and
    efficacy of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med
 1986;
    315:209-14.  
    Wainwright RB, McMahon BJ, Bulkow LR, et al. Duration of
 immunogenicity
    and efficacy of hepatitis B vaccine in a Yupik Eskimo
 population. JAMA
    1989;261:2362-6.  
    Hadler SC. Are booster doses of hepatitis B vaccine necessary?
 Ann
    Intern Med 1988;109:457-8.  
    Redfield RR, Innis BL, Scott RM, Cannon HG, Bancroft WH.
 Clinical
    evaluation of low-dose intradermally administered hepatitis B
 vaccine,
    a cost reduction strategy. JAMA 1985;254:3203-6.  
    Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance
 for
    neurologic adverse events reported after hepatitis B
 vaccination.
    Experience of the first three years. Am J Epidemiol
 1988;127:337-52.  
    Dienstag JL, Stevens CE, Bhan AK, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine
    administered to chronic carriers of hepatitis B surface
 antigen. Ann
    Intern Med 1982;96:575-9.  
    Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Oleszko WR, et al. Passive-active
 immunization
    against hepatitis B: immunogenicity studies in adult Americans.
 Lancet
    1981;1:575-7.  
    CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and
    public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(no.S-6).  
    Breuer B, Friedman SM, Millner ES, et al. Transmission of
 hepatitis B
    in school contacts of retarded HBsAg carriers. JAMA
 1985;254:3190-5.  
    CDC. Routine screening for viral hepatitis in chronic
 hemodialysis
    centers. Hepatitis Surveillance Report No. 49. Atlanta: CDC,
 1985:5-6.  
    Seaworth B, Drucker J, Starling J, Drucker R, Stevens C,
 Hamilton J.
    Hepatitis B vaccine in patients with chronic renal failure
 before
    dialysis. J Infect Dis 1988;157:332-7.  
    Hershow RC, Hadler SC, Kane MA,: Adoption of children from
 countries
    with endemic hepatitis B: transmission risks and medical
 issues.
    Pediatr Infect Dis J 1987;6:431-7.  
    Franks AL, Berg CJ, Kane MA, et al. Hepatitis B virus infection
 among
    children born in the United States to Southeast Asian refugees.
 N Engl
    J Med 1989;321:1301-5.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee GC, et al. Prevention of perinatally
    transmitted hepatitis B virus infections with hepatitis B
 immune
    globulin and hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1983;2:1099-102.  
    Wong VCW, Ip HMH, Reesink HW, et al. Prevention of the HBsAg
 carrier
    state in newborn infants of mothers who are chronic carriers of
 HBsAg
    and HBeAg by administration of hepatitis-B vaccine and
 hepatitis-B
    immunoglobulin: double-blind randomised placebo-controlled
 study.
    Lancet 1984;1:921-6.  
    Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus
    transmission in the United States: prevention by passive-active
    immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740-5.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang LY, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis
 B immune
    globulin for prevention of perinatal transmission of the
 hepatitis B
    virus carrier state: final report of a randomized double-blind,
    placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983:3:135-41.  
    Xu ZY, Liu CB, Francis DP, et al. Prevention of perinatal
 acquisition
    of hepatitis B virus carriage using vaccine: preliminary report
 of a
    randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled and comparative
 trial.
    Pediatrics 1985;76:713-8.  
    Seeff LB, Wright EC, Zimmerman HJ, et al. Type B hepatitis
 after
    needlestick exposure: prevention with hepatitis B immune
 globulin.
    Final report of the Veterans Administration Cooperative Study.
 Ann
    Intern Med 1978;88:285-93.  
    Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin
 for
    accidental exposures among medical personnel: final report of a
    multicenter controlled trial. J Infect Dis 1978;138:625-38.  
    Redeker AG, Mosley JW, Gocke DJ, McKee AP, Pollack W. Hepatitis
 B
    immune globulin as a prophylactic measure for spouses exposed
 to acute
    type B hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1055-9.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y. Epidemiology of hepatocellular
 carcinoma. In:
    Vyas GN, Dienstag JL, Hoofnagle JH, eds. Viral hepatitis and
 liver
    disease. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1984:209-24.  
    Sinatra FR, Shah P, Weissman JY, Thomas DW, Merritt RJ, Tong
 MJ.
    Perinatal transmitted acute icteric hepatitis B in infants born
 to
    hepatitis B surface antigen-positive and anti-hepatitis
 Be-positive
    carrier mothers. Pediatrics 1982;70:557-9.  
    Delaplane D, Yogev R, Crussi F, Schulman ST. Fatal hepatitis B
 in early
    infancy: the importance of identifying HBsAg-positive pregnant
 women
    and providing immunoprophylaxis to their newborns. Pediatrics
    1983;72:176-80.  
    Alter MJ, Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE. The epidemiology
 of non-A,
    non-B hepatitis in the United States. In: Dodd RY, Barker LF,
 eds.
    Infection, immunity, and blood transfusion. New York: Alan R.
 Liss,
    Inc, 1985:71-9.  
    Alter HJ, Purcell RH, Holland PV, et al. Clinical and
 serological
    analysis of transfusion-associated hepatitis. Lancet
 1975;2:838-41.  
    Dienstag JL. Non-A, non-B hepatitis. I. Recognition,
 epidemiology, and
    clinical features. Gastroenterology 1983;85:439-62.  
    Alter MJ, Gerety RJ, Smallwood LA, et al. Sporadic non-A, non-B
    hepatitis: frequency and epidemiology in an urban U.S.
 population. J
    Infect Dis 1982;145:886-93.  
    Alter MJ, Coleman PJ, Alexander WJ, et al., Importance of
 heterosexual
    activity in the transmission of hepatitis B and non-A, non-B
 hepatitis.
    JAMA 1989;262:1201-5.  
    Guyer B, Bradley DW, Bryan JA, Maynard JE. Non-A, non-B
 hepatitis among
    participants in a plasmapheresis stimulation program. J Infect
 Dis
    1979; 139:634-40.  
    Dienstag JL, Alter HJ. Non-A, non-B hepatitis: evolving
 epidemiologic
    and clinical perspectives. Semin Liver Dis 1986;6:67-81.  
    Tabor E, Seeff LB, Gerety RJ. Chronic non-A, non-B hepatitis
 carrier
    state: transmissible agent documented in one patient over a
 six-year
    period. N Engl J Med 1980;303:140-3.  
    Aach RD, Szmuness W, Mosley JW, et al. Serum alanine
 aminotransferase
    of donors in relation to the risk of non-A, non-B hepatitis in
    recipients: the Transfusion-Transmitted Viruses Study. N Engl J
 Med
    1981;304:989-94.  
    Tong MJ, Thursby M, Rakela J, et al. Studies on the
 maternal-infant
    transmission of the viruses which cause acute hepatitis.
    Gastroenterology 1981;80:999-1003.  References 70 through 75 may be obtained by
writing to the
 Hepatitis
Branch, Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, Center for
 Infectious
Diseases, Mailstop A33, Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, Ga.
 30333. Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 1. Hepatitis nomenclature
====================================================
====================================================
===========
                 Abbreviation   Term                          Definition/Comments
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. Hepatitis A   HAV            Hepatitis A virus             Etiologic agent of "infectious"
hepatitis; a
                                                              picornavirus; single serotype.
                 Anti-HAV       Antibody to HAV               Detectable at onset of symptoms;
lifetime
                                                              persistence.
                 IgM            IgM class antibody            Indicates recent infection with hepatitis
A;
                 anti-HAV       to HAV                        detectable for 4-6 months after infection.
B. Hepatitis B   HBV            Hepatitis B virus             Etiologic agent of "serum" hepatitis;
also known
                                                              as Dane particle.
                 HBsAg          Hepatitis B surface           Surface antigen(s) of HBV detectable
in large
                                antigen                       quantity in serum; several subtypes
identified.
                 HBeAg          Hepatitis B e antigen         Soluble antigen; correlates with HBV
replication,
                                                              high titer HBV in serum, and infectivity of serum.
                 HBcAG          Hepatitis B core antigen      No commercial test available.
                 Anti-HBs       Antibody to HBsAg             Indicates past infection with and
immunity to
                                                              HBV, passive antibody from HBIG, or immune
                                                              response from HB vaccine.
                 Anti-HBe       Antibody to HBeAg             Presence in serum of HBsAg carrier
indicates
                                                              lower titer of HBV.
                 Anti-HBc       Antibody to HBcAg             Indicates prior infection with HBV at
some
                                                              undefined time.
                 IgM            IgM class antibody            Indicates recent infection with HBV;
detectable for
                 anti-HBc       to HBcAg                      4-6 mos. after infection.
C. Delta         HDV            Hepatitis D virus             Etiologic agent of delta hepatitis; can
cause
hepatitis                                                     infection only in presence of HBV.
                 HDAg           Delta antigen                 Detectable in early acute delta
infection.
                 Anti-HDV       Antibody to delta antigen     Indicates present or past infection
with delta
                                                              virus.
D. Non-A,        PT-NANB        Parenterally transmitted      Diagnosis by exclusion. At least
two candidate
non-B                                                         viruses, one of which has been proposed as
hepatitis                                                     hepatitis C virus; shares epidemiologic
features
                                                              with hepatitis B.
                 ET-NANB        Enterically transmitted       Diagnosis by exclusion. Causes
large epidemics
                                                              in Asia, Africa, and Mexico; fecal-oral or
                                                              waterborne.
E. Immune        IG             Immune globulin (previously   Contains antibodies to HAV,
low-titer antibodies
globulins                       ISG, immune serum globulin,   to HBV.
                                or gamma globulin)
                 HBIG           Hepatitis B immune globulin   Contains high-titer antibodies to
HBV.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
====================================================
====================================================
===========
Return to top.Table_2
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 2. Prevalence of hepatitis B serologic markers in various population groups
====================================================
=============================
                                                Prevalence of serologic markers
                                                       of HBV infection
                                                -------------------------------
Population group                                  HBsAg (%)   Any marker (%)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Immigrants/refugees from areas of
  high HBV endemicity                                13           70-85
Alaskan Natives/Pacific Islanders                  5-15           40-70
Clients in institutions for the developmentally
  disabled                                        10-20           35-80
Users of illicit parenteral drugs                     7           60-80
Sexually active homosexual men                        6           35-80
Household contacts of HBV carriers                  3-6           30-60
Patients of hemodialysis units                     3-10           20-80
Health-care workers --
  frequent blood contact                            1-2           15-30
Prisoners (male)                                    1-8           10-80
Staff of institutions for the developmentally
  disabled                                            1           10-25
Heterosexuals with multiple partners                  0.5          5-20
Health-care workers --
  no or infrequent blood contact                      0.3          3-10
General population (NHANES II) *
  Blacks                                              0.9            14
  Whites                                              0.2             3
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (26).
====================================================
=============================
Return to top.Table_3
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 3. Recommended doses and schedules of currently licensed HB vaccines
====================================================
====================================================
=======
                                                        Vaccine
                                       -------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Heptavax-B *,+      Recombivax HB *        Engerix-B *,&
Group                                  Dose (ug)  (ml)     Dose (ug)  (ml)      Dose (ug)  (ml)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Infants of HBV-carrier mothers            10     (0.5)        5      (0.5)         10     (0.5)
Other infants and children <11 years      10     (0.5)        2.5    (0.25)        10     (0.5)
Children and adolescents 11-19 years      20     (1.0)        5      (0.5)         20     (1.0)
Adults > 19 years                         20     (1.0)       10      (1.0)         20     (1.0)
Dialysis patients and other               40     (2.0) @     40      (1.0) **      40     (2.0) @,++
  immunocompromised persons
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 * Usual schedule: three doses at 0, 1, 6 months.
 +  Available  only  for  hemodialysis  and  other  immunocompromised  patients  and  for
persons with known allergy to
   yeast.
 & Alternative schedule: four doses at 0, 1, 2, 12 months.
 @ Two 1.0-ml doses given at different sites.
** Special formulation for dialysis patients.
++ Four-dose schedule recommended at 0, 1, 2, 6 months.
====================================================
====================================================
=======
Return to top.Table_4
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table 4. Hepatitis B virus postexposure recommendations
====================================================
====================================================
==========
                                HBIG                                        Vaccine
             ------------------------------------------     ----------------------------------------
Exposure     Dose            Recommended timing             Dose          Recommended
timing
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Perinatal    0.5 ml IM       Within 12 hours of birth       0.5 ml IM *   Within 12 hours of
birth +
Sexual       0.06 ml/kg IM   Single dose within 14 days     1.0 ml IM *   First dose at time
of
                             of last sexual contact                       HBIG treatment +
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* For appropriate age-specific doses of each vaccine, see Table 3.
+ The first dose can be given the same time as the HBIG dose but in a different site;
subsequent doses should be
  given as recommended for specific vaccine.
====================================================
====================================================
==========
Return to top.Table_5
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
Table  5.  Recommendations  for  hepatitis  B  prophylaxis  following  percutaneous  or
permucosal
exposure
====================================================
====================================================
=======
                                                Treatment when source is found to be:
                        -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                 Source not tested
Exposed person          HBsAg-positive                   HBsAg-negative             or unknown
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unvaccinated            HBIG x 1 * and                   Initiate HB vaccine +   Initiate HB
vaccine +
                        initiate HB vaccine +
Previously  vaccinated    Test  exposed  for  anti-Hbs         No  treatment             No
treatment
  Known responder       1. If adequate, & no treatment
                        2. If inadequate, HB vaccine
                           booster dose
  Known nonresponder    HBIG x 2 or                      No treatment            If known
high-risk source,
                        HBIG x 1 plus 1 dose                                     may treat as if source
                        HB vaccine                                               were HBsAg-positive
  Response unknown      Test exposed for anti-Hbs        No treatment            Test
exposed for anti-HBs
                        1. If inadequate, &                                      1. If inadequate &, HB
                           HBIG x 1 plus HB vaccine                                 vaccine booster dose
                           booster dose                                          2. If adequate, no treatment
                        2. If adequate, no treatment
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* HBIG dose 0.06 ml/kg IM.
+ HB vaccine dose -- see Table 3.
& Adequate anti-HBs is >= 10 SRU by RIA or positive by EIA.
====================================================
====================================================
=======
Return to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.**Questions  or  messages
regarding  errors  in  formatting  should  be  addressed  to  mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 08/05/98
 
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00041917.htm
