A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  If  your  child  has  symptoms  of  head  lice
infestation, examine their head, especially behind the ears and at the nape of the neck,
for  crawling  lice  and  nits.  If  you  find  crawling  lice  or  nits,  examine  all  household
members for head lice every 2 – 3 days. Treat anyone with live (crawling) lice or nits
within ¼ inch or less of the scalp. Head lice information for schools You do not need to
send students with head lice infestation home early from school. Students with lice can
go  home  at  the  end  of  the  day,  be  treated,  and  return  to  class  after  beginning
appropriate treatment. Nits may stay in hair after treatment, but successful treatment
will kill crawling lice. Both the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the National
Association of School Nurses (NASN) advocate to discontinue "no-nit" policies (a child
being  free  of  nits  before  returning  to  school)  for  the  following  reasons:   Follow  and
complete all treatment instructions and steps to successfully eliminate head lice.  CDC
does  not  make  recommendations  on  a  specific  product  or  products  to  use  to  treat
individuals  with  lice.  Both  over-the-counter  and  prescription  products  are  available.
Contact your doctor, pharmacist, or health department for additional information about
which product they recommend. Reporting head lice Most health departments do not
require reporting of head lice infestation. However, it is useful to share information with
school nurses, teachers, parents of classmates, and others about contact with head lice
to  limit  spread.  Lice  are  parasites,  or  insects,  found  on  people's  heads  and  bodies,
including the pubic area. Human lice survive by feeding on human blood. Infestation or
infested  person  means  that  a  person  has  lice.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/lice/caring-head/index.html
