Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.  This website is designed to: (1) support eligible organizations
applying for FOA PS15-1510 and (2) provide information related to post-award program
implementation.  The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  National  Center  for
HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  Division  of  HIV/AIDS  Prevention,
Capacity  Building  Branch  (CBB)  is  pleased  to  announce  the  publication  of  funding
opportunity  announcement  (FOA)  PS15-1510:  Training  and  Technical  Assistance  for
Health  Department  Demonstration  Projects  for  Comprehensive  Prevention,  Care,
Behavioral Health, and Social Services for Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM) of Color
At Risk for and Living with HIV. This FOA was published March 31, 2015 on grants.gov.
Requested, but not required, letters of intent are due April 21, 2015. [link to Letter of
Intent to Apply information] The application submission deadline is June 1, 2015. The
purpose of this program is to strengthen the capacity of funded health departments and
their  collaborative  partners  (e.g.,  community-based  organizations,  clinics,  behavioral
health and social services providers, patient navigators, and others that interface with
MSM  of  color)  to  plan,  implement,  and  sustain  (through  ongoing  engagement,
assessment, linkage, and retention) comprehensive prevention, care, behavioral health,
and social services models for MSM of color at risk for and living with HIV infection as
supported  under  FOA  PS15-1509:  Health  Department  Demonstration  Projects  for
Comprehensive Prevention, Care, Behavioral Health, and Social Services for Men Who
Have Sex with Men (MSM) of Color At Risk for and Living with HIV Infection. Based on a
set of core competency categories as defined in PS15-1510, this program specifically
supports  the  innovative  development  and  delivery  of  (1)  information  reflective  of  the
most  advanced  HIV-related  science  and  practice;  (2)  state-of-the-art  training
culminating  in  a  certificate  of  completion;  and  (3)  tailored  technical  assistance  to
facilitate  PS15-1509  funded  health  departments  and  their  the  local  collaborative
partner organizations in their provision of comprehensive HIV-related prevention, care,
behavioral health, and social services for specifically MSM of color. Strategy 1: Develop
a  competency-based  training  program  to  build  capacity  of  PS15-1509  funded  health
departments  and  their  partners  to  provide  comprehensive  HIV  prevention,  care,
behavioral  health,  and  social  services  for  MSM  of  color  at  risk  for  and  living  with  HIV
infection.  (Year  1)  Strategy  2:  Provide  competency-based  training  and  technical
assistance  to  health  department  trainers  and  staff  to  deliver  the  TOP  curriculum  to
provider  staff  (e.g.,  CBOs,  clinics,  others)  participating  in  local  collaborative  as
described in PS15-1509. (Years 2-3) Strategy 3: Conduct monitoring and evaluation of
training  and  technical  assistance  provided  to  PS15-1509  funded  health  departments
and their local organizational partners (Years 1-3) To be eligible, applicants must meet
one  of  the  following  criteria:  Special  Requirements  for  Eligibility:  Applicants  must
electronically submit a complete application package that complies with specifications
as described in FOA section D. Required Registrations to grants.gov no later than June
1, 2015, 11:59 p.m. U.S. Eastern Standard Time. Applicants must upload the following
application package requirements as appropriately labeled PDF documents which may
include  weblinks  for  additional  information.  Evidence  can  be  uploaded  in  Grants.gov
under “Other Attachment Forms” with the suggested labels. Applicants are not allowed
to include any other attachments. If the required documents listed in this section are
not submitted with the application in grants.gov no later than June 1, 2015, 11:59 p.m.
U.S.  Eastern  Standard  Time,  the  application  will  be  considered  incomplete,
non-responsive, and/or late and will not be entered into the review process. The award
ceiling for this FOA is $2,500,000 1st year; $2,000,000 2nd year; and, $1,000,000 3rd
year. CDC will consider any application requesting an award higher than these amounts
as non-responsive, and it will receive no further review in the funding competition.    
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/funding/announcements/ps15-1510/index.html
