A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Local  and/or  state  health  departments
may  be  able  to  provide  guidelines  for  preventing  and  controlling  scabies  outbreaks.
Below  are  suggestions  for  developing  guidelines  for  preventing,  detecting,  and
responding  to  a  single  case  or  multiple  cases  of  crusted  scabies  (formerly  known  as
Norwegian scabies) in an institution. Early detection, treatment, and implementation of
appropriate isolation and infection control practices are essential in preventing scabies
outbreaks. Institutions should maintain a high index of suspicion that undiagnosed skin
rashes  and  conditions  may  be  scabies,  even  if  characteristic  signs  or  symptoms  of
scabies are absent (e.g. no itching).  New patients and employees should be screened
carefully and evaluated for any skin conditions that could be compatible with scabies.
The  onset  of  scabies  in  a  staff  person  who  has  had  scabies  before  can  be  an  early
warning  sign  of  undetected  scabies  in  a  patient/resident.   When  there  is  concern  for
scabies  in  a  person,  skin  scrapings  should  be  obtained  and  examined  carefully  by  a
person  who  is  trained  and  experienced  in  identifying  scabies  mites.  Appropriate
isolation  and  infection  control  practices  (e.g.  gloves,  gowns,  avoidance  of  direct
skin-to-skin  contact,  etc.)  should  be  used  when  providing  hands-on  care  to
patients/residents  who  might  have  scabies.  Epidemiologic  and  clinical  information
about confirmed and suspected scabies patients/residents should be collected and used
for  systematic  review  in  order  to  facilitate  early  identification  of  and  response  to
potential  outbreaks.  Establish  surveillance.  Ensure  that  adequate  diagnostic  services
are  available.  Establish  appropriate  procedures  for  infection  control  and  treatment.
Establish  appropriate  procedures  for  environmental  disinfection.  Scabies  is  an
infestation  of  the  skin  by  a  human  itch  mite.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/scabies/php/public-health-strategy-crusted/index.html
