Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Please note: An update has been
published for this report. To view the update, please click here. Summary  This report
updates and consolidates all previous PHS
recommendations for the management of health-care workers (HCWs)
who have occupational exposure to blood and other body fluids that
may contain human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); it includes
recommendations for HIV postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) and
discusses the scientific rationale for PEP. The decision to
recommend HIV postexposure prophylaxis must take into account the
nature of the exposure (e.g., needlestick or potentially
infectious fluid that comes in contact with a mucous membrane) and
the amount of blood or body fluid involved in the exposure. Other
considerations include pregnancy in the HCW and exposure to virus
known or suspected to be resistant to antiretroviral drugs.
Assessments of the risk for infection resulting from the exposure
and of the infectivity of the exposure source are key determinants
of offering PEP. Systems should be in place for the timely
evaluation and management of exposed HCWs and for consultation
with experts in the treatment of HIV when using PEP.  Recommendations for PEP have
been modified to include a basic
4-week regimen of two drugs (zidovudine and lamivudine) for most
HIV exposures and an expanded regimen that includes the addition
of a protease inhibitor (indinavir or nelfinavir) for HIV
exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission or where
resistance to one or more of the antiretroviral agents recommended
for PEP is known or suspected. An algorithm is provided to guide
clinicians and exposed health-care workers in deciding when to
consider PEP.  Occupational exposures should be considered urgent medical
concerns to ensure timely administration of PEP. Health-care
organizations should have protocols that promote prompt reporting
and facilitate access to postexposure care. Enrollment of HCWs in
registries designed to assess side effects in HCWs who take PEP is
encouraged.   INTRODUCTION   Although  preventing  blood  exposures  is  the  primary
means of
preventing occupationally acquired human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection, appropriate postexposure management is an
important element of workplace safety. In January 1990, CDC issued
a statement on the management of HIV exposures that included
considerations for zidovudine (ZDV) use for postexposure
prophylaxis (PEP) (1). At that time, data were insufficient to
assess the efficacy of ZDV as a prophylactic agent in humans or
the toxicity of this drug in persons not infected with HIV.
Although there are still only limited data to assess safety and
efficacy, additional information is now available that is relevant
to this issue.  In December 1995, CDC published a brief report of a
retrospective case-control study of health-care workers (HCWs)
from France, the United Kingdom, and the United States exposed
percutaneously to HIV; the study identified risk factors for HIV
transmission and documented that the use of ZDV was associated
with a decrease in the risk for HIV seroconversion (2). This
information, along with data on ZDV efficacy in preventing
perinatal transmission (3) and evidence that PEP prevented or
ameliorated retroviral infection in some studies in animals (4),
prompted a Public Health Service (PHS) interagency working group *,
with expert consultation (5), in June 1996 to issue provisional
recommendations for PEP for HCWs after occupational HIV exposure
(6).  Since the provisional recommendations were released, several
new antiretroviral drugs have been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), and more information is available about the
use and safety of antiretroviral agents in exposed HCWs (7-10). In
addition, questions have been raised about the use of
chemoprophylaxis in situations not fully addressed in the 1996
recommendations, including when not to offer PEP, what to do when
the source of exposure or the HIV status of the source person is
unknown, how to approach PEP in HCWs who are or may be pregnant,
and considerations for PEP regimens when the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the
antiretroviral  agents  recommended  for  PEP.   In  May  1997,  a  meeting  of  expert
consultants, convened by CDC
to consider the new information, prompted a PHS interagency
working group ** decision to issue updated recommendations. This
document addresses the management of occupational exposure to HIV,
including guidance in assessing and treating exposed HCWs, updates
previous recommendations for occupational postexposure
chemoprophylaxis, and updates and replaces all previous PHS
guidelines and recommendations for occupational HIV exposure
management for HCWs. Included in this document is an algorithm to
guide decisions regarding the use of PEP for HIV exposures. The
algorithm and these recommendations together address most issues
that may be encountered during postexposure follow-up. As relevant
information becomes available, updates of these recommendations
will be published. Recommendations for nonoccupational (e.g.,
sexual or pediatric) exposures are not addressed in these
guidelines.   DEFINITIONS  OF  HEALTH-CARE  WORKERS  AND  EXPOSURE   In  this  report,
"health-care worker" (HCW) is defined as any
person (e.g., an employee, student, contractor, attending
clinician, public-safety worker, or volunteer) whose activities
involve contact with patients or with blood or other body fluids
from patients in a health-care or laboratory setting. An
"exposure" that may place an HCW at risk for HIV infection and
therefore requires consideration of PEP is defined as a
percutaneous injury (e.g., a needlestick or cut with a sharp
object), contact of mucous membrane or nonintact skin (e.g., when
the exposed skin is chapped, abraded, or afflicted with
dermatitis), or contact with intact skin when the duration of
contact is prolonged (i.e., several minutes or more) or involves
an extensive area, with blood, tissue, or other body fluids. Body
fluids include a) semen, vaginal secretions, or other body fluids
contaminated with visible blood that have been implicated in the
transmission of HIV infection (11,12); and b) cerebrospinal,
synovial, pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids,
which have an undetermined risk for transmitting HIV (11). In
addition, any direct contact (i.e., without barrier protection) to
concentrated HIV in a research laboratory or production facility
is considered an "exposure" that requires clinical evaluation and
consideration  of  the  need  for  PEP.   Although  one  nonoccupational  episode  of  HIV
transmission has
been attributed to contact with blood-contaminated saliva (13),
this incident involved intimate kissing between sexual partners
and is not similar to contact with saliva that may occur during
the provision of health-care services. Therefore, in the absence
of visible blood in the saliva, exposure to saliva from a person
infected with HIV is not considered a risk for HIV transmission;
also, exposure to tears, sweat, or nonbloody urine or feces does
not  require  postexposure  follow-up.  ***   Human  breast  milk  has  been  implicated  in
perinatal
transmission of HIV. However, occupational exposure to human
breast milk has not been implicated in HIV transmission to HCWs.
Moreover, the contact HCWs may have with human breast milk is
quite different from perinatal exposure and does not require
postexposure  follow-up.   BACKGROUND   The  rationale  is  provided  here  for  the
postexposure
management and prophylaxis recommendations given at the end of the
document. Additional details concerning the risk for occupational
HIV transmission to HCWs and management of occupational HIV
exposures are available elsewhere (16-18).  Risk for Occupational Transmission of HIV
to HCWs  Prospective studies of HCWs have estimated that the average
risk for HIV transmission after a percutaneous exposure to
HIV-infected blood is approximately 0.3% (95% confidence interval
{CI}=0.2%-0.5%) (16) and after a mucous membrane exposure is 0.09%
(95% CI=0.006%-0.5%) (19). Although episodes of HIV transmission
after skin exposure have been documented (20), the average risk
for transmission by this route has not been precisely quantified
because no HCWs enrolled in prospective studies have seroconverted
after an isolated skin exposure. The risk for transmission is
estimated to be less than the risk for mucous membrane exposures
(21). The risk for transmission after exposure to fluids or
tissues other than HIV-infected blood also has not been
quantified.  As of June 1997, CDC has received reports of 52 U.S. HCWs
with documented HIV seroconversion temporally associated with an
occupational HIV exposure. An additional 114 episodes in HCWs are
considered possible occupational HIV transmissions; these workers
reported that their infection was occupationally acquired and no
other risk for HIV infection was identified, but transmission of
infection after a specific exposure was not documented (22). Of
the 52 documented episodes, 47 HCWs were exposed to HIV-infected
blood, one to a visibly bloody body fluid, one to an unspecified
fluid, and three to concentrated virus in a laboratory. Forty-five
exposures were percutaneous, and five were mucocutaneous; one HCW
had both a percutaneous and a mucocutaneous exposure. The route of
exposure for one person exposed to concentrated virus is
uncertain. Of the percutaneous exposures, the objects involved
included a hollow-bore needle (41), a broken glass vial (two), a
scalpel (one), and an unknown sharp object (one) (CDC, unpublished
data, 1998).  Epidemiologic and laboratory studies suggest that several
factors may affect the risk for HIV transmission after an
occupational exposure. The one retrospective case-control study of
HCWs who had percutaneous exposure to HIV found that the risk for
HIV transmission was increased with exposure to a larger quantity
of blood from the source patient as indicated by a) a device
visibly contaminated with the patient's blood, b) a procedure that
involved a needle placed directly in a vein or artery, or c) a
deep injury (23). (A laboratory study that demonstrated that more
blood is transferred by deeper injuries and hollow-bore needles
lends further support for the observed variation in risk related
to blood quantity {24}). The risk also was increased for exposure
to blood from source patients with terminal illness, possibly
reflecting either the higher titer of HIV in blood late in the
course of AIDS or other factors (e.g., the presence of
syncytia-inducing strains of HIV). It was estimated that the risk
for HIV transmission from exposures that involve a larger volume
of blood, particularly when the source patient's viral load is
probably  high,  exceeds  the  average  risk  of  0.3%  (23).   The  utility  of  viral  load
measurements from a source patient
as a surrogate for estimating the viral titer for assessing
transmission risk is not known. Plasma viral load measurement
(e.g., HIV RNA) reflects only the level of cell-free virus in the
peripheral blood. This measurement does not reflect the level of
cell-associated virus in the peripheral blood or the level of
virus in other body compartments (e.g., lymphatic tissue).
Although a lower viral load, or results that are below the limits
of viral quantification, in the peripheral blood probably
indicates a lower titer exposure, it does not rule out the
possibility of transmission; HIV transmission from persons with a
plasma viral load below the limits of viral quantification (based
on the assay used at the time) has been reported in instances of
mother-to-infant transmission (25,26) and in one HCW
seroconversion (J.L. Gerberding, San Francisco General Hospital,
unpublished  data,  May  1997).   There  is  some  evidence  that  host  defenses  also  may
influence
the risk for HIV infection. In one small study, HIV-exposed but
uninfected HCWs demonstrated an HIV-specific cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte (CTL) response when peripheral blood mononuclear
cells were stimulated in vitro with HIV mitogens (27). Similar CTL
responses have been observed in other populations with repeated
HIV exposure without resulting infection (28-33). Among several
possible explanations for this observation, one is that the host
immune response sometimes may be able to prevent establishment of
HIV infection after a percutaneous exposure; another is that the
CTL response simply may be a marker for exposure.  HIV Seroconversion in HCWs  Data
on the timing and clinical characteristics of
seroconversion in HIV-exposed HCWs are limited by the infrequency
of infection following occupational exposure, variations in
postexposure testing intervals, and differences over time in the
sensitivity of HIV-antibody testing methods. Among the HCWs with
documented seroconversions reported to CDC for whom data are
available, 81% experienced a syndrome compatible with primary HIV
infection a median of 25 days after exposure (CDC, unpublished
data, 1998). In a recent analysis of 51 seroconversions in HCWs,
the estimated median interval from exposure to seroconversion was
46 days (mean: 65 days); an estimated 95% seroconverted within 6
months after the exposure (34). These data suggest that the time
course of HIV seroconversion in HCWs is similar to that in other
persons who have acquired HIV through nonoccupational modes of
transmission (35).  Three instances of delayed HIV seroconversion occurring in
HCWs have been reported; in these instances, the HCWs tested
negative for HIV antibodies greater than 6 months postexposure but
were seropositive within 12 months after the exposure (36,37; J.L.
Gerberding, San Francisco General Hospital, unpublished data, May
1997). DNA sequencing confirmed the source of infection in one
instance. Two of the delayed seroconversions were associated with
simultaneous exposure to hepatitis C virus (HCV) (37; J.L.
Gerberding, San Francisco General Hospital, unpublished data, May
1997). In one case, co-infection was associated with a rapidly
fatal HCV disease course (37); however, it is not known whether
HCV directly influences the risk for or course of HIV infection or
is a marker for other exposure-related factors.  Rationale for PEP  Considerations that
influence the rationale and
recommendations for PEP include the pathogenesis of HIV infection,
particularly the time course of early infection; the biologic
plausibility that infection can be prevented or ameliorated by
using antiretroviral drugs and direct or indirect evidence of the
efficacy of specific agents used for prophylaxis; and the
risk/benefit of PEP to exposed HCWs. The following discussion
considers  each  of  these  issues.   Role  of  Pathogenesis  in  Considering  Antiretroviral
Prophylaxis  Information about primary HIV infection indicates that
systemic infection does not occur immediately, leaving a brief
"window of opportunity" during which postexposure antiretroviral
intervention may modify viral replication. Data from studies in
animal models and in vitro tissue studies suggest that dendritic
cells in the mucosa and skin are the initial targets of HIV
infection or capture and have an important role in initiating HIV
infection of CD4+ T-cells in regional lymph nodes (38). In a
primate model of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection,
infection of dendritic-like cells occurred at the site of
inoculation during the first 24 hours following mucosal exposure
to cell-free virus. During the subsequent 24-48 hours, migration
of these cells to regional lymph nodes occurred, and virus was
detectable in the peripheral blood within 5 days (39). HIV
replication is rapid (generation time: 2.5 days) and results in
bursts of up to 5,000 viral particles from each replicating cell
(40; M.S. Saag, University of Alabama, personal communication,
September 1997). The exponential increase in viral burden
continues unless controlled by the immune system or other
mechanisms (e.g., exhaustion of available target CD4+ T-cells).
Theoretically, initiation of antiretroviral PEP soon after
exposure may prevent or inhibit systemic infection by limiting the
proliferation of virus in the initial target cells or lymph nodes.  Efficacy of Antiretrovirals
for PEP  Studies in animals and humans provide direct and indirect
evidence of the efficacy of antiretroviral drugs as agents for
postexposure prophylaxis. In human studies and in most animal
studies, ZDV was the antiretroviral agent used for prophylaxis
(26,41-54). However, in more recent animal studies, newer agents
also have been reported to be effective (55,56).  Data from animal studies have been
difficult to interpret, in
part because of problems identifying a comparable animal model for
humans. Most studies use a higher inoculum for exposure than would
be expected in needlestick injuries. Among the animal studies,
differences in controlled variables (e.g., choice of viral strain
{based on the animal model used}, inoculum size, route of
inoculation, time of prophylaxis initiation, and drug regimen)
make attempts to apply these results to humans difficult. In the
animal studies that showed efficacy of pre-exposure and/or
postexposure prophylaxis, reported outcomes (4,57) have included  
    suppression of viremia or delayed antigenemia (41-47); b)
    drug-facilitated vaccine-type response (i.e., chemoprophylaxis
    sufficiently inhibited viral replication to permit formation of a
    long-lasting, protective cellular immune response) (48-56); and c)
    definitive prevention of infection (i.e., chemoprophylactic
    efficacy) (41,52-54). More recent refinements in methodology have
    enabled studies more relevant to humans; in particular, the viral
    inocula used in animal studies have been reduced to levels more
    analogous to human exposures (54,56). The results of these studies
    provide additional evidence of postexposure chemoprophylactic
    efficacy.  In studies of HIV-2 or SIV in nonhuman primates in which ZDV
or 3'-fluorothymidine was used, suppression or delay of
antigenemia was the most common outcome; prevention of infection
was infrequent (43,52,58-60). However, two other antiretroviral
agents, 2',3'-dideoxy-3'-hydroxymethyl cytidine (BEA-005) and
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)adenine (PMPA), used to study PEP
in primates have been more effective in preventing infection. When
PMPA was administered 48 hours before, 4 hours after, or 24 hours
after intravenous SIV inoculation to long-tailed macaques, a
4-week regimen prevented infection in all treated animals (55). A
3-day regimen of BEA-005 prevented SIV infection in 12 of 12
pigtailed macaques when administered 1-8 hours after intravenous
inoculation; infection also was prevented in four of four animals
that received 3 days of BEA-005 within 10 minutes after HIV-2
inoculation (56).  Animal studies have demonstrated that early initiation of PEP
and small inoculum size are correlates of successful PEP. ZDV
initiated 1 hour or 24 hours after intravenous exposure to a
rapidly lethal variant of SIV in pigtailed macaques prevented
infection in one of three animals and modified SIV disease in
three of six animals, respectively; PEP initiated at 72 hours had
no effect (54). In macaques administered ZDV or BEA-005 1 to 72
hours after SIV intravenous challenge, earlier initiation of PEP
was correlated with delayed onset and peak of antigenemia,
decreased duration of antigenemia, and reduction in SIV serum
titer; the most potent effect was evident when PEP was initiated
within 8 hours of exposure (43,56). Studies in primates and murine
and feline animal models have demonstrated that larger inocula
decrease prophylactic efficacy (47,48,53,60). In addition,
delaying initiation, shortening the duration, or decreasing the
antiretroviral dose of PEP, individually or in combination,
decreased  prophylactic  efficacy  (42,43,45,47,50,55).   There  is  little  information  with
which to assess the efficacy
of PEP in humans. Seroconversion is infrequent after an
occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood; therefore a
prospective trial would need to enroll many thousands of exposed
HCWs to achieve the statistical power necessary to directly
demonstrate PEP efficacy. During 1987-1989, the Burroughs-Wellcome
Company sponsored a prospective placebo-controlled clinical trial
among HCWs to evaluate 6 weeks of ZDV prophylaxis; however, this
trial was terminated prematurely because of low enrollment (61).
Because of current indirect evidence of PEP efficacy, it is
unlikely that a placebo-controlled trial in HCWs would ever be
feasible.  In the retrospective case-control study of HCWs, after
controlling for other risk factors for HIV transmission, the risk
for HIV infection among HCWs who used ZDV as PEP was reduced by
approximately 81% (95% CI=43%-94%) (23). In addition, in a
randomized, controlled, prospective trial (AIDS Clinical Trial
Group {ACTG} protocol 076) in which ZDV was administered to
HIV-infected pregnant women and their infants, the administration
of ZDV during pregnancy, labor, and delivery and to the infant
reduced transmission by 67% (3). Only 9%-17% (depending on the
assay used) of the protective effect of ZDV was explained by
reduction of the HIV titer in the maternal blood, suggesting that
ZDV prophylaxis in part involves a mechanism other than the
reduction of maternal viral burden (26).  The limitations of all of these studies must be
considered
when reviewing evidence of PEP efficacy. The extent to which data
from animal studies can be extrapolated to humans is largely
unknown, and the exposure route for mother-to-infant HIV
transmission is not similar to occupational exposures; therefore
these findings may not reflect a similar mechanism of ZDV
prophylaxis in HCWs. Although the results of the retrospective
case-control study of HCWs suggest PEP efficacy, the limitations
of that study include the small number of cases studied and the
use  of  cases  and  controls  from  different  cohorts.   Failure  of  ZDV  PEP  to  prevent  HIV
infection in HCWs has been
reported in at least 14 instances (62-64; G. Ippolito, AIDS
Reference Center, Rome, Italy, and J. Heptonstall, Communicable
Disease Surveillance Center, London, United Kingdom, personal
communication, 1997). Although eight of the 13 source patients had
taken ZDV, laboratory assessment for ZDV resistance of the virus
from the source patient was performed in only three instances, two
of which demonstrated reduced susceptibility to ZDV. In addition
to possible exposure to a ZDV-resistant strain of HIV, other
factors that may have contributed to the apparent failures in
these instances may include a high titer and/or large inoculum
exposure, delayed initiation and/or short duration of PEP, and
possible factors related to the host (e.g., cellular immune system
responsiveness) and/or to the source patient's virus (e.g.,
presence  of  syncytia-forming  strains)  (62).   Antiretroviral  Agents  for  PEP   Several
antiretroviral agents from at least three classes of
drugs are available for the treatment of HIV disease. These
include the nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors
(NRTIs), nonnuceloside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs),
and protease inhibitors (PIs) (See Appendix). Among these drugs,
ZDV (an NRTI) is the only agent shown to prevent HIV transmission
in humans (2,3). Although there are theoretical concerns that the
increased prevalence of resistance to ZDV may diminish its utility
for PEP (65), no data are available to assess whether this is a
factor for consideration. Clinical data from the ACTG protocol 076
study documented that despite genotypic evidence of maternal ZDV
resistance, ZDV prevented perinatal transmission (66). Thus, based
on the available information, it is still reasonable that ZDV
should continue to be the first drug of choice for PEP regimens.  There are no data to
directly support the addition of other
antiretroviral drugs to ZDV to enhance the effectiveness of the
PEP regimen. However, in HIV-infected patients, combination
regimens have proved superior to monotherapy regimens in reducing
HIV viral load (67,68). Thus, theoretically a combination of drugs
with activity at different stages in the viral replication cycle
(e.g., NRTIs with a PI) could offer an additive preventive effect
in PEP, particularly for occupational exposures that pose an
increased risk for transmission.  Determining which agents and how many agents to use
or when
to alter a PEP regimen is largely empiric. Guidelines for the
treatment of early HIV infection recommend the use of three drugs
(two NRTIs and a PI) (69); however, the applicability of these
recommendations to PEP remains unknown. In addition, the routine
use of three drugs for all occupational HIV exposures may not be
needed. Although the use of a highly potent regimen can be
justified for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission, it is uncertain whether the potential additional
toxicity of a third drug is justified for lower-risk exposures.
For this reason, the recommendations at the end of this report
provide guidance for two- and three-drug PEP regimens that are
based on the level of risk for HIV transmission represented by the
exposure.  NRTIs that can be considered for use with ZDV for PEP are
lamivudine (3TC), didanosine (ddI), and zalcitabine, each of which
has been included in recommended regimens that include ZDV (69).
In previous CDC recommendations, 3TC was recommended as a second
agent for PEP based on greater antiretroviral activity of the
ZDV/3TC combination and its activity against many ZDV-resistant
HIV strains without substantially increased toxicity (6). Also,
data suggest that ZDV-resistant mutations develop more slowly in
patients receiving the ZDV/3TC combination than those receiving
ZDV alone (70), and in vitro studies indicate that the mutation
associated with 3TC resistance may be associated with reversal of
ZDV phenotypic resistance (71). No additional information has
emerged to warrant altering the original recommendation of 3TC as
the second agent for PEP. In addition, because ZDV and 3TC are
available in a combination formulation (CombivirTM, manufactured
by Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC), the use of
3TC may be more convenient for HCWs. However, individual
clinicians may prefer other NRTIs or combinations of other
antiretroviral agents based on local knowledge and experience in
treating HIV infection and disease.  The addition of a PI as a third drug for PEP following
high-risk exposures is based on the site of activity in the
replication cycle (i.e., after viral integration has occurred) and
demonstrated effectiveness in reducing viral burden. Previously,
indinavir (IDV) was recommended as the PI for PEP because of its
increased bioavailability when compared with saquinavir and its
more favorable immediate toxicity profile compared with ritonavir
(72). In addition, requirements for dose escalation when
initiating ritonavir make it less practical for use in PEP. Since
the 1996 PEP recommendations were published, nelfinavir (NEL) was
approved for use by FDA and is now included in regimens
recommended for the treatment of primary HIV infection (69). Also,
FDA recently approved a soft-gel formulation of saquinavir
(FortovaseTM, manufactured by Hoffmann-LaRoche, Inc., Nutley, New
Jersey) that has improved bioavailability relative to its hard-gel
formulation (InviraseTM, manufactured by Hoffmann-LaRoche, Inc.).
However, the recommended dose of soft-gel saquinavir (1200 mg
three times a day) is twice that of the hard-gel formulation (600
mg three times a day) and necessitates taking 18 pills a day, a
factor that may influence HCW compliance if used for PEP. Based on
these considerations, either IDV or NEL is recommended as first
choice for inclusion in an expanded PEP regimen. If saquinavir is
preferred by the prescribing physician, the soft-gel formulation
(FortovaseTM) should be used. Also, differences in the side
effects associated with IDV and NEL, discussed below, may
influence which of these agents is selected in a specific
situation.  The NNRTIs (i.e., nevirapine and delavirdine) have not been
included in these recommended regimens for PEP. As a class of
antiretroviral agents, the NNRTIs are fast-acting and very potent,
making them appealing in concept for PEP. In addition, there is
some evidence of prophylactic efficacy (73). However, concerns
about side effects and the availability of alternative agents
argue against routinely using this class of drugs for initial PEP,
although  with  expert  consultation,  an  NNRTI  might  be  considered.   Side  Effects  and
Toxicity of Antiretroviral Agents  An important goal of PEP is to encourage and facilitate
compliance with a 4-week PEP regimen. Therefore, the toxicity
profile of antiretroviral agents, including the frequency,
severity, duration, and reversibility of side effects, is a
relevant consideration. All of the antiretroviral agents have been
associated with side effects (See Appendix). However, studies of
adverse events have been reported primarily for persons with
advanced disease (and longer treatment courses) and therefore may
not reflect the experience of persons with less advanced disease
or those who are uninfected (74). Side effects associated with
many of the NRTIs (e.g., ZDV or ddI) are chiefly gastrointestinal
(e.g., nausea or diarrhea), and in general the incidence of
adverse effects has not been greater when these agents are used in
combination (72).  All of the approved PIs may have potentially serious drug
interactions when used with certain other drugs, requiring careful
evaluation of concomitant medications being used by an HCW before
prescribing a PI and close monitoring for toxicity when an HCW is
receiving one of these drugs (See Appendix). PIs may inhibit the
metabolism of nonsedating antihistamines and other hepatically
metabolized drugs; NEL and ritonavir may accelerate the clearance
of certain drugs, including oral contraceptives (requiring
alternative or additional contraceptive measures for women taking
these drugs). The use of PIs also has been associated with new
onset of diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis,
and exacerbation of pre-existing diabetes mellitus (75-77).
Nephrolithiasis has been associated with IDV use (including in
HCWs using the drug for PEP) (8); however, the incidence of this
potential complication may be limited by drinking at least 48 oz
(1.5 L) of fluid per 24-hour period (e.g., six 8 oz glasses of
water throughout the day) (72). Rare cases of hemolytic anemia
also have been associated with the use of IDV. NEL, saquinavir,
and ritonavir have been associated with the development of
diarrhea; however, this side effect usually responds to treatment
with antimotility agents that can be prescribed for use, if
necessary, at the time any one of these drugs is prescribed for
PEP. The manufacturer's package insert should always be consulted
for  questions  about  potential  drug  interactions.   Among  HCWs  receiving  ZDV  PEP,
usually at doses of 1,000-1,200
mg per day (i.e., higher than the currently recommended dose),
50%-75% reported one or more subjective complaints and
approximately 30% discontinued the drug because of symptoms
(7,78,79). Common symptoms included nausea, vomiting, malaise or
fatigue, headache, or insomnia. Mild decreases in hemoglobin and
absolute neutrophil count also were observed. All side effects
were  reversed  when  PEP  was  discontinued.   Preliminary  information  about  HCWs
receiving combination
drugs for PEP (usually ZDV plus 3TC with or without a PI) suggests
that approximately 50%-90% of HCWs report subjective side effects
that caused 24%-36% to discontinue PEP (8-10). One study
documented that combination regimens that included ZDV at a lower
dose (600 mg per day) were better tolerated than high-dose ZDV
used alone (1,000-1,200 mg per day) (10). However, serious side
effects, including nephrolithiasis, hepatitis, and pancytopenia,
have been reported with the use of combination drugs for PEP
(9,80; J.L. Gerberding, San Francisco General Hospital, personal
communication, May 1997).  Resistance to Antiretroviral Agents  Known or suspected
resistance of the source virus to
antiretroviral agents, particularly to one or more agents that
might be included in a PEP regimen, is a concern for those making
decisions about PEP. Resistance of HIV has been reported with all
available antiretroviral agents (65). However, the relevance of
exposure to a resistant virus is not understood. Although
transmission of resistant strains has been reported (81-85), in
the perinatal clinical trial that studied vertical HIV
transmission (ACTG protocol 076), ZDV prevented perinatal
transmission despite genotypic resistance of HIV to ZDV in the
mother (66). In addition, patients generally take more than one
antiretro-viral drug and, unless testing is performed, often it is
difficult to know to which drug(s) resistance exists. The
complexity of this issue is further compounded by the frequency of
cross-resistance within drug classes.  Resistance should be suspected in source patients
when there
is clinical progression of disease or a persistently increasing
viral load and/or a decline in CD4 T-cell count despite therapy,
or a lack of virologic response to a change in therapy.
Nevertheless, in this situation it is unknown whether a
modification in the PEP regimen is necessary or will influence the
outcome  of  an  occupational  exposure.   Antiretroviral  Drugs  in  Pregnancy  
Considerations for the use of antiretroviral drugs in
pregnancy include their potential effect on the pregnant woman and
on her fetus or neonate. The pharmacokinetics of antiretroviral
drugs has not been completely studied in pregnant women. Some of
the antiretroviral drugs are known to cross the placenta, but data
for humans are not yet available for others (particularly the
PIs). In addition, data are limited on the potential effects of
antiretroviral drugs on the developing fetus or neonate (86).
Decisions on the use of specific drugs in pregnancy also are
influenced by whether a drug has specific adverse effects or might
further exacerbate conditions associated with pregnancy, (e.g.,
drugs that cause nausea may be less tolerated when superimposed on
the nausea normally associated with pregnancy).  There are data on both ZDV and 3TC
from clinical trials in
HIV-infected pregnant women. The most extensive experience has
been with the use of ZDV after 14 weeks of gestation in pregnant
HIV-infected women in phase I studies and the perinatal ACTG
protocol 076 (4,87). The dose of ZDV for pregnant women is the
same as that in nonpregnant persons, and ZDV appears safe and well
tolerated in both women and their infants who have had a follow-up
period of several years (88-90). Data from the Antiretroviral
Pregnancy Registry have not documented an increased risk for birth
defects in infants with in utero exposure to ZDV (91). There are
limited data on use of 3TC alone or in combination with ZDV in
late gestation in pregnant HIV-infected women. As with ZDV, the
pharmacokinetics and dose of 3TC appear to be similar to those for
nonpregnant persons. The drug appears safe during pregnancy for
women  and  infants,  although  long-term  safety  is  not  known  (92,93).   Carcinogenicity
and/or mutagenicity is evident in several in
vitro screening tests for ZDV and all other FDA-licensed
nucleoside antiretroviral drugs. In some in vivo rodent studies,
high-dose lifetime continuous ZDV exposure (94) or very high dose
in utero ZDV exposure has been associated with the development of
tumors in adult females or their offspring (95,96). The relevance
of these animal data to humans is unknown. However, in 1997 an
independent panel reviewed these data and concluded that the known
benefits of ZDV in preventing perinatal transmission, where the
risk for transmission without ZDV is 25%-30%, outweigh the
hypothetical concerns about transplacental carcinogenesis (97).  No data are available
regarding pharmacokinetics, safety, or
tolerability of any of the PIs in pregnant women. The use of PIs
in HIV-infected persons has been associated with hyperglycemia; it
is unknown whether the use of these agents during pregnancy will
exacerbate the risk for pregnancy-associated hyperglycemia.
Therefore, close monitoring of glucose levels and careful
instruction regarding symptoms related to hyperglycemia are
recommended for pregnant HCWs receiving a PI for PEP. IDV is
associated with infrequent side effects in adults (i.e.,
hyperbilirubinemia and renal stones) that could be problematic for
the newborn. As the half-life of IDV in adults is short, these
concerns may be relevant only if the drug is administered shortly
before  delivery.   RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  THE  MANAGEMENT  OF  POTENTIALLY
EXPOSED HCWs  Health-care organizations should make available to their
workers a system that includes written protocols for prompt
reporting, evaluation, counseling, treatment, and follow-up of
occupational exposures that may place HCWs at risk for acquiring
any bloodborne infection, including HIV. Employers also are
required to establish exposure-control plans, including
postexposure follow-up for their employees, and to comply with
incident reporting requirements mandated by the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (15). Access to clinicians who
can provide postexposure care should be available during all
working hours, including nights and weekends. Antiretroviral
agents for PEP should be available for timely administration
(i.e., either by providing access to PEP drugs on site or creating
links with other facilities or providers to make them available
offsite). Persons responsible for providing postexposure
counseling should be familiar with evaluation and treatment
protocols and the facility's procedures for obtaining drugs for
PEP.  HCWs should be educated to report occupational exposures
immediately after they occur, particularly because PEP is most
likely to be effective if implemented as soon after the exposure
as possible (41,55,56). HCWs who are at risk for occupational
exposure to HIV should be taught the principles of postexposure
management, including options for PEP, as part of job orientation
and  ongoing  job  training.   Exposure  Report   If  an  occupational  exposure  occurs,  the
circumstances and
postexposure management should be recorded in the HCW's
confidential medical record (usually on a form the facility
designates for this purpose). Relevant information includes  
    date and time of exposure;  
    details of the procedure being performed, including where and
    how the exposure occurred, and if the exposure was related to
 a
    sharp device, the type of device and how and when in the
 course of
    handling the device the exposure occurred;  
    details of the exposure, including the type and amount of
 fluid
    or material and the severity of the exposure (e.g., for a
    percutaneous exposure, depth of injury and whether fluid was
    injected; or for a skin or mucous-membrane exposure, the
 estimated
    volume of material and duration of contact and the condition
 of
    the skin {e.g., chapped, abraded, or intact});  details about the exposure source (i.e.,
whether the source
material contained HIV or other bloodborne pathogen{s}), and
 if
the source is an HIV-infected person, the stage of disease,
history of antiretroviral therapy, and viral load, if known;
 and  
    details about counseling, postexposure management, and
    follow-up.  Exposure Management  Treatment of an Exposure Site  Wounds and skin
sites that have been in contact with blood or
body fluids should be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes
should be flushed with water. There is no evidence that the use of
antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by squeezing the
wound further reduces the risk for HIV transmission. However, the
use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of
caustic agents (e.g., bleach) or the injection of antiseptics or
disinfectants into the wound is not recommended.  Assessment of Infection Risk  After
an occupational exposure, the source-person and the
exposed HCW should be evaluated to determine the need for HIV PEP.
Follow-up for hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infections
also should be conducted in accordance with previously published
CDC  recommendations  (98,99).   Evaluation  of  exposure.  The  exposure  should  be
evaluated for
potential to transmit HIV based on the type of body substance
involved and the route and severity of the exposure. Exposures to
blood, fluid containing visible blood, or other potentially
infectious fluid (including semen; vaginal secretions; and
cerebrospinal, synovial, pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and
amniotic fluids) or tissue through a percutaneous injury (i.e.,
needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through
contact with a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for
bloodborne transmission and require further evaluation
 (Figure_1
and Figure_1C). In addition, any direct contact (i.e., personal
protective equipment either was not used or was ineffective in
protecting skin or mucous membranes) with concentrated HIV in a
research laboratory or production facility is considered an
 exposure
that  requires  clinical  evaluation  to  assess  the  need  for  PEP.   For  skin  exposures,
follow-up is indicated if it involves
direct contact with a body fluid listed above and there is
evidence of compromised skin integrity (e.g., dermatitis,
abrasion, or open wound). However, if the contact is prolonged or
involves a large area of intact skin, postexposure follow-up may
be considered on a case-by-case basis or if requested by the HCW.  For human bites,
the clinical evaluation must consider
possible exposure of both the bite recipient and the person who
inflicted the bite. HIV transmission only rarely has been reported
by this route (100,101; CDC, unpublished data, 1998). If a bite
results in blood exposure to either person involved, postexposure
follow-up, including consideration of PEP, should be provided.  Evaluation and testing of
an exposure source. The person whose
blood or body fluids are the source of an occupational exposure
should be evaluated for HIV infection. Information available in
the medical record at the time of exposure (e.g., laboratory test
results, admitting diagnosis, or past medical history) or from the
source person may suggest or rule out possible HIV infection.
Examples of information to consider when evaluating an exposure
source for possible HIV infection include laboratory information
(e.g., prior HIV testing results or results of immunologic testing
{e.g., CD4+ count}), clinical symptoms (e.g., acute syndrome
suggestive of primary HIV infection or undiagnosed
immunodeficiency disease), and history of possible HIV exposures
(e.g., injecting-drug use, sexual contact with a known
HIV-positive partner, unprotected sexual contact with multiple
partners {heterosexual and/or homosexual}, or receipt of blood or
blood products before 1985).  If the source is known to have HIV infection, available
information about this person's stage of infection (i.e.,
asymptomatic or AIDS), CD4+ T-cell count, results of viral load
testing, and current and previous antiretroviral therapy, should
be gathered for consideration in choosing an appropriate PEP
regimen. If this information is not immediately available,
initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes in
the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate.  If the HIV serostatus of the source person is unknown, the
source person should be informed of the incident and, if consent
is obtained, tested for serologic evidence of HIV infection. If
consent cannot be obtained (e.g., patient is unconscious),
procedures should be followed for testing source persons according
to applicable state and local laws. Confidentiality of the source
person should be maintained at all times.  HIV-antibody testing of an exposure source
should be
performed as soon as possible. Hospitals, clinics, and other sites
that manage exposed HCWs should consult their laboratories
regarding the most appropriate test to use to expedite these
results. An FDA-approved rapid HIV-antibody test kit should be
considered for use in this situation, particularly if testing by
enzyme immunoassay (EIA) cannot be completed within 24-48 hours.
Repeatedly reactive results by EIA or rapid HIV-antibody tests are
considered highly suggestive of infection, whereas a negative
result is an excellent indicator of the absence of HIV antibody.
Confirmation of a reactive result by Western blot or
immunofluorescent antibody is not necessary for making initial
decisions about postexposure management but should be done to
complete the testing process.  If the source is HIV seronegative and has no clinical
evidence of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or symptoms
of HIV infection, no further testing of the source is indicated.
It is unclear whether follow-up testing of a source who is HIV
negative at the time of exposure, but recently (i.e., within the
last 3-6 months) engaged in behaviors that pose a risk for HIV
transmission, is useful in postexposure management of HCWs; HCWs
who become infected generally seroconvert before repeat testing of
a source would normally be performed.  If the exposure source is unknown, information
about where
and under what circumstances the exposure occurred should be
assessed epidemiologically for risk for transmission of HIV.
Certain situations, as well as the type of exposure, may suggest
an increased or decreased risk; an important consideration is the
prevalence of HIV in the population group (i.e., institution or
community) from which the contaminated source material is derived.
For example, an exposure that occurs in a geographic area where
injecting-drug use is prevalent or on an AIDS unit in a
health-care facility would be considered epidemiologically to have
a higher risk for transmission than one that occurs in a nursing
home for the elderly where no known HIV-infected residents are
present. In addition, exposure to a blood-filled hollow needle or
visibly bloody device suggests a higher-risk exposure than
exposure to a needle that was most likely used for giving an
injection. Decisions regarding appropriate management should be
individualized  based  on  the  risk  assessment.   HIV  testing  of  needles  or  other  sharp
instruments associated
with an exposure, regardless of whether the source is known or
unknown, is not recommended. The reliability and interpretation of
findings in such circumstances are unknown.  Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing
of Exposed HCWs  Exposed HCWs should be evaluated for susceptibility to
bloodborne pathogen infections. Baseline testing (i.e., testing to
establish serostatus at the time of exposure) for HIV antibody
should be performed. If the source person is seronegative for HIV,
baseline testing or further follow-up of the HCW normally is not
necessary. If the source person has recently engaged in behaviors
that are associated with a risk for HIV transmission, baseline and
follow-up HIV-antibody testing (e.g., 3 and/or 6 months
postexposure) of the HCW should be considered. Serologic testing
should be made available to all HCWs who are concerned that they
may have been exposed to HIV.  For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the evaluation
also
should include information about medications the HCW may be taking
and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances
(i.e., pregnancy, breast feeding, or renal or hepatic disease)
that may influence drug selection. Pregnancy testing should be
offered to all nonpregnant women of childbearing age whose
pregnancy  status  is  unknown.   HIV  PEP   The  following  recommendations  apply  to
situations where an
HCW has had an exposure to a source person with HIV or where
information suggests that there is a likelihood that the source
person is HIV-infected. These recommendations are based on the
risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and
limited data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most
occupational HIV exposures do not result in the transmission of
HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully considered when
prescribing PEP. When possible, these recommendations should be
implemented in consultation with persons having expertise in
antiretroviral
 therapy
 and
 HIV
 transmission.
 
 Explaining
 PEP
 to
 HCWs
 
Recommendations for chemoprophylaxis should be explained to
HCWs who have sustained occupational HIV exposures (Figure_1
and Figure_1C). For exposures for which PEP is considered
appropriate, HCWs should be informed that a) knowledge about the
efficacy and toxicity of drugs used for PEP are limited; b) only
 ZDV
has been shown to prevent HIV transmission in humans; c) there are
 no
data to address whether adding other antiretroviral drugs provides
 any
additional benefit for PEP, but experts recommend combination drug
regimens because of increased potency and concerns about
drug-resistant virus; d) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral
drugs in persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are
limited for ZDV and not known regarding other antiretroviral
drugs; and e) any or all drugs for PEP may be declined by the HCW.
HCWs who have HIV occupational exposures for which PEP is not
recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and
toxicity of taking PEP outweigh the negligible risk of
transmission posed by the type of exposure.  Factors in Selection of a PEP Regimen 
Selection of the PEP regimen should consider the comparative
risk represented by the exposure and information about the
exposure source, including history of and response to
antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+
T-lymphocyte counts, viral load measurements, and current disease
stage. Most HIV exposures will warrant only a two-drug regimen,
using two NRTIs, usually ZDV and 3TC. The addition of a third
drug, usually a PI (i.e., IDV or NEL), should be considered for
exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission or where
resistance  to  the  other  drugs  used  for  PEP  is  known  or  suspected.   Timing  of  PEP
Initiation  PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The interval
within which PEP should be started for optimal efficacy is not
known. Animal studies have demonstrated the importance of starting
PEP within hours after an exposure (43,54,56). To assure timely
access to PEP, an occupational exposure should be regarded as an
urgent medical concern and PEP started as soon as possible after
the exposure (i.e., within a few hours rather than days). If there
is a question about which antiretroviral drugs to use, or whether
to use two or three drugs, it is probably better to start ZDV and
3TC immediately than to delay PEP administration. Although animal
studies suggest that PEP probably is not effective when started
later than 24-36 hours postexposure (42,55,56), the interval after
which there is no benefit from PEP for humans is undefined.
Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be started
even when the interval since exposure exceeds 36 hours. Initiating
therapy after a longer interval (e.g., 1-2 weeks) may be
considered for exposures that represent an increased risk for
transmission; even if infection is not prevented, early treatment
of acute HIV infection may be beneficial (69). The optimal
duration of PEP is unknown. Because 4 weeks of ZDV appeared
protective in HCWs (2), PEP probably should be administered for 4
weeks,  if  tolerated.   PEP  if  Serostatus  of  Source  Person  is  Unknown   If  the  source
person's HIV serostatus is unknown at the time
of exposure (including when the source is HIV negative but may
have had a recent HIV exposure), use of PEP should be decided on
a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in
the source (Figure_1 and Figure_1C). If these
 considerations
suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of the
source is pending, it is reasonable to initiate a two-drug PEP
 regimen
until laboratory results have been obtained and later modify or
discontinue  the  regimen  accordingly.   PEP  if  Exposure  Source  is  Unknown   If  the
exposure source is unknown, use of PEP should be
decided on a case-by-case basis. Consideration should include the
severity of the exposure and the epidemiologic likelihood that the
HCW  was  exposed  to  HIV.   PEP  for  Pregnant  HCWs   If  the  HCW  is  pregnant,  the
evaluation of risk and need for
PEP should be approached as with any other HCW who has had an HIV
exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and
her health-care provider regarding the potential benefits and
potential risks to her and her fetus.  Follow-up of HCWs Exposed to HIV  Postexposure
Testing  HCWs with occupational exposure to HIV should receive
follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation
regardless of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing
should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure (e.g., at
6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). It is unclear whether an
extended follow-up period (e.g., 12 months) is indicated in
certain circumstances. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (36,37, J.L. Gerberding, San
Francisco General Hospital, unpublished data, May 1997), the
infrequency of this occurrence does not warrant adding to HCWs'
anxiety by routinely extending the duration of postexposure
follow-up. Circumstances for which extending the duration of
follow-up have been suggested include the use of highly potent
antiretroviral regimens (i.e., more than two drugs) because of
theoretical concerns that HIV seroconversion could be delayed, or
simultaneous exposure to HCV. Data are insufficient for making a
general recommendation in these situations. However, this should
not preclude a decision to extend follow-up in an individual
situation based on the clinical judgement of the HCW's health-care
provider. HIV testing should be performed on any HCW who has an
illness that is compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome,
regardless of the interval since exposure. HIV-antibody testing
using EIA should be used to monitor for sero-conversion. The
routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or
polymerase chain reaction for HIV RNA) to detect infection in
exposed HCWs generally is not recommended (34). Although direct
virus assays may detect HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA,
the infrequency of HCW seroconversion and increased costs of these
tests do not warrant their routine use in this setting. Also, HIV
RNA is approved for use in established HIV infection; its
reliability in detecting very early infection has not been
determined.  Monitoring and Management of PEP Toxicity  If PEP is used, drug-toxicity
monitoring should be performed
at baseline and again 2 weeks after starting PEP. Clinical
judgement, based on medical conditions that may exist in the HCW
and any toxicity associated with drugs included in the PEP
regimen, should determine the scope of testing. Minimally these
should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic
chemical function tests. Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia
should be included for HCWs whose regimen includes any PI; if the
HCW is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria, hematuria,
hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If
toxicity is noted, modification of the regimen should be
considered after expert consultation; further diagnostic studies
may be indicated.  HCWs who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so
because of the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and
diarrhea). These symptoms often can be managed without changing
the regimen by prescribing antimotility and antiemetic agents or
other medications that target the specific symptoms. In other
situations, modifying the dose interval (i.e., administering a
lower dose of drug more frequently throughout the day, as
recommended by the manufacturer), may help promote adherence to
the  regimen.   Counseling  and  Education   Although  HIV  infection  following  an
occupational exposure
occurs infrequently, the emotional impact of the exposure often is
substantial (102,103). In addition, HCWs are given seemingly
conflicting information. Although HCWs are told that there is a
low risk for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP is
recommended and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures
(i.e., sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary
transmission, all of which influence their lives for several weeks
to months (102). Therefore, access to persons who are
knowledgeable about occupational HIV transmission and who can deal
with the many concerns an HIV exposure may raise for the HCW is an
important  element  of  postexposure  management.   HIV-exposed  HCWs  should  be
advised to use the following
measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially during the first 6-12 weeks after the exposure
when most HIV-infected persons are expected to seroconvert: use
sexual abstinence or condoms to prevent sexual transmission and to
avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs,
tissue, or semen. If the exposed HCW is breastfeeding, she should
be counseled about the risk for HIV transmission through breast
milk, and discontinuation of breastfeeding should be considered,
especially following high-risk exposures. If the HCW chooses to
receive PEP, temporary discontinuation of breastfeeding while she
is taking PEP should be considered to avoid exposing the infant to
these agents. NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk; it is not
known  whether  this  also  is  true  for  PIs.   There  is  no  need  to  modify  an  HCW's
patient-care
responsibilities to prevent transmission to patients based solely
on an HIV exposure. If HIV seroconversion is detected, the HCW
should be evaluated according to published recommendations for
HIV-infected HCWs (104).  Exposed HCWs should be advised to seek medical evaluation
for
any acute illness that occurs during the follow-up period. Such an
illness, particularly if characterized by fever, rash, myalgia,
fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, may be indicative of acute
HIV infection but also may be due to a drug reaction or another
medical condition.  Exposed HCWs who choose to take PEP should be advised of the
importance of completing the prescribed regimen. Information
should be provided about potential drug interactions and the drugs
that should not be taken with PEP, the side effects of the drugs
that have been prescribed (See Appendix), measures to minimize
these effects, and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity
during the follow-up period. They should be advised that the
evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed (e.g., back
or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine, or
symptoms of hyperglycemia {i.e., increased thirst and/or frequent
urination}).   RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  THE  SELECTION  OF  DRUGS  FOR  PEP   The
selection of a drug regimen for HIV PEP must strive to
balance the risk for infection against the potential toxicity of
the agent(s) used. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is
not justified for exposures that pose a negligible risk for
transmission (Figure_1 and Figure_1C). Also, there is
 insufficient
evidence to recommend a highly active regimen for all HIV
 exposures.
Therefore, two regimens for PEP are provided (Table_1): a
 "basic"
two-drug regimen that should be appropriate for most HIV exposures
and an "expanded" three-drug regimen that should be used for
exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission
 (Figure_1
and Figure_1C) or where resistance to one or more
 antiretroviral
agents is known or suspected. When possible, the regimens should be
implemented in consultation with persons having expertise in
 antiretroviral
treatment  and  HIV  transmission.   Situations  That  Require  Special  Consideration  
Resistance  of  the  Source  Virus  to  Antiretroviral  Drugs   It  is  unknown  whether  drug
resistance influences transmission
risk; however, transmission of drug-resistant HIV has been
reported (81,82) and is therefore a theoretical concern when
choosing PEP regimens. If the source-person's virus is known or
suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs included in
the PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source
person's virus is unlikely to be resistant is recommended (69). If
the resistance is to one class of antiretroviral drugs, the
addition to the basic PEP regimen of a drug from another class
might be considered (e.g., addition of a PI when a source patient
has not been treated with a PI but has virus resistant to one or
more NRTIs). It is strongly recommended that PEP be started
regardless of the resistance status in the source virus; if
resistance is known or suspected, a third or fourth drug may be
added to the regimen until consultation with a clinical expert in
the  treatment  of  HIV  infection  or  disease  can  be  obtained.   Known  or  Suspected
Pregnancy in the HCW  Pregnancy should not preclude the use of optimal PEP
regimens, and PEP should not be denied to an HCW solely on the
basis of pregnancy. However, as discussed previously, an
occupationally exposed pregnant HCW must be provided with full
information about what is known and not known regarding the
potential benefits and risks associated with use of the
antiretroviral drugs to her and her fetus for her to make an
informed decision regarding the use of PEP. The choice of
antiretroviral drugs to use for PEP in pregnant HCWs is
complicated by the potential need to alter dosing because of
physiologic changes associated with pregnancy and the potential
for short- or long-term effects on the fetus and newborn. Thus,
considerations that should be discussed with a pregnant HCW
include the potential risk for HIV transmission based on the type
of exposure; the stage of pregnancy (the first trimester being the
period of maximal organogenesis and risk for teratogenesis); and
what is known about the pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolerability
of  the  drug  or  combination  of  drugs  in  pregnancy.   POSTEXPOSURE  REGISTRIES  
Health-care providers in the United States are encouraged to
enroll HCWs who receive PEP in a confidential registry developed
by CDC, Glaxo Wellcome Inc., and Merck & Co., Inc., to assess
toxicity; telephone (888) 737-4448 ({888} PEP-4HIV), or write the
HIV PEP Registry, 1410 Commonwealth Drive, Suite 215, Wilmington,
NC 28405. Unusual or serious and unexpected toxicity from
antiretroviral drugs should be reported to the manufacturer and/or
FDA, telephone (800) 332-1088.  Health-care providers also should report instances of
prenatal exposure to antiretroviral agents to the Antiretroviral
Pregnancy Registry. The registry is an epidemiologic project to
collect observational, nonexperimental data on antiretroviral drug
exposure during pregnancy to assess potential teratogenicity.
Referrals should be directed to the Antiretroviral Pregnancy
Registry, 1410 Commonwealth Drive, Suite 215, Wilmington, NC
28405; telephone (800) 258-4263 or (800) 722-9292, ext. 39437; fax
(800) 800-1052.  A protocol has been developed to evaluate HIV seroconversion
in an HCW who received PEP. These events can be reported to CDC,
telephone  (404)  639-6425.   RESOURCES  FOR  CONSULTATION   Clinicians  who  seek
consultation on HIV PEP for assistance in
managing an occupational exposure should access local experts in
HIV treatment as much as possible. In addition, the "National
Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline (PEP-Line)" has been
created to assist clinicians with these issues; telephone (888)
448-4911. Other resources and registries include the HIV
Postexposure Prophylaxis Registry, the Antiretroviral Pregnancy
Registry,  FDA,  and  CDC  (Table_2).   ADMINISTRATIVE  CONSIDERATIONS   Effective
implementation of the elements of postexposure
management detailed in these recommendations may require various
types of expertise. The assessment of the severity of an exposure
generally requires clinical training and experience (i.e., medical
or nursing). However, the assessment of HIV infection risk and
initiation of a basic PEP regimen necessitates knowledge or
experience in clinical epidemiology, infection control,
occupational health, or the clinical treatment of HIV. Decisions
about HIV PEP are particularly complex if PIs are used or there is
concern about drug-resistant virus. Thus, expert consultation when
prescribing PEP is strongly encouraged. PEP protocols should list
the names of readily available resources for consultation and
could include policies that require infectious disease evaluation
before prescribing an expanded antiretroviral regimen. However,
these efforts should not delay initial implementation of PEP where
it is appropriate.  Acknowledgments  Drafts of this document have been reviewed by
many experts in
 the
treatment of HIV infection and disease. We thank these consultants
for their thoughtful comments, suggestions, and assistance.  References 
    CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of
    occupational exposure to human immunodeficiency virus,
 including
    considerations regarding zidovudine postexposure use. MMWR
    1990;39(no. RR-1). 
    CDC. Case-control study of HIV seroconversion in health-care
    workers after percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood --
 France,
    United Kingdom, and United States, January 1988-August 1994.
 MMWR
    1995;44:929-33. 
    Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of
    maternal-infant transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
 type
    1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1173-80. 
    Black RJ. Animal studies of prophylaxis. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B):39-44. 
    Bell DM, Gerberding JL, eds. Human immunodeficiency virus
 (HIV)
    postexposure management of healthcare workers. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B). 
    CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations
    for chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR
    1996;45:468-72. 
    Ippolito G, Puro V, the Italian Registry of Antiretroviral
    Prophylaxis. Zidovudine toxicity in uninfected healthcare
 workers.
    Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):58-62. 
    Wang SA, the HIV PEP Registry Group. Human immunodeficiency
    virus (HIV) postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) following
 occupational
    HIV exposure: findings from the HIV PEP registry {Abstract
 482}.
    In: Program and abstracts of the Infectious Diseases Society
 of
    America 35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious
 Diseases
    Society of America, 1997:161. 
    Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience
    with post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) with combination
    antiretrovirals for occupational exposure (OE) to HIV
 {Abstract
    480}. In: Program and abstracts of the Infectious Diseases
 Society
    of America 35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious
    Diseases Society of America, 1997:161. 
    Beekmann R, Fahrner R, Nelson L, Henderson DK, Gerberding JL.
    Combination post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP): a prospective
 study
    of HIV-exposed health care workers (HCW) {Abstract 481}. In:
    Program and abstracts of the Infectious Diseases Society of
    America 35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious
 Diseases
    Society of America, 1997:161. 
    CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in
    health-care settings. MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S). 
    CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of
    transmission of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B
 virus,
    and other bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR
    1988;37:377-82,387-8. 
    CDC. Transmission of HIV possibly associated with exposure of
    mucous membrane to contaminated blood. MMWR 1997;46:620-3. 
    Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory
    Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80. 
    Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Department of
    Labor. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030, occupational exposure to
 bloodborne
    pathogens; final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64004-182. 
    Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus
    infection in healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B):9-15. 
    Marcus R, Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency
    virus infection in health care workers. In: DeVita VT Jr,
 Hellman
    S, Rosenberg SA, eds. AIDS: biology, diagnosis, treatment and
    prevention. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven
 Publishers,
    1997:645-54. 
    Cardo DM, Bell DM. Postexposure management. In: DeVita VT Jr,
    Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. AIDS: biology, diagnosis,
 treatment
    and prevention. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven
    Publishers, 1997:701-8. 
    Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, the Italian Study Group on
    Occupational Risk of HIV Infection. The risk of occupational
 human
    immunodeficiency virus infection in health care workers. Arch
    Intern Med 1993;153:1451-8. 
    CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in
    health-care workers exposed to blood of infected patients.
 MMWR
    1987;36:285-9. 
    Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of
    nonparenteral occupational exposures to blood and body fluids
    before and after universal precautions training. Am J Med
    1991;90:145-53. 
    CDC. HIV/AIDS surveillance report 1997;9:15. 
    Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control
    study of HIV seroconversion in health care workers after
    percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485-90. 
    Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in
    reducing blood volumes transferred during simulated
 needlestick
    injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589-92. 
    Cao Y, Krogstad P, Korber BT, et al. Maternal HIV-1 viral load
    and vertical transmission of infection: the Ariel Project for
 the
    Prevention of HIV transmission from mother to infant. Nature
 Med
    1997;3:549-52. 
    Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral
    load, zidovudine treatment, and the risk of transmission of
 human
    immunodeficiency virus type 1 from mother to infant. N Engl J
 Med
    1996;335:1621-9. 
    Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM.
    Immune response to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in
    healthcare workers occupationally exposed to HIV-contaminated
    blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21-4. 
    Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune
    response to human immuno-deficiency virus (HIV) type 1 in
    seronegative homosexual men with recent sexual exposure to
 HIV-1.
    J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012-9. 
    Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response
    towards HIV in infected individuals with and without
 zidovudine
    therapy, and in HIV-exposed sexual partners. AIDS 1989;3:63-9.
 
    Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic
    T lymphocyte responses in the peripheral blood of children
 born to
    human  immunodeficiency virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J
 Immunol
    1992;22:2211-7. 
    Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from
    some long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of
 HIV-infected
    individuals proliferate in response to HIV antigens. AIDS Res
 Hum
    Retroviruses 1992;8:1355-9. 
    Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler
    E. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T
    lymphocytes in noninfected heterosexual contacts of
 HIV-infected
    patients. J Clin Invest 1994;93:1293-7. 
    Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific
    cytotoxic T-cells in HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women.
    Nature Medicine 1995;1:59-64. 
    Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody
    seroconversion following human immunodeficiency virus
 exposure. Am
    J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):117-24. 
    Saag MS. Clinical spectrum of human immunodeficiency virus
    diseases. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds.
 AIDS:
    biology, diagnosis, treatment and prevention. 4th ed.
    Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997:203-13. 
    Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure
    and seroconversion in healthcare workers with occupationally
    acquired infection with human immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B):115-6. 
    Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous
    transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C
 virus
    from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J Med 1997;336:919-22. 
    Blauvelt A. The role of skin dendritic cells in the initiation
    of human immunodeficiency virus infection. Am J Med
 1997;102(suppl
    5B):16-20. 
    Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of
    infection and route of viral dissemination after an
 intravaginal
    inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus into rhesus
 macaques.
    J Exp Med 1996;183:215-25. 
    Saag MS. Candidate antiretroviral agents for use in
    postexposure prophylaxis. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):25-31. 
    Van Rompay KKA, Otsyula MG, Marthas ML, Miller CJ, McChesney
    MB, Pedersen NC. Immediate zidovudine treatment protects
 simian
    immunodeficiency virus-infected newborn macaques against rapid
    onset of AIDS. Antimicrob Agents and Chemother 1995;39:125-31.
 
    Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure
    prophylaxis with zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency
    virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice in a time-dependent
 manner.
    J Infect Dis 1991;163:625-7. 
    Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B,
    Baskin GB. Effects of initiation of 3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine
    (zidovudine) treatment at different times after infection of
    rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect
 Dis
    1993;168:825-35. 
    Hayes KA, Lafrado LJ, Erickson JG, Marr JM, Mathes LE.
    Prophylactic ZDV therapy prevents early viremia and lymphocyte
    decline but not primary infection in feline immunodeficiency
    virus-inoculated cats. J AIDS 1993;6:127-34. 
    Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba
    GJ. P re- and postexposure chemoprophylaxis: evidence that
    3'-azido-3-dideoxythymidine inhibits feline leukemia virus
 disease
    by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents and
    Chemother 1992;36:2715-21. 
    Rausch DM, Heyes MP, Murray EA, Eiden LE. Zidovudine treatment
    prolongs survival and decreases virus load in the central
 nervous
    system of rhesus macaques infected perinatally with simian
    immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1995;172:59-69. 
    Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin JN, Pocidalo JJ. Factors
    influencing zidovudine efficacy when administered at early
 stages
    of Friend virus infection in mice. Antiviral Res
 1991;16:163-71. 
    Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral
    infection: success is determined by virus inoculum and
 strength
    and cellular immunity. DNA & Cell Biol 1994;13:59-66. 
    Ruprecht RM, Mullaney S, Bernard LD, Gama Sosa MA, Hom RC,
    Finberg RW. Vaccination with a live retrovirus: the nature of
 the
    protective immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
 1990;87:5558-62. 
    Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Nusinoff Lehrman S, de
    Noronha F. 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine in feline leukemia
    virus-infected cats: a model for therapy and prophylaxis of
 AIDS.
    Cancer Res 1987;47:3190-4. 
    Ruprecht RM, Chou, T-C, Chipty F, et al. Interferon- and
    3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine are highly synergistic in mice and
    prevent viremia after acute retrovirus exposure. J AIDS
    1990;3:591-600. 
    Van Rompay KKA, Marthas ML, Ramos RA, et al. Simian
    immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection of infant rhesus
 macaques
    as a model to test antiretroviral drug prophylaxis and
 therapy:
    oral 3-azido-3'-deoxythymidine prevents SIV infection.
 Antimicrob
    Agents and Chemother 1992;36:2381-6. 
    Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure
    chemoprophylaxis with ZDV or ZDV combined with
 interferon-alpha:
    failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys with a high dose of
 SIV.
    J AIDS 1991;4:1093-7. 
    McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA,
    Schinazi RF. Nonhuman primate models for evaluation of AIDS
    therapy. In: AIDS: anti-HIV agents, therapies and vaccines.
 Ann N
    Y Acad Sci 1990;100;616:287-98. 
    Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV
    infection in macaques by
 (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)adenine.
    Science 1995;270:1197-9. 
    Bottiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of
    simian immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in
    cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and postexposure administration of
    BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157-62. 
    Niu MT, Stein DS, Schnittman SM. Primary human
    immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection: review of
 pathogenesis
    and early treatment intervention in humans and animal
 retrovirus
    infections. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1490-501. 
    Lundgren B, Bttiger D, Ljungdahl-Sthle E, et al. Antiviral
    effects of 3'-fluorothymidine and 3'-azidothymidine in
 cynomolgus
    monkeys infected with simian immunodeficiency virus. J AIDS
    1991;4:489-98. 
    Bottiger D, Putkonen P, Oberg B. Prevention of HIV-2 and SIV
    infections in cynomolgus macaques by prophylactic treatment
 with
    3'-fluorothymidine. AIDS Res Human Retroviruses 1992;8:1235-8.
 
    Bottiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV
    on the acute infection in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect
 of
    treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine {Abstract no. 81}. Symposium
 on
    Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS, 1991. 
    LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind,
    placebo-controlled study of the safety and efficacy of
 Retrovir
    (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent in health care
    workers (HCW) exposed to HIV {Abstract 489}. In: Program and
    abstracts, 30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial
 Agents
    and Chemotherapy. Washington, DC: American Society for
    Microbiology, 1990:167. 
    Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis.
    Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52-5. 
    Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A.
    HIV seroconversion after a work place accident and treated
 with
    zidovudine {Abstract Pub.C.1141} In: Program and abstracts of
 the
    XI International Conference on AIDS. Vancouver, British
 Columbia,
    Canada, June 1996:460. 
    Lot F, Abiteboul D. Health-care workers infected with HIV in
    France: as of June 30, 1995. Bulletin Epidemiologique
    Hebdomadiaire 1995;44:193-4. 
    Mayers DL. Prevalence and incidence of resistance to
    zidovudine and other antiretroviral drugs. Am J Med
 1997;102(suppl
    5B):70-5. 
    Coombs RW, Shapiro DE, Eastman PS, et al. Maternal viral
    genotypic zidovudine (ZDV) resistance and infrequent failure
 of
    ZDV therapy to prevent perinatal transmission {Abstract 17}.
 In:
    Program and abstracts of the Infectious Disease Society of
 America
    35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Disease
 Society of
    America, 1997:74. 
    Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human
    immunodeficiency virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76-80. 
    Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C,
    Costes O. Effects of a combination of zidovudine, didanosine,
 and
    lamivudine on primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1
    infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051-5. 
    CDC. Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in
    HIV-infected adults and adolescents. MMWR 1997;46(no.
 RR-5):43-82. 
    Katlama C, Ingrand D, Loveday C, et al. Safety and efficacy of
    lamivudine-zidovudine combination therapy in antiretroviral
 naive
    patients: a randomized controlled comparison with zidovudine
    monotherapy. JAMA 1996;276:118-25. 
    Larder BA. Viral resistance and the selection of
    antiretroviral combinations. J AIDS 1995;10(suppl 1):S28-S33. 
    Anonymous. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on
    Drugs and Therapeutics 1996;38:35-7. 
    Grob PM, Cao Y, Muchmore E, et al. Prophylaxis against HIV-1
    infection in chimpanzees by nevirapine, a nonnucleoside
 inhibitor
    of reverse transcriptase. Nature Medicine 1997;3:665-70. 
    Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral
    agents. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65-7. 
    Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase
    blood glucose in HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997:27. 
    Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia
    associated with protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients
    {Abstract LB-8}. In: Abstracts of the 37th Interscience
 Conference
    on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Washington, DC:
 American
    Society for Microbiology, 1997. 
    Dube MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
    inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia {Letter}. Lancet
    1997;350:713-4. 
    Tokars JI, Marcus R, Culver DH, et al. Surveillance of HIV
    infection and zidovudine use among health care workers after
    occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood. Ann Intern Med
    1993;118:913-9. 
    Forseter G, Joline C, Wormser GP. Tolerability, safety, and
    acceptability of zidovudine prophylaxis in health care
 workers.
    Arch Intern Med 1994;154:2745-9. 
    Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash
    associated with zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis
    {Letter}. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855. 
    Imrie A, Beveridge A, Genn W, Vizzard J, Cooper DA, the Sydney
    Primary HIV Infection Study Group. Transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus type 1 resistant to nevirapine and
    zidovudine. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1502-6. 
    Veenstra J, Schuurman R, Cornelissen M, et al. Transmission of
    zidovudine-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1
 variants
    following deliberate injection of blood from a patient with
 AIDS:
    characteristics and natural history of the virus. Clin Infect
 Dis
    1995;21:556-60. 
    Erice A, Mayers DL, Strike DG, et al. Brief report: primary
    infection with zidovudine-resistant human immunodeficiency
 virus
    type 1. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1163-5. 
    Fitzgibbon JE, Gaur S, Frenkel LD, et al. Transmission from
    one child to another of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
 with
    a zidovudine-resistance mutation. N Engl J Med
 1993;329:1835-41. 
    Frenkel LM, Wagner LE, Demeter LM, et al. Effects of
    zidovudine use during pregnancy on resistance and vertical
    transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Clin
 Infect
    Dis 1995;20:1321-6. 
    CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for the
    use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant women infected with
 HIV-1
    for maternal health and for reducing perinatal HIV-1
 transmission
    in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-2). 
    O'Sullivan MJ, Boyer PJJ, Scott GB, et al. The
    pharmacokinetics and safety of zidovudine in the third
 trimester
    of pregnancy for women infected with human immunodeficiency
 virus
    and their infants: Phase I Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
    Clinical Trials Group Study (protocol 082). Am J Obstet
 Gynecol
    1993;168:1510-6. 
    CDC. Birth outcomes following zidovudine therapy in pregnant
    women. MMWR 1994;43: 409,415-6. 
    White A, Eldridge R, Andrews E, the Antiretroviral Pregnancy
    Registry Advisory Committee. Birth outcomes following
 zidovudine
    exposure in pregnant women: the Antiretroviral Pregnancy
 Registry.
    Acta Paediatr Suppl 1997;421:86-8. 
    Culnane M, Fowler MG, Lee S, et al. Evaluation for late
    effects of in utero (IU) ZDV exposure among uninfected infants
    born to HIV+ women enrolled in ACTG 076 and 219 {Abstract
 485}.
    Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:445. 
    Anonymous. Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry for didanosine
    (VIDEX , ddI), lamivudine (EPIVIRTM, 3tc), saquinavir
 (INVIRASE ,
    SAQ), stavudine (ZERIT , d4T), zalcitabine (HIVID , ddC),
    zidovudine (RETROVIR , ZDV), interim report, 1 January 1989
    through 31 December 1996. Research Triangle Park, NC: Bristol
    Myers Squibb Co., Glaxo Wellcome, Hoffman-LaRoche, and Merck
 Inc.,
    1997. 
    Johnson MA, Goodwin C, Yuen GJ, et al. The pharmacokinetics of
    3TC administered to HIV-1 infected women (pre-partum, during
    labour and post-partum) and their offspring {Abstract
 Tu.C.445}.
    In: Proceedings from the XI International Conference on AIDS,
    Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; July 7-12, 1996; vol
 I:249-50. 
    Moodley J, Moodley D, Pillay K, et al. Antiviral effect of
    lamivudine alone and in combination with zidovudine in
    HIV-infected pregnant women {Abstract 607}. In: Abstracts of
 the
    4th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
    Washington D.C.: January 22-26, 1997:176. 
    Ayers KM, Clive D, Tucker WE Jr., Hajian G, de Miranda P.
    Nonclinical toxicology studies with zidovudine: genetic
 toxicity
    tests and carcinogenicity bioassays in mice and rats.
 Fundamental
    Appl Toxicol 1996;32:148-58. 
    Ayers KM, Torrey CE, Reynolds DJ. A transplacental
    carcinogenicity bioassay in CD-1 mice with zidovudine.
 Fundamental
    Appl Toxicol 1997;38:195-8. 
    Olivero OA, Anderson LM, Diwan BA, et al. AZT is a genomic
    transplacental carcinogen in animal models. J AIDS 1997;14:A29
    (Abstract 52). 
    National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
    National Institutes of Health. Summary of the meeting of a
 panel
    to review studies of transplacental toxicity of AZT.
 Washington,
    DC: National Institutes of Health, 1997. 
    CDC. Immunization of health-care workers -- recommendations of
    the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and
 the
    Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
 (HICPAC).
    MMWR 1997;46(no. RR-18):21-2. 
    CDC. Recommendations for follow-up of health-care workers
    after occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus. MMWR
    1997;46:603-6. 
    Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of
    human immunodeficiency virus through human bites. J AIDS
    1993;6:402-6. 
    Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomai J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of
    HIV-1 by human bite {Letter}. Lancet 1996;347:1762. 
    Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational
    exposures to bloodborne pathogens: hepatitis B virus,
 hepatitis C
    virus, and human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Infect Dis
    1992;14:1179-85. 
    Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposure of
    health care workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus
 (HIV):
    stress reactions and counseling interventions. Social Work in
    Health Care 1995;21(3):61-80. 
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients
 during
    exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(no. RR-8). 
This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC,
the Food and Drug Administration, the Health Resources and
Services Administration, and the National Institutes of Health. 
** This interagency working group comprised representatives of
CDC, FDA, and the National Institutes of Health. Information
included in these recommendations may not represent FDA approval
or approved labeling for the particular product or indications in
question. Specifically the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be
synonymous with the FDA-defined legal standards for product
approval. 
*** Although exposure to these body substances generally is not
considered a risk for occupational HIV transmission, this does not
negate the importance of handwashing and appropriate glove use
when contacting these body substances. Handwashing and appropriate
glove use are part of standard precautions for infection control
to prevent transmission of nosocomial and community-acquired
pathogens and are required for compliance with the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration bloodborne pathogen standard
(14,15). In addition, postexposure evaluation for hepatitis B (and
possibly hepatitis C) should be provided if contact with saliva
includes a possible portal of entry (i.e., nonintact skin, mucous
membrane, or percutaneous injury). Table_1
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 1. Basic and expanded postexposure prophylaxis regimens
====================================================
=========================
Regimen  category   Application                   Drug regimen
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Basic               Occupational HIV exposures    4 weeks (28 days) of both
                    for which there is a          zidovudine 600 mg every
                    recognized transmission       day in divided doses (i.e.
                    risk (Figure 1).              300 mg twice a day, 200 mg
                                                  three times a day, or 100
                                                  mg every 4 hours) and
                                                  lamivudine 150 mg twice a
                                                  day.
Expanded            Occupational HIV exposures    Basic regimen plus either
                    that pose an increased risk   indinavir 800 mg every 8
                    for transmission (e.g.        hours or nelfinavir 750 mg
                    larger volume of blood        three times a day.*
                    and/or higher virus titer
                    in blood) (Figure 1).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Idinavir should be taken on an empty stomach (i.e. without food or
  with a light meal) and with increased fluid consumption (i.e. drinking
  six 8oz glasses of water throughout the day); nelfinavir should be taken
  with meals.
====================================================
=========================
Return to top.Table_2
Note:
 To  print  large  tables  and  graphs  users  may  have  to  change  their  printer  settings  to
landscape and use a small font size.
TABLE 2. HIV postexposure prophylaxis resources and registries
====================================================
=========================
Resource or registry            Contact Information
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Clinicians'            Telephone: (888) 448-4911
Postexposure Hotline            Telephone: (888) 737-4448
                                           (888) PEP4HIV
                                Write:     1410 Commonwealth Drive
                                           Suite 215
                                           Wilmington, NC 28405
Antiretroviral Pregnancy        Telephone: (800)258-4263
Registry                        Fax:       (800)800-1052
                                Write:     1410 Commonwealth Drive
                                           Suite 215
                                           Wilmington, NC 28405
Food and Drug Administration    Telephone: (800)332-1088
(for reporting unusual or
severe toxicity to anti-
retroviral agents)
CDC (for reporting HIV          Telephone: (404)639-6425
seroconversions in health-
care workers who received
PEP)
====================================================
=========================
Return to top.Figure_1Return to top.
Figure_1CReturn to top.
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.Page
converted: 10/05/98
 
    CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of
    occupational exposure to human immunodeficiency virus,
 including
    considerations regarding zidovudine postexposure use. MMWR
    1990;39(no. RR-1).  
    CDC. Case-control study of HIV seroconversion in health-care
    workers after percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood --
 France,
    United Kingdom, and United States, January 1988-August 1994.
 MMWR
    1995;44:929-33.  
    Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of
    maternal-infant transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
 type
    1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1173-80.  
    Black RJ. Animal studies of prophylaxis. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B):39-44.  
    Bell DM, Gerberding JL, eds. Human immunodeficiency virus
 (HIV)
    postexposure management of healthcare workers. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B).  
    CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations
    for chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR
    1996;45:468-72.  
    Ippolito G, Puro V, the Italian Registry of Antiretroviral
    Prophylaxis. Zidovudine toxicity in uninfected healthcare
 workers.
    Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):58-62.  
    Wang SA, the HIV PEP Registry Group. Human immunodeficiency
    virus (HIV) postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) following
 occupational
    HIV exposure: findings from the HIV PEP registry {Abstract
 482}.
    In: Program and abstracts of the Infectious Diseases Society
 of
    America 35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious
 Diseases
    Society of America, 1997:161.  
    Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience
    with post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) with combination
    antiretrovirals for occupational exposure (OE) to HIV
 {Abstract
    480}. In: Program and abstracts of the Infectious Diseases
 Society
    of America 35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious
    Diseases Society of America, 1997:161.  
    Beekmann R, Fahrner R, Nelson L, Henderson DK, Gerberding JL.
    Combination post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP): a prospective
 study
    of HIV-exposed health care workers (HCW) {Abstract 481}. In:
    Program and abstracts of the Infectious Diseases Society of
    America 35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious
 Diseases
    Society of America, 1997:161.  
    CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in
    health-care settings. MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).  
    CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of
    transmission of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B
 virus,
    and other bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR
    1988;37:377-82,387-8.  
    CDC. Transmission of HIV possibly associated with exposure of
    mucous membrane to contaminated blood. MMWR 1997;46:620-3.  
    Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory
    Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80.  
    Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Department of
    Labor. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030, occupational exposure to
 bloodborne
    pathogens; final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64004-182.  
    Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus
    infection in healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B):9-15.  
    Marcus R, Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency
    virus infection in health care workers. In: DeVita VT Jr,
 Hellman
    S, Rosenberg SA, eds. AIDS: biology, diagnosis, treatment and
    prevention. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven
 Publishers,
    1997:645-54.  
    Cardo DM, Bell DM. Postexposure management. In: DeVita VT Jr,
    Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds. AIDS: biology, diagnosis,
 treatment
    and prevention. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven
    Publishers, 1997:701-8.  
    Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, the Italian Study Group on
    Occupational Risk of HIV Infection. The risk of occupational
 human
    immunodeficiency virus infection in health care workers. Arch
    Intern Med 1993;153:1451-8.  
    CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in
    health-care workers exposed to blood of infected patients.
 MMWR
    1987;36:285-9.  
    Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of
    nonparenteral occupational exposures to blood and body fluids
    before and after universal precautions training. Am J Med
    1991;90:145-53.  
    CDC. HIV/AIDS surveillance report 1997;9:15.  
    Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control
    study of HIV seroconversion in health care workers after
    percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485-90.  
    Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in
    reducing blood volumes transferred during simulated
 needlestick
    injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589-92.  
    Cao Y, Krogstad P, Korber BT, et al. Maternal HIV-1 viral load
    and vertical transmission of infection: the Ariel Project for
 the
    Prevention of HIV transmission from mother to infant. Nature
 Med
    1997;3:549-52.  
    Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral
    load, zidovudine treatment, and the risk of transmission of
 human
    immunodeficiency virus type 1 from mother to infant. N Engl J
 Med
    1996;335:1621-9.  
    Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM.
    Immune response to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in
    healthcare workers occupationally exposed to HIV-contaminated
    blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21-4.  
    Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune
    response to human immuno-deficiency virus (HIV) type 1 in
    seronegative homosexual men with recent sexual exposure to
 HIV-1.
    J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012-9.  
    Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response
    towards HIV in infected individuals with and without
 zidovudine
    therapy, and in HIV-exposed sexual partners. AIDS 1989;3:63-9.
  
    Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic
    T lymphocyte responses in the peripheral blood of children
 born to
    human  immunodeficiency virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J
 Immunol
    1992;22:2211-7.  
    Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from
    some long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of
 HIV-infected
    individuals proliferate in response to HIV antigens. AIDS Res
 Hum
    Retroviruses 1992;8:1355-9.  
    Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler
    E. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T
    lymphocytes in noninfected heterosexual contacts of
 HIV-infected
    patients. J Clin Invest 1994;93:1293-7.  
    Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific
    cytotoxic T-cells in HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women.
    Nature Medicine 1995;1:59-64.  
    Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody
    seroconversion following human immunodeficiency virus
 exposure. Am
    J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):117-24.  
    Saag MS. Clinical spectrum of human immunodeficiency virus
    diseases. In: DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, eds.
 AIDS:
    biology, diagnosis, treatment and prevention. 4th ed.
    Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997:203-13.  
    Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure
    and seroconversion in healthcare workers with occupationally
    acquired infection with human immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med
    1997;102(suppl 5B):115-6.  
    Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous
    transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C
 virus
    from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J Med 1997;336:919-22.  
    Blauvelt A. The role of skin dendritic cells in the initiation
    of human immunodeficiency virus infection. Am J Med
 1997;102(suppl
    5B):16-20.  
    Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of
    infection and route of viral dissemination after an
 intravaginal
    inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus into rhesus
 macaques.
    J Exp Med 1996;183:215-25.  
    Saag MS. Candidate antiretroviral agents for use in
    postexposure prophylaxis. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):25-31.  
    Van Rompay KKA, Otsyula MG, Marthas ML, Miller CJ, McChesney
    MB, Pedersen NC. Immediate zidovudine treatment protects
 simian
    immunodeficiency virus-infected newborn macaques against rapid
    onset of AIDS. Antimicrob Agents and Chemother 1995;39:125-31.
  
    Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure
    prophylaxis with zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency
    virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice in a time-dependent
 manner.
    J Infect Dis 1991;163:625-7.  
    Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B,
    Baskin GB. Effects of initiation of 3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine
    (zidovudine) treatment at different times after infection of
    rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect
 Dis
    1993;168:825-35.  
    Hayes KA, Lafrado LJ, Erickson JG, Marr JM, Mathes LE.
    Prophylactic ZDV therapy prevents early viremia and lymphocyte
    decline but not primary infection in feline immunodeficiency
    virus-inoculated cats. J AIDS 1993;6:127-34.  
    Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba
    GJ. P re- and postexposure chemoprophylaxis: evidence that
    3'-azido-3-dideoxythymidine inhibits feline leukemia virus
 disease
    by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents and
    Chemother 1992;36:2715-21.  
    Rausch DM, Heyes MP, Murray EA, Eiden LE. Zidovudine treatment
    prolongs survival and decreases virus load in the central
 nervous
    system of rhesus macaques infected perinatally with simian
    immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1995;172:59-69.  
    Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin JN, Pocidalo JJ. Factors
    influencing zidovudine efficacy when administered at early
 stages
    of Friend virus infection in mice. Antiviral Res
 1991;16:163-71.  
    Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral
    infection: success is determined by virus inoculum and
 strength
    and cellular immunity. DNA & Cell Biol 1994;13:59-66.  
    Ruprecht RM, Mullaney S, Bernard LD, Gama Sosa MA, Hom RC,
    Finberg RW. Vaccination with a live retrovirus: the nature of
 the
    protective immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
 1990;87:5558-62.  
    Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Nusinoff Lehrman S, de
    Noronha F. 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine in feline leukemia
    virus-infected cats: a model for therapy and prophylaxis of
 AIDS.
    Cancer Res 1987;47:3190-4.  
    Ruprecht RM, Chou, T-C, Chipty F, et al. Interferon- and
    3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine are highly synergistic in mice and
    prevent viremia after acute retrovirus exposure. J AIDS
    1990;3:591-600.  
    Van Rompay KKA, Marthas ML, Ramos RA, et al. Simian
    immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection of infant rhesus
 macaques
    as a model to test antiretroviral drug prophylaxis and
 therapy:
    oral 3-azido-3'-deoxythymidine prevents SIV infection.
 Antimicrob
    Agents and Chemother 1992;36:2381-6.  
    Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure
    chemoprophylaxis with ZDV or ZDV combined with
 interferon-alpha:
    failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys with a high dose of
 SIV.
    J AIDS 1991;4:1093-7.  
    McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA,
    Schinazi RF. Nonhuman primate models for evaluation of AIDS
    therapy. In: AIDS: anti-HIV agents, therapies and vaccines.
 Ann N
    Y Acad Sci 1990;100;616:287-98.  
    Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV
    infection in macaques by
 (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)adenine.
    Science 1995;270:1197-9.  
    Bottiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of
    simian immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in
    cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and postexposure administration of
    BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157-62.  
    Niu MT, Stein DS, Schnittman SM. Primary human
    immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection: review of
 pathogenesis
    and early treatment intervention in humans and animal
 retrovirus
    infections. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1490-501.  
    Lundgren B, Bttiger D, Ljungdahl-Sthle E, et al. Antiviral
    effects of 3'-fluorothymidine and 3'-azidothymidine in
 cynomolgus
    monkeys infected with simian immunodeficiency virus. J AIDS
    1991;4:489-98.  
    Bottiger D, Putkonen P, Oberg B. Prevention of HIV-2 and SIV
    infections in cynomolgus macaques by prophylactic treatment
 with
    3'-fluorothymidine. AIDS Res Human Retroviruses 1992;8:1235-8.
  
    Bottiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV
    on the acute infection in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect
 of
    treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine {Abstract no. 81}. Symposium
 on
    Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS, 1991.  
    LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind,
    placebo-controlled study of the safety and efficacy of
 Retrovir
    (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent in health care
    workers (HCW) exposed to HIV {Abstract 489}. In: Program and
    abstracts, 30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial
 Agents
    and Chemotherapy. Washington, DC: American Society for
    Microbiology, 1990:167.  
    Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis.
    Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52-5.  
    Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A.
    HIV seroconversion after a work place accident and treated
 with
    zidovudine {Abstract Pub.C.1141} In: Program and abstracts of
 the
    XI International Conference on AIDS. Vancouver, British
 Columbia,
    Canada, June 1996:460.  
    Lot F, Abiteboul D. Health-care workers infected with HIV in
    France: as of June 30, 1995. Bulletin Epidemiologique
    Hebdomadiaire 1995;44:193-4.  
    Mayers DL. Prevalence and incidence of resistance to
    zidovudine and other antiretroviral drugs. Am J Med
 1997;102(suppl
    5B):70-5.  
    Coombs RW, Shapiro DE, Eastman PS, et al. Maternal viral
    genotypic zidovudine (ZDV) resistance and infrequent failure
 of
    ZDV therapy to prevent perinatal transmission {Abstract 17}.
 In:
    Program and abstracts of the Infectious Disease Society of
 America
    35th annual meeting. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Disease
 Society of
    America, 1997:74.  
    Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human
    immunodeficiency virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76-80.  
    Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C,
    Costes O. Effects of a combination of zidovudine, didanosine,
 and
    lamivudine on primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1
    infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051-5.  
    CDC. Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in
    HIV-infected adults and adolescents. MMWR 1997;46(no.
 RR-5):43-82.  
    Katlama C, Ingrand D, Loveday C, et al. Safety and efficacy of
    lamivudine-zidovudine combination therapy in antiretroviral
 naive
    patients: a randomized controlled comparison with zidovudine
    monotherapy. JAMA 1996;276:118-25.  
    Larder BA. Viral resistance and the selection of
    antiretroviral combinations. J AIDS 1995;10(suppl 1):S28-S33.  
    Anonymous. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on
    Drugs and Therapeutics 1996;38:35-7.  
    Grob PM, Cao Y, Muchmore E, et al. Prophylaxis against HIV-1
    infection in chimpanzees by nevirapine, a nonnucleoside
 inhibitor
    of reverse transcriptase. Nature Medicine 1997;3:665-70.  
    Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral
    agents. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65-7.  
    Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase
    blood glucose in HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997:27.  
    Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia
    associated with protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients
    {Abstract LB-8}. In: Abstracts of the 37th Interscience
 Conference
    on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Washington, DC:
 American
    Society for Microbiology, 1997.  
    Dube MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
    inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia {Letter}. Lancet
    1997;350:713-4.  
    Tokars JI, Marcus R, Culver DH, et al. Surveillance of HIV
    infection and zidovudine use among health care workers after
    occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood. Ann Intern Med
    1993;118:913-9.  
    Forseter G, Joline C, Wormser GP. Tolerability, safety, and
    acceptability of zidovudine prophylaxis in health care
 workers.
    Arch Intern Med 1994;154:2745-9.  
    Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash
    associated with zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis
    {Letter}. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.  
    Imrie A, Beveridge A, Genn W, Vizzard J, Cooper DA, the Sydney
    Primary HIV Infection Study Group. Transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus type 1 resistant to nevirapine and
    zidovudine. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1502-6.  
    Veenstra J, Schuurman R, Cornelissen M, et al. Transmission of
    zidovudine-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1
 variants
    following deliberate injection of blood from a patient with
 AIDS:
    characteristics and natural history of the virus. Clin Infect
 Dis
    1995;21:556-60.  
    Erice A, Mayers DL, Strike DG, et al. Brief report: primary
    infection with zidovudine-resistant human immunodeficiency
 virus
    type 1. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1163-5.  
    Fitzgibbon JE, Gaur S, Frenkel LD, et al. Transmission from
    one child to another of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
 with
    a zidovudine-resistance mutation. N Engl J Med
 1993;329:1835-41.  
    Frenkel LM, Wagner LE, Demeter LM, et al. Effects of
    zidovudine use during pregnancy on resistance and vertical
    transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Clin
 Infect
    Dis 1995;20:1321-6.  
    CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for the
    use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant women infected with
 HIV-1
    for maternal health and for reducing perinatal HIV-1
 transmission
    in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-2).  
    O'Sullivan MJ, Boyer PJJ, Scott GB, et al. The
    pharmacokinetics and safety of zidovudine in the third
 trimester
    of pregnancy for women infected with human immunodeficiency
 virus
    and their infants: Phase I Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
    Clinical Trials Group Study (protocol 082). Am J Obstet
 Gynecol
    1993;168:1510-6.  
    CDC. Birth outcomes following zidovudine therapy in pregnant
    women. MMWR 1994;43: 409,415-6.  
    White A, Eldridge R, Andrews E, the Antiretroviral Pregnancy
    Registry Advisory Committee. Birth outcomes following
 zidovudine
    exposure in pregnant women: the Antiretroviral Pregnancy
 Registry.
    Acta Paediatr Suppl 1997;421:86-8.  
    Culnane M, Fowler MG, Lee S, et al. Evaluation for late
    effects of in utero (IU) ZDV exposure among uninfected infants
    born to HIV+ women enrolled in ACTG 076 and 219 {Abstract
 485}.
    Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:445.  
    Anonymous. Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry for didanosine
    (VIDEX , ddI), lamivudine (EPIVIRTM, 3tc), saquinavir
 (INVIRASE ,
    SAQ), stavudine (ZERIT , d4T), zalcitabine (HIVID , ddC),
    zidovudine (RETROVIR , ZDV), interim report, 1 January 1989
    through 31 December 1996. Research Triangle Park, NC: Bristol
    Myers Squibb Co., Glaxo Wellcome, Hoffman-LaRoche, and Merck
 Inc.,
    1997.  
    Johnson MA, Goodwin C, Yuen GJ, et al. The pharmacokinetics of
    3TC administered to HIV-1 infected women (pre-partum, during
    labour and post-partum) and their offspring {Abstract
 Tu.C.445}.
    In: Proceedings from the XI International Conference on AIDS,
    Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; July 7-12, 1996; vol
 I:249-50.  
    Moodley J, Moodley D, Pillay K, et al. Antiviral effect of
    lamivudine alone and in combination with zidovudine in
    HIV-infected pregnant women {Abstract 607}. In: Abstracts of
 the
    4th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
    Washington D.C.: January 22-26, 1997:176.  
    Ayers KM, Clive D, Tucker WE Jr., Hajian G, de Miranda P.
    Nonclinical toxicology studies with zidovudine: genetic
 toxicity
    tests and carcinogenicity bioassays in mice and rats.
 Fundamental
    Appl Toxicol 1996;32:148-58.  
    Ayers KM, Torrey CE, Reynolds DJ. A transplacental
    carcinogenicity bioassay in CD-1 mice with zidovudine.
 Fundamental
    Appl Toxicol 1997;38:195-8.  
    Olivero OA, Anderson LM, Diwan BA, et al. AZT is a genomic
    transplacental carcinogen in animal models. J AIDS 1997;14:A29
    (Abstract 52).  
    National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
    National Institutes of Health. Summary of the meeting of a
 panel
    to review studies of transplacental toxicity of AZT.
 Washington,
    DC: National Institutes of Health, 1997.  
    CDC. Immunization of health-care workers -- recommendations of
    the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and
 the
    Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
 (HICPAC).
    MMWR 1997;46(no. RR-18):21-2.  
    CDC. Recommendations for follow-up of health-care workers
    after occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus. MMWR
    1997;46:603-6.  
    Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of
    human immunodeficiency virus through human bites. J AIDS
    1993;6:402-6.  
    Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomai J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of
    HIV-1 by human bite {Letter}. Lancet 1996;347:1762.  
    Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational
    exposures to bloodborne pathogens: hepatitis B virus,
 hepatitis C
    virus, and human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Infect Dis
    1992;14:1179-85.  
    Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposure of
    health care workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus
 (HIV):
    stress reactions and counseling interventions. Social Work in
    Health Care 1995;21(3):61-80.  
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients
 during
    exposure-prone  invasive  procedures.  MMWR  1991;40(no.  RR-8).   This  interagency
working group comprised representatives of CDC,
the Food and Drug Administration, the Health Resources and
Services  Administration,  and  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.   **  This  interagency
working group comprised representatives of
CDC, FDA, and the National Institutes of Health. Information
included in these recommendations may not represent FDA approval
or approved labeling for the particular product or indications in
question. Specifically the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be
synonymous with the FDA-defined legal standards for product
approval.  *** Although exposure to these body substances generally is not
considered a risk for occupational HIV transmission, this does not
negate the importance of handwashing and appropriate glove use
when contacting these body substances. Handwashing and appropriate
glove use are part of standard precautions for infection control
to prevent transmission of nosocomial and community-acquired
pathogens and are required for compliance with the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration bloodborne pathogen standard
(14,15). In addition, postexposure evaluation for hepatitis B (and
possibly hepatitis C) should be provided if contact with saliva
includes a possible portal of entry (i.e., nonintact skin, mucous
membrane, or percutaneous injury).  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 10/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00052722.htm
