A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Scabies can spread easily under crowded
conditions  where  close  body  and  skin  contact  is  frequent.  Places  where  scabies
outbreaks more commonly occur include: Local and/or state health departments may
be able to provide guidelines for preventing and controlling scabies outbreaks. Below
are suggestions for preventing, detecting, and responding to single or multiple cases of
non-crusted scabies in an institution.  Early detection, treatment, and implementation
of  appropriate  isolation  and  infection  control  practices  are  essential  in  preventing
scabies  outbreaks.  Institutions  should  maintain  a  high  index  of  suspicion  that
undiagnosed skin rashes and conditions may be scabies, even if characteristic signs or
symptoms  of  scabies  are  absent  (e.g.  no  itching).  New  patients/residents  and
employees  should  be  screened  carefully  and  evaluated  for  any  skin  conditions  that
could be compatible with scabies. The onset of scabies in a staff person who has had
scabies before can be an early warning sign of undetected scabies in a patient/resident.
When there is concern for scabies in a person, skin scrapings should be obtained and
examined carefully by a person who is trained and experienced in identifying scabies
mites.  Appropriate  isolation  and  infection  control  practices  (e.g.,  gloves,  gowns,
avoidance of direct skin-to-skin contact, etc.) should be used when providing hands-on
care  to  patients/residents  who  might  have  scabies.  Epidemiologic  and  clinical
information  about  patients/residents  with  confirmed  and  suspected  scabies  should  be
collected and used for systematic review in order to facilitate early identification of and
response  to  potential  outbreaks.  Establish  surveillance.  Ensure  that  adequate
diagnostic services are available. Establish appropriate procedures for infection control
and  treatment.  1.  levels  of  risk  for  patients/residents  and  staff;   2.  extent  of  the
outbreak  (e.g.,  confined  or  widespread  in  the  facility);  and   3.  temporal  relationship
among cases. Establish appropriate procedures for environmental disinfection. Scabies
is  an  infestation  of  the  skin  by  a  human  itch  mite.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/scabies/php/public-health-strategy/index.html
