Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Approaching  the  adoption  of  healthy  food  service  guidelines
with  an  equity  lens  can  help  address  disparities  among  different  populations.  To
promote  health  equity  consider  including  the  following  strategies  in  any  food  service
guideline policy: An organization’s policies and practices can make healthy behaviors
easier  for  individuals.  Internal  policies  can  reinforce  a  culture  of  health  and  support
healthy  eating  and  physical  activity.  These  policies  may  have  the  added  benefit  of
increasing  worker  productivity,  improving  employee  morale,  and  generating  cost
savings  associated  with  better  employee  health  outcomes.  Embedding  your  nutrition
standards and behavioral design requirements into organizational policies can increase
the availability and selection of healthier food and beverage options. For example, you
can  work  with  large  employers  to  amend  a  contractual  agreement  with  its  onsite
vendor and require healthier menu options be available, placed at eye level, promoted
with innovative marketing techniques, and priced competitively. These factors can play
an important role in sustaining healthier menu offerings. You can include food service
guidelines  standards  and  behavioral  design  strategies  in  a  variety  of  different
organizational  policies.  For  example:  In  addition,  some  communities  and  states  have
adopted  local  ordinances,  state  laws,  and  executive  orders  requiring  government
worksites  to  follow  healthier  food  service  guidelines.  Approaching  the  adoption  of
healthy food service guidelines with an equity lens can help address disparities among
different  populations.  To  promote  health  equity  consider  including  the  following
strategies  in  any  food  service  guideline  policy:  CDC’s  Food  Service  Guidelines  (FSG)
Policy  Wheel  defines  seven  core  elements  of  a  comprehensive  FSG  policy.  The  term
“FSG policy” can include a variety of formal written agreements that seek to prioritize
good  nutrition  and  health  within  any  food  service  operation.  Click  on  any  plus  sign
below  to  see  sample  language  for  vendor  contracts,  purchasing  agreements,  or
organizational policies. The sample language is for illustrative purposes only and is just
one  example  of  what  a  strong  FSG  policy  may  include.   The  nutrition  standards  the
vendor  is  expected  to  meet  should  be  clearly  stated  in  the  food  service  guidelines
policy or written agreement. Standards should be based on the most current nutrition
science and operationalized for use in a food service environment. This allows a vendor
to  properly  plan,  purchase,  and  prepare  heathier  menu  offerings  in  a  timely  and
cost-effective manner. Sample language that incorporates nutrition standards for food
service guidelines is below but does not include all of the standards in the Food Service
Guidelines for Federal Facilities [PDF-3.34MB].  See Table 1 and Table 3 for the full list
of standards for prepared foods and beverages, respectively. When providing prepared
foods, the vendor must comply with the following food and nutrition standards:   When
providing packaged foods, the vendor must comply with the following food and nutrition
standards: When providing beverages, the vendor must comply with the following food
and nutrition standards: Return to FSG Policy Framework These promotional strategies
use  pricing,  placement,  and  marketing  strategies  to  increase  the  purchase  and
consumption  of  healthier  menu  offerings.  Using  any  combination  of  these  standards
may  help  make  the  vendor  more  successful  in  launching  a  healthier  food  service
operation  at  your  organization  and  may  increase  chances  of  remaining  financially
sustainable over time. Sample language that incorporates behavioral design standards
for  food  service  guideline  is  below.  This  is  for  illustrative  purposes  only.  The  vendor
must implement one or more of the following standards to increase the selection and
sale  of  healthier  menu  offerings:  Return  to  FSG  Policy  Framework  Including  facility
efficiency standards in any food service guidelines policy will reduce a building’s overall
environmental  impact  by  improving  energy  efficiency,  conserving  natural  resources,
and observing waste diversion best practices at all onsite food service venues. These
standards  can  also  support  the  surrounding  community  through  local  sourcing  of
produce and products from regional growers and food manufacturers. Sample language
that  incorporates  facility  efficiency  standards  for  food  service  guidelines  is  below  but
does not include all of the standards in the Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities
[PDF-3.34MB].  See Table 4 for the full list of facility efficiency standards. The vendor
must comply with the following purchasing standards: The vendor must comply with the
following food service management and consumer engagement standards: The vendor
must  comply  with  the  following  waste  diversion  standards:  Return  to  FSG  Policy
Framework  Including  specific  food  safety  standards  in  your  food  service  guidelines
policy will ensure all onsite food vendors follow applicable state, local, and tribal food
safety  regulations.  In  addition,  these  standards  also  name  managerial  practices,
employee behaviors, and food preparation practices that go beyond what is described
in the Food and Drug Administration’s Food Code and can reduce the risk of foodborne
illnesses and outbreaks that are sometimes common in food service operations. Sample
language  that  incorporates  food  safety  standards  for  food  service  guideline  is  below.
This  is  for  illustrative  purposes  only.  The  vendor  must  follow  the  guidance  and
standards in the most recently published Food Code (and all supplements) relating to
food  safety  procedures  and  practices.  The  vendor  must  have  at  least  one
management/supervisory  employee  (not  necessarily  the  Person  in  Charge)  who  is  a
Certified Food Protection Manager present during all hours of operation. The vendor is
always expected to follow the most current Food Code.  The vendor may also select to
implement one or more of the following standards to further reduce risk of foodborne
illness:  Return  to  FSG  Policy  Framework  A  successful  partnership  with  a  food  vendor
requires  a  collaborative  working  relationship  and  ongoing  monitoring  of  the
implementation  of  healthier  food  service  guidelines.  Including  compliance  checks  in
your  policy,  contract,  or  written  agreement  establishes  a  systematic  method  for
assessing  whether  the  contracted  vendor  is  meeting  agreed  upon  requirements.  A
schedule of routine compliance checks should be established with the vendor upfront.
You may also want to consider setting up periodic food environment audits to assess
the vendor’s adherence in real time. Routine compliance checks have the added benefit
of providing the vendor with an opportunity to identify any challenges or barriers they
are  experiencing  and  to  improve  implementation  through  mutually  agreed  upon
changes.  Sample  language  that  incorporates  compliance  standards  for  food  service
guidelines is below. This is for illustrative purposes only. The vendor must demonstrate
compliance  by:  Return  to  FSG  Policy  Framework  Naming  the  specific  data  or  metrics
you want the vendor to report is an important element to include in any healthier food
service policy, contract, or written agreement. Communicating reporting requirements
upfront  ensures  the  vendor  understands  what  metrics  will  be  used  to  assess
institutional changes over time. You also have the added benefit of using standardized
metrics  to  help  communicate  the  impact  of  your  healthier  food  service  initiative.
Although  vendor  reports  may  be  used  to  assess  compliance,  their  utility  is  much
broader  in  scope.  Vendor  reporting  generally  contains  information  about  overall
operations, number of trainings, new food service staff, gross sales and profit margins,
and  comparisons  between  sales  of  healthy  and  less  healthy  foods.  Beyond  just
monitoring  compliance,  vendor  reporting  can  provide  metrics  that  will  help  you
evaluate  and  communicate  the  overall  impact  (positive  or  negative)  of  your
organization’s food service guidelines initiative to institutional leadership, partners, and
champions.  Sample  language  that  includes  vendor  reporting  requirements  for  food
service  guidelines  is  below.  This  is  for  illustrative  purposes  only.  The  vendor  should
describe his or her company’s capacity to address the following: Return to FSG Policy
Framework In any policy it is important to clearly identify the individuals responsible for
carrying out the specific activities and objectives of the policy. This includes naming the
responsible parties who will play a significant role in the implementation or monitoring
and  evaluation  of  the  policy’s  impact.  Sample  language  that  includes  roles  and
responsibilities  standards  for  food  service  guidelines  is  below.  This  is  for  illustrative
purposes  only.  To  successfully  carry  out  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this  agreement,
the  following  persons  are  responsible  for  the  implementation  and  monitoring  of
stipulations defined by this policy: Return to FSG Policy Framework CDC’s food service
guidelines  policy,  Food  Service  Guidelines  in  CDC-owned  or  -operated  Dining  and
Vending  Facilities  [PDF-207KB],  helps  to  create  a  healthier  food  environment  at  CDC
and  supports  the  health  and  well-being  of  its  employees.  Two  publications  highlight
CDC’s state- and local-level surveillance of food service guidelines policies over time.
See the state-level food service guidelines policy publication the local-level publication.
To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email address.
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/food-service-guidelines/strategize-and-act/policies-and-contracts.html
