Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  The  following  questions  and  answers  provide  important
information  about  breastfeeding  in  a  chemical  emergency  incident  from  a  clinical
perspective. For general information about chemical emergencies, see CDC’s Chemical
Emergencies  website;  clinicians  may  find  more  information  at  the  HHS  website
on  Chemical  Hazards  Emergency  Medical  Management  (CHEMM).  If  a  person  who  is
breastfeeding is exposed to mustard gas or any nerve agents (GA, GB, GD and VX) and
develops  any  symptoms  consistent  with  exposure,  they  should  immediately  stop
breastfeeding  until  symptoms  have  resolved  and  they  are  cleared  by  a  physician  to
resume breastfeeding. While there is not enough information to suggest a safe level of
these  agents  in  breast  milk,  there  is  published  evidence  that  organophosphate
chemicals,  of  which  nerve  agents  are  structurally  related,  may  be  secreted  in  breast
milk. There is no direct published scientific literature on whether sulfur mustard can be
secreted in breast milk, but other similar vesicant agents, including nitrogen mustard
(in the form of the FDA approved medication mechlorethamine) and lewisite, have been
identified  as  potentially  hazardous  during  breastfeeding.  Situational-specific  factors,
such as the availability of other sources of nutrition for the infant, should be included in
that discussion. No. Breastfeeding may still be unsafe even after antidote treatment for
nerve agents, lewisite, and cyanide. If antidotes are given, breastfeeding should only be
restarted after being cleared by a physician. For nerve agents, the antidotes available,
including atropine, oximes (including pralidoxime or 2-PAM), and benzodiazepines, do
not  directly  neutralize  the  nerve  agent  chemical.  Atropine  and  benzodiazepines  treat
symptoms caused by nerve agent toxicity, but do not directly interact with or neutralize
the  nerve  agent.  Oximes  such  as  pralidoxime  help  regenerate  the  protein  enzyme
targeted  by  nerve  agents  (called  “cholinesterase”),  but  do  not  interact  with  nerve
agents that have not yet bound a cholinesterase molecule. An antidote is available for
lewisite:  Dimercaprol,  also  known  as  “British  Anti  Lewisite.”  Dimercaprol  is  a  type  of
chemical called a “chelator” that binds heavy metals to allow for their excretion from
the  body.  In  lewisite  poisoning,  dimercaprol  binds  the  arsenic  in  lewisite;  however,  if
arsenic is still present in the lactating mother’s body, it can be secreted into breastmilk
and could be harmful to the infant.  Two types of antidotes are available for cyanide
poisoning. The first is hydroxocobalamin, also known as “provitamin B12”, “B12a”, or
“Cyanokit”; it functions by combining with cyanide to form non-toxic cyanocobalamin
(Vitamin  B12).  The  manufacturer  of  Cyanokit  states  that  “breastfeeding  is  not
recommended during treatment with Cyanokit,” though there do not appear to be any
published cases related to breastfeeding after use of Cyanokit. A second line therapy,
no longer available in the United States, is referred to as the Lilly Cyanide Antidote Kit
and  contains  combinations  of  nitrites  (amyl  nitrite  or  sodium  nitrite)  and  sodium
thiosulfate. The nitrites help remove cyanide from the sites where it causes the most
toxicity,  while  thiosulfate  binds  cyanide  to  help  increase  excretion  as  thiocyanate  in
urine.  While  there  is  some  published  evidence  that  chronic  thiocyanate  excretion  in
breast milk may cause harm by reducing the amount of iodine available to the infant,
this  is  of  less  concern  with  short-term  thiosulfate  use  as  the  amount  and  duration  of
thiocyanate  generation  is  likely  to  be  limited.    Because  of  very  limited  data  on  the
quantitative secretion of chemical agents into breast milk, an exact time frame for how
long  breastfeeding  should  be  avoided  cannot  be  determined.  A  woman’s  decision  to
resume  breastfeeding  should  be  made  in  discussion  with  her  physician  after  she  has
recovered and been discharged from medical care. Situational-specific factors, such as
the  availability  of  other  sources  of  nutrition  for  the  infant,  should  be  included  in  that
discussion.  Vesicants, also known as “blister agents,” can cause severe skin and eye
burns, as well as destroy blood cells and bone marrow through direct damage to DNA.
There  are  several  different  vesicant  agents,  including  sulfur  mustard  (also  known  as
“mustard  gas”),  lewisite,  nitrogen  mustard,  and  phosgene  oxime.  While  there  are  no
direct  case  reports  describing  the  effects  of  vesicants  on  breastfeeding  mothers,  the
available  information  suggests  breastfeeding  should  be  avoided  by  mothers  who
develop  symptoms  after  vesicant  exposure.  A  woman’s  decision  to  resume
breastfeeding should be made in discussion with her physician after she has recovered
and been discharged from medical care. Nerve agents are a class of chemicals that can
temporarily  or  permanently  deactivate  important  proteins  in  the  human  nervous
system.  These  agents  are  called  “organophosphates”  to  describe  their  chemical
structure.  Military  nerve  agents  include  sarin  (GB),  tabun  (GA),  soman  (GD),  and  VX.
Closely  related  chemicals  that  are  less  toxic  to  humans  are  used  as  pesticides  in
farming;  these  include  malathion,  parathion,  chlorpyrifos,  and  many  others.
Breastfeeding  should  be  avoided  by  mothers  exposed  to  military  nerve  agents  or
organophosphate pesticides, even if they have received antidotes. A woman’s decision
to resume breastfeeding should be made in discussion with her physician after she has
recovered  and  been  discharged  from  medical  care.  Irritant  gasses  are  a  class  of
poisonous chemicals that can directly injure the airways and lungs when inhaled, and
also damage the eyes and exposed skin. Some of these substances include ammonia,
chlorine  gas,  phosgene,  and  many  other  chemicals  used  in  industrial  manufacturing.
The  severity  of  injury  depends  on  the  concentration  of  the  gas  in  the  air  and  the
duration  of  exposure.  Overall,  it  is  unclear  if  breastfeeding  by  mothers  exposed  to
irritant gasses is safe. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should
be  considered  along  with  any  potential  adverse  effects  on  the  breastfed  child  from
irritant gas exposure. A woman’s decision to resume breastfeeding should be made in
discussion  with  her  physician  after  she  has  recovered  and  been  discharged  from
medical  care.  Riot  control  agents,  also  known  as  “tear  gas”  or  “lacrimators,”  are  a
group  of  chemical  gasses  intended  for  use  to  disperse  crowds  or  temporarily
incapacitate individuals with a minimal risk of death or permanent injury. It is unknown
if any of the chemicals used as riot control agents could be absorbed into the body of a
lactating mother and then pass into breast milk. Mothers exposed to riot control agents
are advised to thoroughly decontaminate (remove clothes and wash their bodies well)
before breastfeeding or expressing milk/pumping. Expressing milk by hand or by pump
and discarding the breast milk is currently not thought to be necessary after exposure
to riot control agents. References: Blood agents, including hydrogen cyanide gas, are a
class  of  chemicals  that  can  cause  death  or  serious  injury  by  interrupting  the  body’s
ability  to  use  oxygen.  Mothers  who  require  medications  to  treat  cyanide  poisoning
should  avoid  breastfeeding  at  least  until  they  are  discharged  from  medical  care  and
fully recovered. It is unclear if breastfeeding by mothers who are exposed to cyanide
but  do  not  require  medical  treatment  is  safe.  A  woman’s  decision  to  resume
breastfeeding should be made in discussion with her physician after she has recovered
and been discharged from medical care.
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/chemicalemergencies/questions-and-answers-about-breastfeeding-in-a-chemical-em
ergency.html
