 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by
Cindy M. Weinbaum, MD, Ian Williams, PhD, Eric E. Mast, MD, Susan A. Wang, MD,
Lyn Finelli, Annemarie Wasley, ScD, Stephanie M. 
Neitzel, and John W. Ward, MD 
National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Division of Viral
Hepatitis
 
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Kevin Fenton, MD, Director, 
and the Division of Viral Hepatitis, John Ward, MD, Director.
 Corresponding preparer: Cindy M. Weinbaum, MD, Division of Viral Hepatitis, National
Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and 
TB  Prevention,  1600  Clifton  Road,  MS  G-37,  Atlanta  GA  30333.  Telephone:
404-718-8596; Fax: 404-718-8595; email: 
chw4@cdc.gov.
Summary
 Serologic testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is the primary way to identify
persons with chronic hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) infection. Testing has been recommended previously for pregnant women,
infants born to HBsAg-positive 
mothers, household contacts and sex partners of HBV-infected persons, persons born in
countries with HBsAg prevalence of 
>8%, persons who are the source of blood or body fluid exposures that might warrant
postexposure prophylaxis (e.g., 
needlestick injury to a health-care worker or sexual assault), and persons infected with
human immunodeficiency virus. This 
report  updates  and  expands  previous  CDC  guidelines  for  HBsAg  testing  and  includes
new recommendations for public 
health evaluation and management for chronically infected persons and their contacts.
Routine testing for HBsAg now 
is recommended for additional populations with HBsAg prevalence of 
>2%: persons born in geographic regions with 
HBsAg  prevalence  of  >2%,  men  who  have  sex  with  men,  and  injection-drug  users.
Implementation of these recommendations 
will  require  expertise  and  resources  to  integrate  HBsAg  screening  in  prevention  and
care settings serving populations 
recommended  for  HBsAg  testing.  This  report  is  intended  to  serve  as  a  resource  for
public health officials, organizations, and 
health-care  professionals  involved  in  the  development,  delivery,  and  evaluation  of
prevention and clinical services.
Introduction
 Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a common cause of death associated
with liver failure, cirrhosis, and 
liver cancer. Worldwide, approximately 350 million persons have chronic HBV infection,
and an estimated 620,000 persons 
die annually from HBV-related liver disease 
(1,2). Hepatitis B vaccination is highly effective in preventing infection with 
HBV and consequent acute and chronic liver disease. In the United States, the number
of newly acquired HBV infections 
has  declined  substantially  as  the  result  of  the  implementation  of  a  comprehensive
national immunization program 
(3--5). However, the prevalence of chronic HBV infection 
remains high; in 2006, approximately 800,000--1.4 million U.S. 
residents  were  living  with  chronic  HBV  infection  (Table  1),  and  hepatitis  B  is  the
underlying cause of an 
estimated 2,000--4,000 deaths each year in the United States 
(6).
 Improving  the  identification  and  public  health  management  of  persons  with  chronic
HBV infection can help prevent 
serious  sequelae  of  chronic  liver  disease  and  complement  immunization  strategies  to
eliminate HBV transmission in the United 
States. Persons with chronic HBV infection can remain 
asymptomatic for years, unaware of their infections and of their risks 
for transmitting the virus to others and for having serious liver disease later in life. Early
identification of persons with 
chronic  HBV  infection  permits  the  identification  and  vaccination  of  susceptible
household contacts and sex partners, 
thereby interrupting ongoing transmission.
 All persons with chronic HBV infection need medical management to monitor the onset
and progression of liver disease 
and liver cancer. Safe and effective antiviral agents now are available to treat chronic
hepatitis B, providing a greater 
imperative  to  identify  persons  who  might  benefit  from  medical  evaluation,
management, and antiviral therapy and other treatment 
when indicated. The majority of the medications now in use for hepatitis B treatment
were approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) in 2002 or later; two forms of alfa 2 interferon and five oral
nucleoside/nucleotide analogues have 
been approved, and other medications are in clinical trials.
 Serologic testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is the primary way to identify
persons with chronic HBV 
infection. Because of the availability of effective vaccine and postexposure prophylaxis,
CDC previously recommended HBsAg 
testing  for  pregnant  women,  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers,  household
contacts and sex partners of HBV-infected 
persons, persons born in countries with HBsAg prevalence of 
>8%, and persons who are the source of blood or body fluid 
exposures  that  might  warrant  postexposure  prophylaxis  (e.g.,  needlestick  injury  to  a
health-care worker or sexual assault), and 
persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
(4,5,7--11). This report updates and expands 
these  multiple  previous  CDC  guidelines  for  HBsAg  testing  and  includes  new
recommendations for public health evaluation and management 
of  chronically  infected  persons  and  their  contacts.  Routine  HBsAg  testing  now  is
recommended for persons born in 
geographic regions in which HBsAg prevalence is 
>2%, men who have sex with men (MSM), and injection-drug users (IDUs).
Methods
 During February 7--8, 2007, CDC convened a meeting of researchers, physicians, state
and local public 
health professionals, and other persons in the public and private sectors with expertise
in the prevention, care, and treatment 
of chronic hepatitis B. These consultants reviewed available published and unpublished
epidemiologic and treatment 
data,  considered  whether  to  recommend  testing  specific  new  populations  for  HBV
infection, and discussed how best to 
implement new and existing testing strategies. Topics discussed included 
1) the changing epidemiology of chronic HBV 
infection, 2) health disparities caused by the disproportionate 
HBV-related morbidity and mortality among persons infected as 
infants and young children in countries with high levels of HBV endemicity, and 3) the
increasing benefits of care and 
opportunities for prevention for infected persons and their contacts. On the basis of this
discussion, CDC determined that 
reconsideration  of  current  guidelines  was  warranted.  This  report  summarizes  current
HBsAg testing recommendations published previously 
by  CDC,  expands  CDC  recommendations  to  increase  the  identification  of  chronically
infected 
persons in the United States, and defines the components 
of programs needed to identify HBV-infected persons 
successfully.
Clinical Features and Natural History of HBV Infection
 HBV is a 42-nm DNA virus in the 
Hepadnaviridae family. After a susceptible person is exposed, the virus is transported 
by  the  bloodstream  to  the  liver,  which  is  the  primary  site  of  HBV  replication.  HBV
infection can produce either asymptomatic 
or symptomatic infection. When clinical manifestations of acute disease occur, illness
typically begins 2--3 months after 
HBV  exposure  (range:  6  weeks--6  months).  Infants,  children  aged  <5  years,  and
immunosuppressed adults with newly 
acquired HBV infection typically are asymptomatic; 30%--50% of other persons aged 
>5 years have clinical signs or symptoms of 
acute  disease  after  infection.  Symptoms  of  acute  hepatitis  B  include  fatigue,  poor
appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
low-grade  fever,  jaundice,  dark  urine,  and  light  stool  color.  Clinical  signs  include
jaundice, liver tenderness, and 
possibly hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Fatigue and loss of appetite typically precede
jaundice by 1--2 weeks. Acute illness 
typically lasts 2--4 months. The case-fatality rate among persons with reported cases of
acute hepatitis B is approximately 1%, with 
the highest rates occurring in adults aged >60 years 
(12).
 Primary  HBV  infection  can  be  self-limited,  with  elimination  of  virus  from  blood  and
subsequent lasting immunity 
against  reinfection,  or  it  can  progress  to  chronic  infection  with  continuing  viral
replication in the liver and persistent 
viremia.  Resolved  primary  infection  is  not  a  risk  factor  for  subsequent  occurrence  of
chronic liver disease or hepatocellular 
carcinoma
 (HCC).
 However,
 patients
 with
 resolved
 infection
 who
 become
immunosuppressed (e.g., from chemotherapy or 
medication) might, albeit rarely, experience reactivation of hepatitis B with symptoms
of acute illness 
(13--15). HBV DNA has been detected in the livers of persons without serologic markers
of chronic infection after resolution of acute infection 
(13,16--19). The risk for progression to chronic infection is related inversely to age at
the time of infection. HBV infection 
becomes  chronic  in  >90%  of  infants,  approximately  25%--50%  of  children  aged  1--5
years, and <5% of older children and 
adults)  (13,20--23).  Immunosuppressed  persons  (e.g.,  hemodialysis  patients  and
persons with HIV infection) are at increased risk 
for chronic infection (22). Once chronic HBV infection is established, 0.5% of infected
persons spontaneously resolve 
infection annually (indicated by the loss of detectable 
HBsAg and serum HBV DNA and normalization of serum 
alanine aminotransferase [ALT] levels); resolution is rarer among children than among
adults 
(13,24,25).
 Persons with chronic HBV infection can be asymptomatic and have no evidence of liver
disease, or they can have a 
spectrum of disease, ranging from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis or liver cancer. Chronic
infection is responsible for the majority of 
cases of HBV-related morbidity and mortality; follow-up studies have demonstrated that
approximately 25% of persons 
infected with HBV as infants or young children and 15% of those infected at older ages
died of cirrhosis or liver cancer. The 
majority remained asymptomatic until onset of cirrhosis or end-stage liver disease 
(26). Persons with histologic evidence of 
chronic hepatitis B (e.g., hepatic inflammation and fibrosis) are at higher risk for HCC
than HBV-infected persons without 
such  evidence  (27).  Potential  extrahepatic  complications  of  chronic  HBV  infection
include polyarteritis nodosa 
(28,29),
 membranous
 glomerulonephritis,
 and
 membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis 
(30).
Serologic Markers of HBV Infection
 The serologic patterns of chronic HBV infection are varied and complex. Antigens and
antibodies associated with 
HBV infection include HBsAg and antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs), hepatitis B core antigen
(HBcAg) and antibody to HBcAg 
(anti-HBc),  and  hepatitis  B  e  antigen  (HBeAg)  and  antibody  to  HBeAg  (anti-HBe).
Testing also can be performed to assess 
the presence and concentration of circulating HBV DNA. At least one serologic marker is
present during each of the 
different phases of HBV infection (Figures 1 and 2) 
(31). Serologic assays are available commercially for all markers except 
HBcAg,  because  no  free  HBcAg  circulates  in  blood.  No  rapid  or  oral  fluid  tests  are
licensed in the United States to test for any 
HBV markers.
 Three  phases  of  chronic  HBV  infection  have  been  recognized:  the  immune  tolerant
phase (HBeAg-positive, with high 
levels of HBV DNA but absence of liver disease), the immune active or chronic hepatitis
phase (HBeAg-positive, 
HBeAg-negative,  or  anti-HBe-positive,  with  high  levels  of  HBV  DNA  and  active  liver
inflammation), and the inactive phase (anti-HBe 
positive, normal liver aminotransferase levels, and low or 
absent levels of HBV DNA) (32). Patients can evolve through these phases 
or revert from inactive hepatitis B back to immune 
active infection at any time.
 The  serologic  markers  typically  used  to  differentiate  among  acute,  resolving,  and
chronic infection are HBsAg, IgM 
anti-HBc,  and  anti-HBs  (Table  2).  The  presence  of  HBeAg  and  HBV  DNA  generally
indicates high levels of viral replication; 
the  presence  of  anti-HBe  usually  indicates  decreased  or  undetectable  HBV  DNA  and
lower levels of viral replication.
 In newly infected persons, HBsAg is the only serologic marker detected during the first
3--5 weeks after infection. 
The average time from exposure to detection of HBsAg is 30 days (range: 6--60 days) 
(31,33).  Highly  sensitive  single-sample  nucleic  acid  tests  can  detect  HBV  DNA  in  the
serum of an infected person 10--20 days before detection of HBsAg 
(34). Transient HBsAg positivity has been reported for up to 18 days after hepatitis B
vaccination and is clinically 
insignificant (35,36).
 Anti-HBc  appears  at  the  onset  of  symptoms  or  liver-test  abnormalities  in  acute  HBV
infection and persists for life in 
the majority of persons. Acute or recently acquired infection can be distinguished from
chronic infection by the presence of 
the immunoglobulin M (IgM) class of anti-HBc, which is detected at the onset of acute
hepatitis B and persists for up to 
6 months if the infection resolves. In patients with chronic HBV infection, IgM anti-HBc
can persist during viral replication 
at low levels that typically are not detectable by the assays used in the United States.
However, persons with exacerbations 
of chronic infection can test positive for IgM anti-HBc 
(37). Because the positive predictive value of this test is low 
in asymptomatic persons, IgM anti-HBc testing for diagnosis of acute hepatitis B should
be limited to persons with 
clinical  evidence  of  acute  hepatitis  or  an  epidemiologic  link  to  a  person  with  HBV
infection.
 In persons who recover from HBV infection, HBsAg and HBV DNA usually are eliminated
from the blood, and 
anti-HBs  appears.  In  persons  who  become  chronically  infected,  HBsAg  and  HBV  DNA
persist. In persons in whom chronic 
infection  resolves,  HBsAg  becomes  undetectable;  anti-HBc  persists  and  anti-HBs  will
occur in the majority of these persons 
(38,39).
 In certain persons, total anti-HBc is the only detectable HBV serologic marker. Isolated
anti-HBc positivity can represent 
1)  resolved  HBV  infection  in  persons  who  have  recovered  but  whose  anti-HBs  levels
have waned, most commonly in 
high-prevalence  populations;  2)  chronic  infection  in  which  circulating  HBsAg  is  not
detectable by commercial serology, 
most  commonly  in  high-prevalence  populations  and  among  persons  with  HIV  or  HCV
infection 
(40)  (HBV  DNA  has  been  isolated  from  the  blood  in  <5%  of  persons  with  isolated
anti-HBc) 
(40,41); or 3) false-positive reaction. In 
low-prevalence  populations,  isolated  anti-HBc  may  be  found  in  10%--20%  of  persons
with serologic markers of HBV infection, most 
of whom will demonstrate a primary response after hepatitis B 
vaccination(42,43). Persons positive only for anti-HBc 
are 
unlikely  to  be  infectious  except  under  unusual  circumstances  in  which  they  are  the
source for direct percutaneous exposure 
of  susceptible  recipients  to  substantial  quantities  of  virus  (e.g.,  blood  transfusion  or
organ transplant) 
(44).
 HBeAg can be detected in the serum of persons with acute or chronic HBV infection. In
the majority of those with 
chronic infection, HBeAg is cleared over time, and anti-HBe appears 
(45--49). Presence of HBeAg correlates with more active 
disease: patients with HBeAg typically have high levels of HBV DNA 
(106--1010 IU/mL), whereas those who are HBeAg-negative 
and anti-HBe-positive generally have low or only modest HBV DNA levels 
(0--105 IU/mL).
Epidemiology of HBV Infection in the United States
Transmission
 HBV is transmitted by percutaneous and mucosal exposure to infectious blood or body
fluids. The highest concentrations 
of virus are found in blood; however, semen and saliva also have been demonstrated to
be infectious 
(50). HBV remains viable and infectious in the environment for at least 7 days and can
be present in high concentrations on inanimate objects, even 
in  the  absence  of  visible  blood  (13,51).  Persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection  are  the
major source of new 
infections,  and  the  primary  routes  of  HBV  transmission  are  sexual  contact,
percutaneous exposure to infectious body fluids (such as 
occurs through needle sharing by IDUs or needlestick injuries in health-care settings),
perinatal exposure to an infected mother, 
and  prolonged,  close  personal  contact  with  an  infected  person  (e.g.,  via  contact  with
exudates from dermatologic lesions, 
contact  with  contaminated  surfaces,  or  sharing  toothbrushes  or  razors),  as  occurs  in
household contact 
(5,52). No evidence exists of transmission of HBV by casual contact in the workplace,
and transmission occurs rarely in childcare settings 
(4).  Few  cases  have  been  reported  in  which  health-care  workers  have  transmitted
infection to patients, particularly since implementation 
of standard universal infection control precautions 
(53).
Incidence of HBV Infection
 During  1985--2006,  incidence  of  acute  hepatitis  B  in  the  United  States  declined
substantially, from 11.5 cases per 
100,000 population in 1985 to 1.6 in 2006 
(12). The actual incidence of new HBV infections is estimated to be approximately 
tenfold  higher  than  the  reported  incidence  of  acute  hepatitis  B,  after  adjustment  for
underreporting of cases and 
asymptomatic  infections.  In  2006,  an  estimated  46,000  persons  were  newly  infected
with HBV 
(54). The greatest declines in incidence of acute disease have occurred in the cohorts of
children for whom infant and adolescent catch-up vaccination was 
recommended (12). Among children aged <15 years, incidence of hepatitis B declined
98% during 1990--2006, from 1.2 per 
100,000 population in 1990 to 0.02 in 2006 
(12). This decline reflects the effective implementation of hepatitis B vaccination in 
the  United  States.  Since  2001,  fewer  than  30  cases  of  acute  hepatitis  B  have  been
reported annually in children born in 1991 
or later, the majority of whom were international adoptees or children born outside the
United States who were not 
fully vaccinated (55). In 2006, adults aged 
>20 years had the highest incidence of acute HBV infection, reflecting low hepatitis 
B vaccination coverage among adults with behavioral risks for HBV infection (e.g., MSM,
IDUs, persons with multiple 
sex partners, and persons whose sex partners are infected with HBV) 
(12).
Prevalence of HBV Infection and Its Sequelae
 U.S.  mortality  data  for  2000--2003  indicated  that  HBV  infection  was  the  underlying
cause of an estimated 
2,000--4,000 deaths annually. The majority of these deaths resulted from cirrhosis and
liver cancer 
(6; CDC, unpublished data, 2000--2003).
 The  burden  of  chronic  HBV  infection  in  the  United  States  is  greater  among  certain
populations as a result of earlier age 
at infection, immune suppression, or higher levels of circulating infection. These include
persons born in geographic 
regions with high (>8%) or intermediate (2%--7%) prevalence of chronic HBV infection,
HIV-positive persons (who might 
have additional risk factors) (56--58), and certain adult populations for whom hepatitis
B vaccination has been 
recommended because of behavioral risks (e.g., MSM and IDUs). An accurate estimate
of the prevalence of chronic HBV infection in 
the United States must be derived from multiple sources of data to 
account for the disproportionate contributions of persons 
of  foreign  birth,  members  of  certain  ethnic  minority  populations,  and  persons  with
certain medical conditions (Table 1). For 
the 
U.S.-born civilian noninstitutionalized population, prevalence estimates can be obtained
from the most recent 
National  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey  (NHANES),  which  was  conducted
during 1999--2004 (available at
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm).  Because  data  from  studies  of  foreign-born
U.S. residents 
indicate that HBsAg seroprevalence corresponds to HBV 
endemicity in the country of origin (5), for the foreign-born population residing in the
United 
States, HBV prevalence estimates were derived by applying 
country-specific prevalence estimates gathered from the 
scientific literature and the World Health Organization 
(2) to the number of foreign-born U.S. residents by their country of birth 
as reported by the 2006 U.S. Census American Community Survey 
(59). Other populations for which estimates were 
calculated included those in correctional institutions and the homeless. Together, these
sources indicated that an estimated 
800,000--1.4 million persons in the United States have chronic HBV infection. 
Approximately 0.3%--0.5% of U.S. residents are 
chronically infected with HBV; 47%--70% of these persons were born in other countries
(Table 1).
 
Global Variation in Prevalence of HBV Infection
 HBV  transmission  patterns  and  the  seroprevalence  of  chronic  HBV  infection  vary
markedly worldwide, 
although seroprevalence studies in many countries are limited, and the epidemiology of
hepatitis B is changing. Approximately 45% 
of  persons  worldwide  live  in  regions  in  which  HBV  is  highly  endemic  (i.e.,  where
prevalence of chronic HBV infection is 
>8% among adults and that of resolved or chronic infection [i.e., anti-HBc positivity] is
>60%) 
(2) (Figure 3). Historically, >90% of new infections occurred among infants and young
children as the result of perinatal or household transmission during 
early  childhood  (26).  Infant  immunization  programs  in  many  countries  have  led  to
marked decreases in incidence and 
prevalence among younger, vaccinated members of these populations 
(60--63). Countries of intermediate HBV endemicity (i.e., 
HBsAg prevalence of 2%--7%) account for approximately 43% of the world's population;
in these countries, multiple modes 
of
 transmission
 (i.e.,
 perinatal,
 household,
 sexual,
 injection-drug
 use,
 and
health-care--related) contribute to the 
infection burden. Regions of the world with high or intermediate prevalence of HBsAg
include much of Eastern Europe, Asia, 
Africa, the Middle East, and the Pacific Islands 
(2,4) (Figure 3 and Table 3). In countries of low endemicity (i.e., HBsAg 
prevalence of <2%), the majority of new infections occur among adolescents and adults
and are attributable to sexual and 
injection-drug--use  exposures.  However,  in  certain  areas  of  low  HBV  endemicity,
prevalence of chronic HBV infection is high 
among indigenous populations born before routine infant immunization 
(Table 3).
 In  the  United  States,  marked  decreases  in  the  prevalence  of  chronic  HBV  infection
among younger, vaccinated 
foreign-born  U.S.  residents  have  been  observed,  most  likely  as  a  result  of  infant
immunization programs globally 
(64). However, the rate of liver cancer deaths in the United States continues to be high
among certain 
foreign-born  U.S.  populations.  For  example,  the  rate  of  liver  cancer  deaths  is  highest
among Asians/Pacific Islanders, 
reflecting the high prevalence of chronic hepatitis B in 
this population (65,66). Globally, other regions with HBsAg prevalence of 
>2% also have identified high levels of 
HBV-associated HCC (67,68).
 
Household Contacts and Sex Partners of Persons With Chronic HBV Infection
 Serologic testing and hepatitis B vaccination has been recommended since 1982 
(69)  for  household  contacts  and  sex  partners  of  persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection
because previous studies have determined that 14%--60% of persons living 
in  households  with  persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection  have  serologic  evidence
indicating resolved HBV infection, and 
3%--20%  have  evidence  indicating  chronic  infection.  The  risk  for  infection  is  highest
among unvaccinated children living with 
a person with chronic HBV infection in a household or in an extended family setting and
among sex partners of 
chronically infected persons (70--77).
 
Men Who Have Sex With Men
 During 1994--2000, studies of MSM aged <30 years identified chronic infection in 1.1%
of MSM aged 18--24 years 
(95% confidence interval [CI] = 0--2.2%) 
(78), 2.1% (95% CI = 1.6%--2.6%) of MSM aged 15--21 years 
(79), and 2.3% (95% CI = 1.7%--2.8%) of MSM aged 22--29 years 
(80). In these studies, prevalence was higher (7.4%; 95% CI = 
5.3%--9.6%) among young MSM who were HIV-positive than it was among those who
were HIV-negative (1.5%; 95% CI = 
1.2%--1.9%) (CDC, unpublished data, 2007). Before the 
introduction of the hepatitis B vaccine in 1982, prevalence of chronic 
HBV infection among MSM was 4.6%--6.1% 
(81--83). In recent studies, prevalence of past infection increased with increasing 
age, suggesting that chronic infection might still be more prevalent among older MSM 
(79,80).
 
Injection-Drug Users
 Chronic  HBV  infection  has  been  identified  in  2.7%--11.0%  of  IDUs  in  a  variety  of
settings 
(84--91); HBsAg prevalence of 7.1% (95% CI = 6.3%--7.8%) has been described among
IDUs with HIV coinfection 
(92). IDUs contribute disproportionately to the burden of infection in the United States:
in chronic HBV infection registries, 4%--12% of 
reported chronically infected persons had a history of injection-drug use 
(93). Prevalence of resolved or chronic HBV infection 
among  IDUs  increases  with  the  number  of  years  of  drug  use  and  is  associated  with
frequency of injection and with sharing of 
drug-preparation  equipment  (e.g.,  cottons,  cookers,  and  rinse  water),  independent  of
syringe sharing 
(94,95).
 
HIV-Positive Persons
 As life expectancies for HIV-infected persons have increased with use of highly active
antiretroviral therapy, liver 
disease, much of it related to HBV and HCV infections, has become the most common
non-AIDS--related cause of death among 
this population (56,57,96,97). Chronic HBV infection has been identified in 6%--15% of
HIV-positive persons from 
Western Europe and the United States, including 9%--17% of MSM; 7%--10% of IDUs;
4%--6% of heterosexuals; and 1.5% 
of  pregnant  women  (58,98,99).  This  high  level  of  chronic  infection  reflects  both
common routes of transmission for HIV 
and HBV and a higher risk of chronicity after HBV infection in an immunocompromised
host 
(100--102).
 
Persons With Selected Medical Conditions
 Although population-level studies are lacking to determine HBsAg prevalence among
populations with other 
medical  conditions,  persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection  who  initiate  cytotoxic  or
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g., chemotherapy 
for  malignant  diseases,  immunosuppression  related  to  organ  transplantation,  and
immunosuppression for rheumatologic 
and  gastroenterologic  disorders)  are  at  risk  for  HBV  reactivation  and  associated
morbidity and mortality 
(32,101,102).  Prophylactic  antiviral  therapy  can  prevent  reactivation  and  possible
fulminant hepatitis in HBsAg positive patients 
(13,101).
Rationale for Testing to Identify Persons With Chronic HBV Infection
 Although limited data are available regarding the number of persons with chronic HBV
infection in the United States who 
are  unaware  of  their  infection  status,  studies  of  programs  conducting  HBsAg  testing
among Asian-born persons living in the 
United States indicated that approximately one third of infected persons were unaware
of their HBV infection 
(5,103--105). Published studies for other populations are lacking. Prompt identification
of chronic infection with HBV is 
essential  to  ensure  that  infected  persons  receive  necessary  care  to  prevent  or  delay
onset of liver disease and services to prevent transmission to others. 
Treatment guidelines for chronic hepatitis B have been issued 
(13,106,107), and multiple medications have been 
approved for treatment of adults with chronic HBV infection. With recent advances in
hepatitis B treatment and detection of liver cancer, identification 
of an HBV-infected person permits the implementation of 
important interventions to reduce morbidity and mortality, including
 Identification  of  infected  persons  also  allows  for  primary  prevention  of  ongoing  HBV
transmission by enabling persons 
with chronic infection to adopt behaviors that reduce the risk of transmission to others
and by permitting identification of 
close  contacts  who  require  testing  and  subsequent  vaccination  (if  identified  as
susceptible) or medical management (if identified 
as having chronic HBV infection). Appropriate HBsAg testing and counseling also help
prevent 
health-care--associated transmission in dialysis settings by 
allowing for cohorting of infected patients 
(112). Testing donated blood and donors of organs and tissues prevents 
infectious  materials  from  being  used  and  allows  unvaccinated  persons  exposed  to
needlesticks 
to  receive  additional  postexposure  prophylaxis  if  the  source  of  the  exposure  was
HBV-infected 
(113).
 Testing for chronic HBV infection meets established public health screening criteria 
(114).  Screening  is  a  basic  public  health  tool  used  to  identify  unrecognized  health
conditions so treatment can be offered before symptoms occur and, 
for 
communicable diseases, so interventions can be implemented to reduce the likelihood
of continued transmission 
(114).  Screening  for  chronic  HBV  infection  is  consistent  with  the  main  generally
accepted public health screening 
criteria: 1) chronic hepatitis B is a serious health disorder that can be diagnosed before
symptoms occur; 2) it can be detected 
by reliable, inexpensive, and minimally invasive screening tests; 3) chronically infected
patients have years of life to gain if 
medical evaluation and/or treatment is initiated early, before symptoms occur; and 4)
the costs of screening are reasonable in 
relation to the anticipated benefits (114). The 
cost-effectiveness of identifying persons with chronic HBV infection cannot 
be calculated because treatment options constantly are increasing the number of years
of disease-free life, and the 
various  treatments  have  diverse  associated  costs.  However,  testing  for  HBsAg  in
populations in which prevalence of chronic 
infection is 2% would cost $750--$3,752 for each chronically infected person identified
(range represents $15.01 laboratory cost 
per test--$75 per screening visit 
[Marketscan® Database, Ann Arbor, Michigan, unpublished data, 2007]); at higher 
prevalences, the per-case-identified cost would decrease. This is comparable to the cost
of other screening programs. HIV testing in 
a population with 1% infection prevalence costs $2,133 ([$1,733--$3,733] per positive
identified 
(115); [Marketscan® Database, Ann Arbor, Michigan, unpublished data, 2007] $16 per
test [$13--$28]). Another study determined that the cost 
to identify each new case of diabetes mellitus using a two-step glucose-based screening
process in three volunteer clinics 
in Minnesota was $4,064 per case identified 
(116). The cost of HBsAg testing in populations with 
>2% prevalence is substantially lower than the costs per case identified for certain fetal
and newborn screening interventions (e.g., screening 
for newborn hearing disorders [$16,000 per case identified] 
[117], metabolic disorders [$68,000 per case] 
[118], neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia [NAIT] caused by anti-HPA-1a [$98,771
per case] 
[119], or fetal Down syndrome [$690,000 per case] 
[120]).
 To prevent HBV transmission, previous guidelines have recommended HBsAg testing
for hemodialysis patients, 
pregnant women, and persons known or suspected of having been exposed to HBV (i.e.,
infants born to HBV-infected 
mothers,  household  contacts  and  sex  partners  of  infected  persons,  and  persons  with
known occupational or other exposures 
to infectious blood or body fluids) (3,112). HBsAg testing also is 
required for donors of blood, organs, and tissues 
(113).  To  guide  immunization  efforts  and  identify  infected  persons,  testing  also  has
been recommended previously for persons born in 
regions with high HBV endemicity (4,121). Finally, testing has been recommended for
HIV-positive persons on the basis of their 
high  prevalence  of  HBV  coinfection  and  their  increased  risk  for  HBV-associated
morbidity and mortality 
(122).
 Because  persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection  serve  as  the  reservoir  for  new  HBV
infections in the United 
States,  identification  of  these  persons  will  complement  vaccination  strategies  for
elimination of HBV transmission. With 
the availability of effective treatments for chronic hepatitis B, the infected person, once
identified, can benefit from testing as 
well.  Thus,  CDC  recommends  expanding  HBV  testing  to  include  all  persons  born  in
regions with HBsAg prevalence of 
>2%  (high  and  intermediate  endemicity).  CDC  also  recommends  HBsAg  testing  in
addition to vaccination for MSM and 
IDUs  because  of  their  higher-than-population  prevalence  and  their  ongoing  risk  for
infection. Finally, to prevent adverse 
medical  outcomes  among  persons  who  might  be  seeking  medical  care  for  other
reasons, recommendations also are made to test 
persons
 with
 ALT
 elevations
 of
 unknown
 etiology
 and
 candidates
 for
immunosuppressive therapies.
Recommendations
 Persons  who  are  most  likely  to  be  actively  infected  with  HBV  should  be  tested  for
chronic HBV infection. Testing 
should  include  a  serologic  assay  for  HBsAg  offered  as  a  part  of  routine  care  and  be
accompanied by appropriate counseling 
and referral for recommended clinical evaluation and care. Laboratories that 
provide HBsAg testing should use an FDA-licensed 
or  FDA-approved  HBsAg  test  and  should  perform  testing  according  to  the
manufacturer's labeling, including testing of 
initially reactive specimens with a licensed, neutralizing confirmatory test. A confirmed
HBsAg-positive result indicates active 
HBV infection, either acute or chronic; chronic infection is confirmed by the absence of
IgM anti-HBc or by the persistence 
of  HBsAg  or  HBV  DNA  for  at  least  6  months.  All  HBsAg-positive  persons  should  be
considered infectious.
 Recommendations  and  federal  mandates  related  to  routine  testing  for  chronic  HBV
infection have been summarized 
(Table  4).  To  determine  susceptibility  among  persons  who  are  at  ongoing  risk  for
infection and recommended for vaccination, 
total  anti-HBc  or  anti-HBs  also  should  be  tested  at  the  time  of  serologic  testing  for
chronic HBV infection. New 
populations recommended for testing are the following:
 Because  some  persons  might  have  been  infected  with  HBV  before  they  received
hepatitis B vaccination, HBsAg testing 
is recommended regardless of vaccination history for the 
following populations:
 Persons to be tested who have been recommended to 
receive hepatitis B vaccination, including those in settings in 
which  universal  vaccination  is  recommended  (i.e.,  sexually  transmitted  disease
[STD]/HIV testing and treatment facilities, 
drug-abuse treatment and prevention settings, health-care settings targeting services
to IDUs, health-care settings targeting 
services to MSM, and correctional facilities) should receive the first dose of vaccine at
the same medical visit after blood is drawn 
for 
testing unless an established patient-provider relation can ensure that the patient will
return for serologic test results and 
that  vaccination  can  be  initiated  at  that  time  if  the  patient  is  susceptible.  In  venues
where vaccination is recommended and 
testing is not feasible, vaccination still should be provided for all populations for whom
it is recommended.
Public Health Management of HBsAg-Positive Persons
 The finding of HBsAg in serum is indicative of chronic HBV infection unless the person
has signs or symptoms of 
acute hepatitis. All HBsAg-positive laboratory results should be reported to the state or
local health department, in accordance 
with state requirements for reporting of acute and chronic HBV infection. Chronic HBV
infection can be confirmed by 
verifying the presence of HBsAg in a serum sample taken at least 6 months after the
first test, or by the absence of IgM anti-HBc in 
the  original  specimen.  Standard  case  definitions  for  the  classification  of  reportable
cases of HBV infection have been 
published previously (124).
Contact Management
 Sex  partners  and  household  and  needle-sharing  contacts  of  HBsAg-positive  persons
should be identified. Unvaccinated 
past and present sex partners and household and 
needle-sharing contacts should be tested for HBsAg and for anti-HBc and/or 
anti-HBs and should receive the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine as soon as the blood
sample for serologic testing has 
been  collected.  Susceptible  persons  should  complete  the  vaccine  series  using  an
age-appropriate vaccine dose and schedule. 
Those who have not been vaccinated fully should complete the vaccine series. Contacts
determined to be HBsAg-positive should 
be referred for medical care.
 Health-care providers and public health authorities treating persons with chronic HBV
infection should obtain the names 
of their sex contacts and household members and a history of drug use. Providers then
can help to arrange for evaluation 
and vaccination of contacts, either directly or with 
assistance from state and local health departments. Contact notification is 
well-established in public STD programs; these programs have the expertise to reach
identified contacts of HBsAg-positive 
patients and might be able to provide guidance on procedures and best practices, or in
programs with sufficient capacity, 
offer  assistance  to  other  providers  to  reach  identified  contacts.  With  sufficient
resources, identification of contacts should 
be accompanied by health counseling and include referral of patients and their contacts
for other 
services when appropriate.
 The success of contact management for hepatitis B has varied widely, depending on
local resources. One study 
determined  that  approximately  half  of  providers  caring  for  patients  with  chronic  HBV
infection recommended contact vaccination, 
and <20% of contacts initiated vaccination 
(125). In the national perinatal hepatitis B prevention program, approximately 26% 
of  all  persons  identified  as  contacts  by  HBsAg-positive  women  were  tested  and
evaluated for vaccination by public 
health departments (CDC, unpublished data, 2005). In several state and local programs
with targeted efforts for adult hepatitis 
B prevention, up to 85% of identified contacts have been 
evaluated (CDC, unpublished data, 2005); however, many states 
and  cities  have  no  contact  identification  programs  outside  the  perinatal  hepatitis  B
prevention program. Given the potential 
for  contact  notification  to  disrupt  networks  of  HBV  transmission  and  reduce  disease
incidence, health-care providers 
should  encourage  patients  with  HBV  infection  to  notify  their  sex  partners,  household
members, and 
injection-drug--sharing contacts and urge them to seek medical evaluation, testing, and
vaccination.
Patient Education
 Medical  providers  should  advise  patients  identified  as  HBsAg  positive  regarding
measures they can take to 
prevent transmission to others and protect their health or refer patients for counseling
if needed. Patient education should 
be conducted in a culturally sensitive manner in the patient's primary language (both
written and oral whenever possible). 
Ideally  bilingual,  bicultural,  medically  trained  interpreters  should  be  used  when
indicated.
 Other counseling messages include the following:
 Because  15%--25%  of  persons  with  chronic  HBV  infection  are  at  risk  for  premature
death from cirrhosis and liver 
cancer, persons with chronic HBV infection should be evaluated soon after infection is
identified by referral to or in consultation 
with  a  physician  experienced  in  the  management  of  chronic  liver  disease.  When
assessing chronic HBV infection, the 
physician must consider the level of HBV replication and the 
degree of liver injury. Injury is assessed using serial tests of 
serum  aminotransferases  (ALT  and  AST),  and,  when  needed,  liver  biopsy  (histologic
activity and fibrosis scores).
 Initial  evaluation  of  patients  with  chronic  HBV  infection  should  include  a  thorough
history and physical examination, 
with special emphasis on risk factors for coinfection with HIV and HCV, alcohol use, and
family history of HBV infection 
and  liver  cancer.  Laboratory  testing  should  assess  for  indicators  of  liver  disease
(complete blood count and liver panel), markers 
of  HBV  replication  (HBeAg,  anti-HBe,  HBV  DNA),  coinfection  with  HCV,  HDV,  and  HIV,
and antibody to hepatitis A 
virus (HAV) (if local HAV prevalence makes prevaccination testing cost effective) 
(109). Where testing is available, 
schistosomiasis (S. mansoni or S. 
japonicum) also should be assessed for persons from endemic areas 
(129)  because  schistosomiasis  might  increase  progression  to  cirrhosis  or  HCC  in  the
presence of HBV infection 
(130,131). Persons with chronic HBV 
infection who are not known to be immune to HAV should 
receive 2 doses of hepatitis A vaccine 6--18 months apart. Baseline 
alfa fetoprotein assay (AFP) is used to assess for evidence of HCC at initial diagnosis of
HBV infection, and ultrasound 
in patients at risk of HCC (i.e., Asian men aged >40 years, Asian women 
aged >50 years, persons with cirrhosis, persons with 
a family history of HCC, Africans aged >20 years, and HBV-infected persons aged >40
years with persistent or intermittent 
ALT  elevation  and/or  high  HBV  DNA)  (13,108).  Liver  biopsy  (or,  ideally,  noninvasive
markers) can be used to assess 
inflammation  and  fibrosis  if  initial  laboratory  assays  suggest  liver  damage,  as  per
published practice guidelines for liver 
biopsy in chronic HBV infection (13).
 Following an initial evaluation, all patients with chronic HBV infection, even those with
normal aminotransferase 
levels,  should  receive  lifelong  monitoring  to  assess  progression  of  liver  disease,
development of HCC, need for treatment, 
and  response  to  treatment.  Frequency  of  monitoring  depends  on  several  factors,
including family history, age, and the 
condition  of  the  patient;  monitoring  schedules  have  been  recommended  by  several
authorities 
(13,106,107,132).
 Therapy for hepatitis B is a rapidly changing area of clinical practice. Seven therapies
have been approved by FDA for 
the  treatment  of  chronic  HBV  infection:  interferon  alfa-2b,  peginterferon  alfa-2a,
lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil, 
entecavir, telbivudine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate 
(13,106,132,133). In addition, at least two other FDA-approved oral 
antiviral  medications  for  HIV  (clevudine  and  emtricitabine)  are  undergoing  phase-3
trials for HBV treatment and might be 
approved soon for chronic hepatitis B. Treatment decisions are made on the basis of
HBeAg status, HBV DNA viral load, ALT, stage 
of liver disease, age of patient, and other factors 
(13,32,134).
 Coinfection with HIV complicates the management of 
patients with chronic hepatitis B. When selecting antiretrovirals 
for  HIV  treatment,  the  provider  must  consider  the  patient's  HBsAg  status  to  avoid
liver-associated complications 
and development of antiviral resistance. Management of these 
patients has been described elsewhere (135).
 Serologic  endpoints  of  antiviral  therapy  are  loss  of  HBeAg,  HBeAg  seroconversion  in
persons initially HBeAg 
positive, suppression of HBV DNA to undetectable levels by sensitive PCR-based assays
in patients who are HBeAg-negative and 
anti-HBe  positive,  and  loss  of  HBsAg.  Optimal  duration  of  therapy  has  not  been
established. For HBeAg-positive 
patients, treatment should be continued for at least 6 months after loss of HBeAg and
appearance of anti-HBe 
(13);  for  HBeAg-negative/anti-HBe-positive  patients,  relapse  rates  are  80%--90%  if
treatment is stopped in 1--2 years 
(13).  Viral  resistance  to  lamivudine  occurs  in  up  to  70%  of  persons  during  the  first  5
years of treatment 
(32).  Lower  rates  of  resistance  among  treatment-naïve  patients  have  been  observed
with adefovir (30% in 5 years), entecavir (<1% at 4 years), and 
telbivudine  (2.3%--5%  in  1  year)  (136)  but  more  resistance  might  occur  with  longer
usage or among patients who developed 
resistance
 previously
 to
 lamivudine.
 Although
 combination
 therapy
 has
 not
demonstrated a higher rate of response than that using 
the  most  potent  antiviral  medication  in  the  regimen,  more  studies  are  needed  using
combinations of different classes of 
different  medications  active  against  HBV  to  determine  if  combination  therapy  will
reduce the rate of the development of resistance.
Development of Surveillance Registries of Persons with Chronic HBV Infection
 Information systems, or registries, of persons with chronic HBV infection can facilitate
the notification, counseling, 
and medical management of persons with chronic HBV infection. These registries can
be used to distinguish newly reported 
cases of infection from previously identified cases, facilitate and track case follow-up,
enable communication with case contacts 
and  medical  providers,  and  provide  local,  state,  and  national  estimates  of  the
proportion of persons with chronic HBV 
infection  who  have  been  identified.  Public  health  agencies  use  registries  for  patient
case management as part of disease control 
programs  for  HIV  and  tuberculosis;  for  tracking  cancers;  and  for  identifying  disease
trends, treatment successes, and outcomes. 
Chronic  HBV  registries  can  similarly  be  used  as  a  tool  for  public  health  program  and
clinical management. Widespread registry use 
for chronic HBV infection will be facilitated by the development of better algorithms for
deduplication (i.e., methods to 
ensure that each infected person is represented only once), routine electronic reporting
of laboratory results, and 
improved communication with laboratories.
 A  tiered  approach  to  establishing  a  registry  might  allow  programs  to  increase
incrementally the number of data 
elements  collected  and  the  expected  extent  of  follow-up  as  resources  become
available. The specific data elements to be included 
will  depend  upon  the  objectives  of  the  registry  and  the  feasibility  of  collecting  that
information. At a minimum, 
sufficient information should be collected to distinguish newly identified persons from
those reported previously, 
including  demographic  characteristics  and  serologic  test  results.  If  an  IgM  anti-HBc
result is not reported, information about the 
clinical characteristics of the patient (e.g., presence of symptoms consistent with acute
viral hepatitis, date of symptom onset, 
and results of liver enzyme testing) and the reason for testing can help ensure that the
registry includes only persons with 
chronic  infection  and  excludes  those  with  acute  disease.  Including  data  elements  on
ethnicity and/or country of birth can assist 
in targeting interventions, and information about contacts identified and managed and
medical referrals made can be used 
to review program needs. 
 Collaboration between the registry and the perinatal hepatitis B prevention program is
important to ensure that the 
registry captures data on women and infants with chronic 
infection identified through the perinatal hepatitis B prevention 
program.  Conversely,  the  perinatal  hepatitis  B  prevention  program  can  use  registry
data to identify outcomes for infants born to 
infected  women  who  might  have  been  lost  to  follow-up.  Periodic  cross-matches  with
local cancer registry and death certificate data 
can allow a program to estimate the contribution of chronic HBV infection to cancer and
death rates. Guidelines that clarify 
how and when data with or without personal identifiers are transmitted and used should
be developed to facilitate the protection 
of confidential data.
Implementation of Testing Recommendations
 Health  departments  provide  clinical  services  in  a  variety  of  settings  serving  persons
recommended for HBsAg 
testing,  including  many  foreign-born  persons,  MSM,  and  IDUs.  Ideally,  HBsAg  testing
should be available in venues such as 
homeless  shelters,  jails,  STD  treatment  clinics,  and  refugee  clinics  because  of  the
increased representation of IDUs and former IDUs 
in  homeless  shelters  (58%  drug  users  [137]),  substance  abuse  treatment  programs
(13%--50% IDUs 
[138,139]), and correctional facilities (25% IDUs 
[140]) and the overrepresentation of IDUs and MSM in STD clinics (6% IDUs and 
10% MSM [141]), prevalence of chronic HBV infection 
is likely to be higher in these settings. However, few states have 
resources to implement HBsAg testing programs in these settings and rely instead on
limited community programs for needed 
public health and medical management.
 In  2008,  CDC  supported  adult  viral  hepatitis  prevention  coordinators  (AVHPCs)  in  49
states, the District of 
Columbia, and five cities (Los Angeles, Chicago, New York City, Philadelphia, and 
Houston) who assist in integrating hepatitis A 
and hepatitis B vaccination, hepatitis B and hepatitis C testing, and prevention services
among MSM, IDUs, 
and at-risk heterosexuals treated in STD clinics, HIV testing programs, substance abuse
treatment centers, correctional 
facilities,  and  other  venues.  AVHPCs  can  promote  the  implementation  of  hepatitis  B
screening for MSM and IDUs. Testing in 
refugee and immigrant health centers and other health-care venues is needed to reach
U.S. residents born in regions with 
HBsAg prevalence of >2% (142); AVHPCs also can collaborate within these settings to
ensure that persons from 
HBV-endemic regions are tested for HBsAg.
 CDC's  perinatal  hepatitis  B  prevention  program  provides  case  management  for
HBsAg-positive mothers and their 
infants, including educating mothers and providers about 
appropriate follow-up and medical management 
(143).  This  program  currently  identifies  12,000--13,000  HBsAg-positive  pregnant
women each year (CDC, unpublished data, 2007). 
Although  perinatal  prevention  programs  provide  follow-up  for  infants  born  to  HBV
infected women, the majority of states and 
local  perinatal  prevention  programs  lack  staff  to  offer  care  referrals  for  HBV  infected
pregnant women.
 Multiple  health-care  providers  play  a  role  in  identifying  persons  with  chronic  HBV
infection and should seek ways 
to implement testing for chronic HBV in clinical settings: primary care, obstetrician, and
other physician offices, refugee 
clinics, TB clinics, substance abuse treatment programs, 
dialysis clinics, employee health clinics, university health clinics, and 
other  venues.  Medical  compliance  with  testing  recommendations  already  is  high  for
certain populations, particularly among 
those  who  typically  receive  care  in  hospitals  or  other  health-care  settings  in  which
HBsAg testing is routine. For example, 99% 
of pregnant women deliver their infants in hospitals and 89%--96% of them are tested
for HBV infection 
(144;  CDC,  unpublished  data,  2007),  and  susceptible  dialysis  patients  are  tested
monthly for HBsAg 
(119).  However,  compliance  with  testing  recommendations  is  lower  in  other  settings.
One study indicated that testing was performed for 30%--50% of 
persons born in regions with high HBsAg prevalence who were seen in public primary
care clinics 
(145). Even in settings in which persons are tested routinely for HBsAg, more efforts are
needed to educate, evaluate, and refer clients for appropriate 
medical  follow-up.  CDC  supports  education  and  training  grants  that  help  educate
providers to screen patients at risk for 
chronic hepatitis B. Prevention research is needed to guide the delivery of hepatitis B
screening in diverse clinical and 
community settings.
 In  addition,  community  outreach  and  education,  conducted  through  developing
partnerships between health 
departments  and  community  organizations,  is  needed  to  encourage  community
members to seek HBsAg testing. These partnerships 
might be particularly important to overcome social and cultural barriers to testing and
care among members of racial and 
ethnic  minority  populations  who  are  unfamiliar  with  the  U.S.  health-care  system.
Advisory groups of community 
representatives, providers who treat patients for chronic hepatitis B, providers whose
patient populations represent populations with 
high prevalence, and professional medical organizations can guide health departments
in developing communications 
and prioritizing hepatitis B screening efforts.
 The lack of sufficient resources for management of infected persons can be a barrier to
implementation of 
screening programs. All persons with HBV infection, including those who lack insurance
and resources, will need ongoing 
medical management and possibly therapy. This demand for care will 
increase as screening increases, and additional providers will 
be  needed  with  expertise  in  the  rapidly  evolving  field  of  hepatitis  B  monitoring  and
treatment.
 Acknowledgments
 The  following  persons  provided  consultation  and  guidance  in  the  preparation  of  this
report: Miriam J. Alter, PhD, University of 
Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas; Mary B. Barton, MD, MPP, Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality, 
Rockville, Maryland; Molli C. Conti, Hepatitis B Foundation, Doylestown, Pennsylvania;
Adrian DiBisceglie, MD, St. Louis University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Kristen R. Ehresmann, MPH, Minnesota Department of
Health, St. Paul, Minnesota; Susan I. 
Gerber, MD, Chicago Department of Public Health, Chicago, Illinois; Beau Gratzner, MPP,
Howard Brown Health Center, Chicago, 
Illinois;  Ken  J.  Hoffman,  MD,  Substance  Abuse  and  Mental  Health  Services
Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Jay H. Hoofnagle, 
MD,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  National  Institute  of  Diabetes  and  Digestive  and
Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland; Sandra 
Huang,  MD,  San  Francisco  Department  of  Public  Health,  San  Francisco,  California;  W.
Ray Kim, MD, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine,  Rochester,  Minnesota;  Anna  Suk-Fong  Lok,  MD,  University  of  Michigan,  Ann
Arbor, Michigan; Brian McMahon, MD, Alaska 
Native  Tribal  Health  Consortium,  Anchorage,  Alaska;  Alawode  Oladele,  MD,  DeKalb
County Board of Health, Decatur, Georgia; Henry 
J.  Pollack,  MD,  New  York  University  Medical  Center,  New  York,  New  York;  Samuel  So,
MD, Asian Liver Center at Stanford 
University, Stanford, California; William Stauffer, MD, DTM&H, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota; Diana L. Sylvestre, 
MD, University of California, San Francisco, Oakland, California; Jonathan L. Temte, MD,
PhD, AAFP Liaison to ACIP, University 
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin; Ann R. Thomas,
MD, Oregon Department of Health, 
Portland,  Oregon;  Amy  E.  Warner,  MPH,  Colorado  Department  of  Public  Health  and
Environment, Denver, Colorado; Isaac B. Weisfuse, 
MD, New York Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, New York, New York; John B.
Wong, MD, FACP, Tufts New England 
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
References
 * Disagreement exists internationally about best practices for avoiding transmission of
HBV from health-care worker to patient 
(53).
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from typeset documents.
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. 
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Date  last  reviewed:
9/4/2008
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5708a1.htm
