A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Below  are  tables  summarizing
recommendations  for  this  guideline.  The  ultimate  goal  of  the  Recommendations  for
Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in  Health-Care  Facilities,  2008,  is  to  reduce  rates  of
health-care  associated  infections  through  appropriate  use  of  both  disinfection  and
sterilization.  Each  recommendation  is  categorized  according  to  scientific  evidence,
theoretical  rationale,  applicability,  and  federal  regulations.  Examples  are  included  in
some recommendations to aid the reader; however, these examples are not intended to
define  the  only  method  of  implementing  the  recommendation.  The  CDC  system  for
categorizing  recommendations  is  defined  in  the  following  (Rankings)  section.
Update:  Use  an  EPA-registered  sporicidal  disinfectant  in  units  with  high  rates  of
endemic  Clostridium  difficile  infection  or  in  an  outbreak  setting.  Clarification
Statement:  CDC  and  HICPAC  have  recommendations  in  both  2003  Guidelines  for
Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  and  the  2008  Guideline  for
Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities that state that the CDC does not
support  disinfectant  fogging.  Specifically,  the  2003  and  2008  Guidelines  state:  These
recommendations  refer  to  the  spraying  or  fogging  of  chemicals  (e.g.,  formaldehyde,
phenol-based
 agents,
 or
 quaternary
 ammonium
 compounds)
 as
 a
 way
 to
decontaminate  environmental  surfaces  or  disinfect  the  air  in  patient  rooms.  The
recommendation  against  fogging  was  based  on  studies  in  the  1970’s  that  reported  a
lack  of  microbicidal  efficacy  (e.g.,  use  of  quaternary  ammonium  compounds  in  mist
applications)  but  also  adverse  effects  on  healthcare  workers  and  others  in  facilities
where  these  methods  were  utilized.  Furthermore,  some  of  these  chemicals  are  not
EPA-registered  for  use  in  fogging-type  applications.  These  recommendations  do  not
apply  to  newer  technologies  involving  fogging  for  room  decontamination  (e.g.,  ozone
mists,  vaporized  hydrogen  peroxide)  that  have  become  available  since  the  2003  and
2008 recommendations were made. These newer technologies were assessed by CDC
and  HICPAC  in  the  2011  Guideline  for  the  Prevention  and  Control  of  Norovirus
Gastroenteritis  Outbreaks  in  Healthcare  Settings,  which  makes  the  recommendation:
“More  research  is  required  to  clarify  the  effectiveness  and  reliability  of  fogging,  UV
irradiation,  and  ozone  mists  to  reduce  norovirus  environmental  contamination.  (No
recommendation/unresolved  issue)”  The  2003  and  2008  recommendations  still  apply;
however,  CDC  does  not  yet  make  a  recommendation  regarding  these  newer
technologies.  This  issue  will  be  revisited  as  additional  evidence  becomes  available.
Update:  Multisociety  guideline  on  reprocessing  flexible  gastrointestinal  endoscopes:
2011 Cdc-pdfpdf icon[PDF – 547KB]Externalexternal icon CDC provides information on
infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among
healthcare workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/summary-recommendations.html
