Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Summary  Since 1989, a rapid
increase in the incidence of infection and
colonization with vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) has been
 reported
by U.S. hospitals. This increase poses important problems,
 including a) the
lack of available antimicrobial therapy for VRE infections, because
 most
VRE are also resistant to drugs previously used to treat such
 infections
(e.g., aminoglycosides and ampicillin), and b) the possibility that
 the
vancomycin-resistant genes present in VRE can be transferred to
 other
gram-positive microorganisms (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus).  An increased risk for VRE
infection and colonization has been
associated with previous vancomycin and/or multiantimicrobial
 therapy,
severe underlying disease or immunosuppression, and intraabdominal
 surgery.
Because enterococci can be found in the normal gastrointestinal and
 female
genital tracts, most enterococcal infections have been attributed
 to
endogenous sources within the individual patient. However, recent
 reports
of outbreaks and endemic infections caused by enterococci,
 including VRE,
have indicated that patient-to-patient transmission of the
 microorganisms
can occur either through direct contact or through indirect contact
 via a)
the hands of personnel or b) contaminated patient-care equipment or
environmental  surfaces.   This  report  presents  recommendations  of  the  Hospital
Infection
 Control
Practices Advisory Committee for preventing and controlling the
 spread of
vancomycin resistance, with a special focus on VRE. Preventing and
controlling the spread of vancomycin resistance will require
 coordinated,
concerted efforts from all involved hospital departments and can be
achieved only if each of the following elements is addressed: a)
 prudent
vancomycin use by clinicians, b) education of hospital staff
 regarding the
problem of vancomycin resistance, c) early detection and prompt
 reporting
of vancomycin resistance in enterococci and other gram-positive
microorganisms by the hospital microbiology laboratory, and d)
 immediate
implementation of appropriate infection-control measures to prevent
person-to-person transmission of VRE.  INTRODUCTION  From 1989 through 1993, the
percentage of nosocomial
 enterococcal
infections reported to CDC's National Nosocomial Infections
 Surveillance
(NNIS) system that were caused by vancomycin-resistant enterococci
 (VRE)
increased from 0.3% to 7.9% (1). This overall increase primarily
 reflected
the 34-fold increase in the percentage of VRE infections in
 patients in
intensive-care units (ICUs) (i.e., from 0.4% to 13.6%), although a
 trend
toward an increased percentage of VRE infections in non-ICU
 patients also
was noted (1). The occurrence of VRE in NNIS hospitals was
 associated with
larger hospital size (i.e., a hospital with greater than or equal
 to 200
beds) and university affiliation (1). Other hospitals also have
 reported
increased endemic rates and clusters of VRE infection and
 colonization
(2-8). The actual increase in the incidence of VRE in U.S.
 hospitals might
be greater than reported because the fully automated methods used
 in many
clinical laboratories cannot consistently detect vancomycin
 resistance,
especially moderate vancomycin resistance (as manifested in the
 VanB
phenotype) (9-11).  Vancomycin resistance in enterococci has coincided with the
 increasing
incidence of high-level enterococcal resistance to penicillin and
aminoglycosides, thus presenting a challenge for physicians who
 treat
patients who have infections caused by these microorganisms (1,4).
Treatment options are often limited to combining antimicrobials or
experimental  compounds  that  have  unproven  efficacy  (12-14).   The  epidemiology  of
VRE has not been clarified; however,
 certain
patient populations are at increased risk for VRE infection or
colonization. These populations include critically ill patients or
 those
with severe underlying disease or immunosuppression (e.g., patients
 in ICUs
or in oncology or transplant wards); persons who have had an
 intraabdominal
or cardio-thoracic surgical procedure or an indwelling urinary or
 central
venous catheter; and persons who have had a prolonged hospital stay
 or
received multiantimicrobial and/or vancomycin therapy (2-8).
 Because
enterococci are part of the normal flora of the gastrointestinal
 and female
genital tracts, most infections with these microorganisms have been
attributed to the patient's endogenous flora (15). However, recent
 studies
have indicated that VRE and other enterococci can be transmitted
 directly
by patient-to-patient contact or indirectly by transient carriage
 on the
hands of personnel (16) or by contaminated environmental surfaces
 and
patient-care equipment (3,8,17).  The potential emergence of vancomycin resistance in
clinical
 isolates
of Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis also is a
 public
health concern. The vanA gene, which is frequently plasmid-borne
 and
confers high-level resistance to vancomycin, can be transferred in
 vitro
from enterococci to a variety of gram-positive microorganisms
 (18,19),
including S. aureus (20). Although vancomycin resistance in
 clinical
strains of S. epidermidis or S. aureus has not been reported,
vancomycin-resistant strains of Staphylococcus haemolyticus have
 been
isolated (21,22).  In November 1993 and February 1994, the Subcommittee on the
 Prevention
and Control of Antimicrobial-Resistant Microorganisms in Hospitals
 of CDC's
Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC)
 responded
to the increase in vancomycin resistance in enterococci by meeting
 with
representatives from the American Hospital Association, the
 American
Society for Microbiology, the Association for Professionals in
 Infection
Control and Epidemiology, the Infectious Diseases Society of
 America, the
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, and the Surgical
 Infection
Society. Meeting participants agreed with the need for prompt
implementation of control measures; thus, recommendations to
 prevent the
spread of VRE were developed. Public comments were solicited and
incorporated into the draft recommendations. In November 1994,
 HICPAC
ratified the following recommendations for preventing and
 controlling the
spread of vancomycin resistance, with special focus on VRE.  HICPAC recognizes that a)
data are limited and additional
 research
will be required to clarify the epidemiology of VRE and determine
cost-effective control strategies, and b) many U.S. hospitals have
concurrent problems with other antimicrobial-resistant organisms
 (e.g.,
methicillin-resistant S. aureus {MRSA} and beta-lactam and
aminoglycoside-resistant gram-negative bacilli) that might have
 different
epidemiologic  features  and  require  different  control  measures.   RECOMMENDATIONS  
Each hospital -- through collaboration of its
 quality-improvement and
infection-control programs; pharmacy and therapeutics committee;
microbiology laboratory; clinical departments; and nursing,
 administrative,
and housekeeping services -- should develop a comprehensive,
institution-specific, strategic plan to detect, prevent, and
 control
infection and colonization with VRE. The following elements should
 be
addressed in the plan.  Prudent Vancomycin Use  Vancomycin use has been reported
consistently as a risk factor
 for
infection and colonization with VRE (2,4,7,8,17) and may increase
 the
possibility of the emergence of vancomycin-resistant S. aureus
 (VRSA)
and/or vancomycin-resistant S. epidermidis (VRSE). Therefore, all
 hospitals
and other health-care delivery services, even those at which VRE
 have never
been detected, should a) develop a comprehensive,
 antimicrobial-utilization
plan to provide education for their medical staff (including
 medical
students who rotate their training in different departments of the
health-care facility), b) oversee surgical prophylaxis, and c)
 develop
guidelines for the proper use of vancomycin (as applicable to the
institution).  Guideline development should be part of the hospital's
quality-improvement program and should involve participation from
 the
hospital's pharmacy and therapeutics committee; hospital
 epidemiologist;
and infection-control, infectious-disease, medical, and surgical
 staffs.
The guidelines should include the following considerations:  
    Situations in which the use of vancomycin is appropriate or
    acceptable:  
        For treatment of serious infections caused by
 beta-lactam-
        resistant gram-positive microorganisms. Vancomycin may be
 less
        rapidly bactericidal than are beta-lactam agents for
 beta-lactam-
        susceptible staphylococci (23,24).  
        For treatment of infections caused by gram-positive
        microorganisms in patients who have serious allergies to
        beta-lactam antimicrobials.  
        When antibiotic-associated colitis fails to respond to
        metronidazole therapy or is severe and potentially
        life-threatening.  
        Prophylaxis, as recommended by the American Heart
 Association,
        for endocarditis following certain procedures in patients
 at high
        risk for endocarditis (25).  
        Prophylaxis for major surgical procedures involving
 implantation
        of prosthetic materials or devices (e.g., cardiac and
 vascular
        procedures {26} and total hip replacement) at
 institutions that
        have a high rate of infections caused by MRSA or
        methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis. A single dose of
 vancomycin
        administered immediately before surgery is sufficient
 unless the
        procedure lasts greater than 6 hours, in which case the
 dose
        should be repeated. Prophylaxis should be discontinued
 after a
        maximum of two doses (27-30).  
    Situations in which the use of vancomycin should be
 discouraged:  
        Routine surgical prophylaxis other than in a patient who
 has a
        life-threatening allergy to beta-lactam antibiotics (28).
  
        Empiric antimicrobial therapy for a febrile neutropenic
 patient,
        unless initial evidence indicates that the patient has an
        infection caused by gram-positive microorganisms (e.g.,
 at an
        inflamed exit site of Hickman catheter) and the
 prevalence of
        infections caused by MRSA in the hospital is substantial
 (31-37).  
        Treatment in response to a single blood culture positive
 for
        coagulase-negative staphylococcus, if other blood
 cultures taken
        during the same time frame are negative (i.e., if
 contamination
        of the blood culture is likely). Because contamination of
 blood
        cultures with skin flora (e.g., S. epidermidis) could
 result in
        inappropriate administration of vancomycin, phlebotomists
 and
        other personnel who obtain blood cultures should be
 trained to
        minimize microbial contamination of specimens (38-40).  
        Continued empiric use for presumed infections in patients
 whose
        cultures are negative for beta-lactam-resistant
 gram-positive
        microorganisms (41).  
        Systemic or local (e.g., antibiotic lock) prophylaxis for
        infection or colonization of indwelling central or
 peripheral
        intravascular catheters (42-48).  
        Selective decontamination of the digestive tract.  
        Eradication of MRSA colonization (49,50).  
        Primary treatment of antibiotic-associated colitis (51).  
        Routine prophylaxis for very low-birthweight infants
 (i.e.,
        infants who weigh less than 1,500 g {3 lbs 4 oz}) (52).  
        Routine prophylaxis for patients on continuous ambulatory
        peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis (48,53).  
        Treatment (chosen for dosing convenience) of infections
 caused by
        beta-lactam-sensitive gram-positive microorganisms in
 patients
        who have renal failure (54-57).  
        Use of vancomycin solution for topical application or
 irrigation.  
    Enhancing compliance with recommendations:  
        Although several techniques may be useful, further study
 is
        required to determine the most effective methods for
 influencing
        the prescribing practices of physicians (58-61).  
        Key parameters of vancomycin use can be monitored through
 the
        hospital's quality assurance/improvement process or as
 part of
        the drug-utilization review of the pharmacy and
 therapeutics
        committee  and  the  medical  staff.   Education  Programs   Continuing  education
programs for hospital staff (including
 attending
and consulting physicians, medical residents, and students;
 pharmacy,
nursing, and laboratory personnel; and other direct patient-care
 providers)
should include information concerning the epidemiology of VRE and
 the
potential impact of this pathogen on the cost and outcome of
 patient care.
Because detection and containment of VRE require an aggressive
 approach and
high performance standards for hospital personnel, special
 awareness and
educational  sessions  might  be  indicated.   Role  of  the  Microbiology  Laboratory  in  the
Detection, Reporting,
 and
Control of VRE  The microbiology laboratory is the first line of defense
 against the
spread of VRE in the hospital. The laboratory's ability to promptly
 and
accurately identify enterococci and detect vancomycin resistance is
essential for recognizing VRE colonization and infection and
 avoiding
complex, costly containment efforts that are required when
 recognition of
the problem is delayed. In addition, cooperation and communication
 between
the laboratory and the infection-control program will facilitate
 control
efforts.   Identification  of  Enterococci   Presumptively  identify  colonies  on  primary
isolation plates as
enterococci by using colonial morphology, a Gram stain, and a
 pyrrolidonyl
arylamidase (PYR) test. Although identifying enterococci to the
 species
level can help predict certain resistance patterns (e.g.,
 Enterococcus
faecium is more resistant to penicillin than is Enterococcus
 faecalis) and
may help determine the epidemiologic relatedness of enterococcal
 isolates,
such identification is not routinely necessary if antimicrobial
susceptibility testing is performed. However, under special
 circumstances
or as laboratory resources permit, biochemical tests can be used to
differentiate between various enterococcal species. Although most
commercially available identification systems adequately
 differentiate E.
faecalis from other species of enterococci, additional tests for
 motility
and pigment production are required to distinguish Enterococcus
 gallinarum
(motile and nonpigmented) and Enterococcus casseliflavus (motile
 and
pigmented)  from  E.  faecium  (nonmotile  and  nonpigmented).   Tests  for  Antimicrobial
Susceptibility  Determine vancomycin resistance and high-level resistance to
penicillin (or ampicillin) and aminoglycosides (62) for enterococci
isolated from blood, sterile body sites (with the possible
 exception of
urine), and other sites as clinically indicated. Laboratories
 routinely may
test wound and urine isolates for resistance to vancomycin and
 penicillin
or ampicillin if resources permit (see Screening Procedures for
 Detecting
VRE in Hospitals Where VRE Have Not Been Detected).  
    Laboratories that use disk diffusion should incubate plates
 for 24
    hours and read zones of inhibition by using transmitted light
 (62,63).  
    Minimum inhibitory concentrations can be determined by agar
 dilution,
    agar gradient dilution, broth macrodilution, or manual broth
    microdilution (62-64). These test systems should be incubated
 for 24
    hours.  
    The fully automated methods of testing enterococci for
 resistance to
    vancomycin currently are unreliable (9-11).  When VRE Are Isolated From a Clinical
Specimen  Confirm vancomycin resistance by repeating antimicrobial
susceptibility testing using any of the recommended methods (see
 Tests for
Antimicrobial Susceptibility), particularly if VRE isolates are
 unusual in
the hospital, OR streak 1 uL of standard inoculum (0.5 McFarland)
 from an
isolated colony of enterococci onto brain heart infusion agar
 containing 6
ug/mL of vancomycin, incubate the inoculated plate for 24 hours at
 35 C (95
F), and consider any growth indicative of vancomycin resistance
 (62,63,65).  Immediately, while performing confirmatory susceptibility
 tests,
notify the patient's primary caregiver, patient-care personnel, and
infection-control personnel regarding the presumptive
 identification of VRE
so that appropriate isolation precautions can be initiated promptly
 (see
Preventing and Controlling VRE Transmission in All Hospitals).
 Follow this
preliminary report with the (final) result of the confirmatory
 test.
Additionally, highlight the report regarding the isolate to alert
 staff
that  isolation  precautions  are  indicated.   Screening  Procedures  for  Detecting  VRE  in
Hospitals Where VRE Have
 Not Been
Detected  In some hospital microbiology laboratories, antimicrobial
susceptibility testing of enterococcal isolates from urine or
 nonsterile
body sites (e.g., wounds) is not performed routinely; thus,
 identification
of nosocomial VRE colonization and infection in hospitalized
 patients may
be delayed. Therefore, in hospitals where VRE have not yet been
 detected,
implementing special measures can promote earlier detection of VRE.
  Antimicrobial susceptibility survey. Perform periodic
 susceptibility
testing on an epidemiologic sample of enterococcal isolates
 recovered from
all types of clinical specimens, especially from high-risk patients
 (e.g.,
those in an ICU or in an oncology or transplant ward). The optimal
frequency of testing and number of isolates to be tested will vary
 among
hospitals, depending on the patient population and number of
 cultures
performed at the hospital. Hospitals that process large numbers of
 culture
specimens need to test only a fraction (e.g., 10%) of enterococcal
 isolates
every 1-2 months, whereas hospitals processing fewer specimens
 might need
to test all enterococcal isolates during the survey period. The
 hospital
epidemiologist can help design a suitable sampling strategy.  Culture survey of stools or
rectal swabs. In tertiary medical
 centers
and other hospitals that have many critically ill patients (e.g.,
 ICU,
oncology, and transplant patients) at high risk for VRE infection
 or
colonization, periodic culture surveys of stools or rectal swabs of
 such
patients can detect the presence of VRE. Because most patients
 colonized
with VRE have intestinal colonization with this organism, fecal
 screening
of patients is recommended even though VRE infections have not been
identified  clinically  (2,4,16).   The  frequency  and  intensity  of  surveillance  should  be
based on
 the
size of the population at risk and the specific hospital unit(s)
 involved.
If VRE have been detected in other health-care facilities in a
 hospital's
area and/or if a hospital's staff decides to determine whether VRE
 are
present in the hospital despite the absence of recognized clinical
 cases,
stool or rectal-swab culture surveys are useful. The cost of
 screening can
be reduced by inoculating specimens onto selective media containing
vancomycin (2,17,66) and restricting screening to those patients
 who have
been in the hospital long enough to have a substantial risk for
colonization (e.g., 5-7 days) or who have been admitted from a
 facility
(e.g., a tertiary-care hospital or a chronic-care facility) where
 VRE have
been identified.  After colonization with VRE has been detected, all the
 enterococcal
isolates (including those from urine and wounds) from patients in
 the
hospital should be screened routinely for vancomycin resistance,
 and
efforts to contain the spread of VRE should be intensified (i.e.,
 by strict
adherence to handwashing and compliance with isolation precautions)
 (see
Preventing and Controlling VRE Transmission in All Hospitals).
 Intensified
fecal screening for VRE might facilitate earlier identification of
colonized patients, leading to more efficient containment of the
microorganism.   Preventing  and  Controlling  Nosocomial  Transmission  of  VRE  
Eradicating VRE from hospitals is most likely to succeed when
 VRE
infection or colonization is confined to a few patients on a single
 ward.
After VRE have become endemic on a ward or have spread to multiple
 wards or
to the community, eradication becomes difficult and costly.
 Aggressive
infection-control measures and strict compliance by hospital
 personnel are
required  to  limit  nosocomial  spread  of  VRE.   Control  of  VRE  requires  a  collaborative,
institution-wide,
multidisciplinary effort. Therefore, the hospital's
quality-assurance/improvement department should be involved at the
 outset
to identify specific problems in hospital operations and
 patient-care
systems and to design, implement, and evaluate appropriate changes
 in these
systems.  Preventing and Controlling VRE Transmission in All Hospitals  The following
measures should be implemented by all hospitals,
including those in which VRE have been isolated infrequently or not
 at all,
to prevent and control transmission of VRE.  
    Notify appropriate hospital staff promptly when VRE are
 detected (see
    When VRE Are Isolated From a Clinical Specimen).  
    Inform clinical staff of the hospital's policies regarding
    VRE-infected or colonized patients. Because the slightest
 delay can
    lead to further spread of VRE and complicate control efforts,
    implement the required procedures as soon as VRE are detected.
    Clinical staff are essential to limiting the spread of VRE in
    patient-care areas; thus, continuing education regarding the
    appropriate response to the detection of VRE is critical (see
    Education Programs).  
    Establish system(s) for monitoring appropriate process and
 outcome
    measures (e.g., cumulative incidence or incidence density of
 VRE
    colonization, rate of compliance with VRE isolation
 precautions and
    handwashing, interval between VRE identification in the
 laboratory and
    implementation of isolation precautions on the wards, and the
    percentage of previously colonized patients admitted to the
 ward who
    are identified promptly and placed on isolation precautions).
 Relay
    these data to the clinical, administrative, laboratory, and
 support
    staff to reinforce ongoing education and control efforts (67).
  
    Initiate the following isolation precautions to prevent
    patient-to-patient transmission of VRE:  
        Place VRE-infected or colonized patients in private rooms
 or in
        the same room as other patients who have VRE (8).  
        Wear gloves (clean, nonsterile gloves are adequate) when
 entering
        the room of a VRE-infected or colonized patient because
 VRE can
        extensively contaminate such an environment (3,8,16,17).
 When
        caring for a patient, a change of gloves might be
 necessary after
        contact with material that could contain high
 concentrations of
        VRE (e.g., stool).  
        Wear a gown (a clean, nonsterile gown is adequate) when
 entering
        the room of a VRE-infected or colonized patient a) if
 substantial
        contact with the patient or with environmental surfaces
 in the
        patient's room is anticipated, b) if the patient is
 incontinent,
        or c) if the patient has had an ileostomy or colostomy,
 has
        diarrhea, or has a wound drainage not contained by a
 dressing
        (8).  
        Remove gloves and gown before leaving the patient's room
 and
        immediately wash hands with an antiseptic soap or a
 waterless
        antiseptic agent (68-71). Hands can be contaminated via
 glove
        leaks (72-76) or during glove removal, and bland soap
 does not
        always completely remove VRE from the hands (77).  
        Ensure that after glove and gown removal and handwashing,
        clothing and hands do not contact environmental surfaces
 in the
        patient's room that are potentially contaminated with VRE
 (e.g.,
        a door knob or curtain) (3,8).  
    Dedicate the use of noncritical items (e.g., a stethoscope,
    sphygmomanometer, or rectal thermometer) to a single patient
 or cohort
    of patients infected or colonized with VRE (17). If such
 devices are
    to be used on other patients, adequately clean and disinfect
 these
    devices first (78).  
    Obtain a stool culture or rectal swab from roommates of
 patients newly
    found to be infected or colonized with VRE to determine their
    colonization status, and apply isolation precautions as
 necessary.
    Perform additional screening of patients on the ward at the
 discretion
    of the infection-control staff.  
    Adopt a policy for deciding when patients infected or
 colonized with
    VRE can be removed from isolation precautions. The optimal
    requirements remain unknown; however, because VRE colonization
 can
    persist indefinitely (4), stringent criteria might be
 appropriate,
    such as VRE-negative results on at least three consecutive
 occasions
    (greater than or equal to 1 week apart) for all cultures from
 multiple
    body sites (including stool or rectal swab, perineal area,
 axilla or
    umbilicus, and wound, Foley catheter, and/or colostomy sites,
 if
    present).  
    Because patients with VRE can remain colonized for long
 periods after
    discharge from the hospital, establish a system for
 highlighting the
    records of infected or colonized patients so they can be
 promptly
    identified and placed on isolation precautions upon
 readmission to the
    hospital. This information should be computerized so that
 placement of
    colonized patients on isolation precautions will not be
 delayed
    because the patients' medical records are unavailable.  
    Local and state health departments should be consulted when
 developing
    a plan regarding the discharge of VRE-infected or colonized
 patients
    to nursing homes, other hospitals, or home-health care. This
 plan
    should be part of a larger strategy for handling patients who
 have
    resolving infections and patients colonized with
    antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms.  Hospitals With Endemic VRE or Continued
VRE Transmission  The following measures should be taken to prevent and control
transmission of VRE in hospitals that have endemic VRE or continued
 VRE
transmission despite implementation of measures described in the
 preceding
section (see Preventing and Controlling VRE Transmission in All
 Hospitals).  
    Focus control efforts initially on ICUs and other areas where
 the VRE
    transmission rate is highest (4). Such areas can serve as
 reservoirs
    for VRE, allowing VRE to spread to other wards when patients
 are well
    enough to be transferred.  
    Where feasible, cohort the staff who provide regular, ongoing
 care to
    patients to minimize the movement/contact of health-care
 providers
    between VRE-positive and VRE-negative patients (4,8).  
    Hospital staff who are carriers of enterococci have been
 implicated
    rarely in the transmission of this organism (8). However, in
    conjunction with careful epidemiologic studies and upon the
 direction
    of the infection-control staff, examine personnel for chronic
 skin and
    nail problems and perform hand and rectal swab cultures of
 these
    workers. Remove from the care of VRE-negative patients those
    VRE-positive personnel linked epidemiologically to VRE
 transmission
    until their carrier state has been eradicated.  
    Because the results of several enterococcal outbreak
 investigations
    suggest a potential role for the environment in the
 transmission of
    enterococci (3,8,16,17,79,80), institutions experiencing
 ongoing VRE
    transmission should verify that the hospital has adequate
 procedures
    for the routine care, cleaning, and disinfection of
 environmental
    surfaces (e.g., bed rails, bedside commodes, carts, charts,
 doorknobs,
    and faucet handles) and that these procedures are being
 followed by
    housekeeping personnel. To verify the efficacy of hospital
 policies
    and procedures, some hospitals might elect to perform focused
    environmental cultures before and after cleaning rooms that
 house
    patients who have VRE. All environmental culturing should be
 approved
    and supervised by the infection-control program in
 collaboration with
    the clinical laboratory (3,8,16,17,79,80).  
    Consider sending representative VRE isolates to reference
 laboratories
    for strain typing by pulsed field gel electrophoresis or other
    suitable techniques to aid in defining reservoirs and patterns
 of
    transmission.  Detecting and Reporting VRSA and VRSE  The microbiology laboratory
has the primary responsibility for
detecting and reporting the occurrence of VRSA or VRSE in the
 hospital. All
clinical isolates of S. aureus and S. epidermidis should be tested
routinely, using standard methods, for susceptibility to vancomycin
 (62).
If VRSA or VRSE is identified in a clinical specimen, confirm
 vancomycin
resistance by repeating antimicrobial susceptibility testing using
 standard
methods (62). Restreak the colony to ensure that the culture is
 pure. The
most common causes of false-positive VRSA reports are
 susceptibility
testing on mixed cultures and misidentifying VRE, Leuconostoc, S.
haemolyticus,  or  Pediococcus  as  VRSA  (81,82).   Immediately  (i.e.,  while  performing
confirmatory testing)
 notify the
hospital's infection-control personnel, the patient's primary
 caregiver,
and patient-care personnel on the ward on which the patient is
 hospitalized
so that the patient can be placed promptly on isolation precautions
(depending on the site{s} of infection or colonization) adapted
 from
previous CDC guidelines (83) and those recommended for VRE
 infection or
colonization in this report (see Preventing and Controlling
 Nosocomial
Transmission of VRE). Furthermore, immediately notify the state
 health
department and CDC, and send the isolate through the state health
department to CDC (telephone {404} 639-6413) for confirmation of
 vancomycin
resistance.  References  
    CDC. Nosocomial enterococci resistant to vancomycin -- United
 States,
    1989-1993. MMWR 1993;42:597-9.  
    Rubin LG, Tucci V, Cercenado E, Eliopoulos G, Isenberg HD.
    Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium in hospitalized
 children.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:700-5.  
    Karanfil LV, Murphy M, Josephson A, et al. A cluster of
    vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium in an intensive care
 unit.
    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:195-200.  
    Handwerger S, Raucher B, Altarac D, et al. Nosocomial outbreak
 due to
    Enterococcus faecium highly resistant to vancomycin,
 penicillin, and
    gentamicin. Clin Infect Dis 1993;16:750-5.  
    Frieden TR, Munsiff SS, Low DE, et al. Emergence of
    vancomycin-resistant enterococci in New York City. Lancet
 1993;342:
    76-9.  
    Boyle JF, Soumakis SA, Rendo A, et al. Epidemiologic analysis
 and
    genotypic characterization of a nosocomial outbreak of
    vancomycin-resistant enterococci. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:
 1280-5.  
    Montecalvo MA, Horowitz H, Gedris C, et al. Outbreak of
 vancomycin-,
    ampicillin-, and aminoglycoside-resistant Enterococcus faecium
    bacteremia in an adult oncology unit. Antimicrob Agents
 Chemother
    1994;38:1363-7.  
    Boyce JM, Opal SM, Chow JW, et al. Outbreak of multi-drug
 resistant
    Enterococcus faecium with transferable vanB class vancomycin
    resistance. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:1148-53.  
    Tenover FC, Tokars J, Swenson J, Paul S, Spitalny K, Jarvis W.
 Ability
    of clinical laboratories to detect antimicrobial
 agent-resistant
    enterococci. J Clin Microbiol 1993;31:1695-9.  
    Sahm DF, Olsen L. In vitro detection of enterococcal
 vancomycin
    resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1990;34:1846-8.  
    Zabransky RJ, Dinuzzo AR, Huber MB, Woods GL. Detection of
 vancomycin
    resistance in enterococci by the Vitek AMS System. Diagn
 Microbiol
    Infect Dis 1994;20:113-6.  
    Moellering RC Jr. The Garrod lecture: the enterococcus -- a
 classic
    example of the impact of antimicrobial resistance on
 therapeutic
    options. J Antimicrob Chemother 1991;28:1-12.  
    Hayden MK, Koenig GI, Trenholme GM. Bactericidal activities of
    antibiotics against vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium
 blood
    isolates and synergistic activities of combinations.
 Antimicrob Agents
    Chemother 1994;38:1225-9.  
    Mobarakai N, Landman D, Quale JM. In-vitro activity of
 trospectomycin,
    a new aminocyclitol antibiotic against multidrug-resistant
    Enterococcus faecium. J Antimicrob Chemother 1994;33:319-21.  
    Murray BE. The life and times of the enterococcus. Clin
 Microbiol Rev
    1990;3:46-65.  
    Rhinehart E, Smith N, Wennersten C, et al. Rapid dissemination
 of
    beta-lactamase-producing aminoglycoside-resistant Enterococcus
    faecalis among patients and staff on an infant and toddler
 surgical
    ward. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1814-8.  
    Livornese LL Jr, Dias S, Samel C, et al. Hospital-acquired
 infection
    with vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium transmitted by
    electronic thermometers. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:112-6.  
    Uttley AH, George RC, Naidoo J, et al. High-level
 vancomycin-resistant
    enterococci causing hospital infections. Epidemiol Infect
 1989;103:
    173-81.  
    Leclercq R, Derlot E, Weber M, Duval J, Courvalin P.
 Transferable
    vancomycin and teicoplanin resistance in Enterococcus faecium.
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1989;33:10-5.  
    Noble WC, Virani Z, Cree R. Co-transfer of vancomycin and
 other
    resistance genes from Enterococcus faecalis NCTC12201 to
    Staphylococcus aureus. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1992;72:195-8.  
    Veach LA, Pfaller MA, Barrett M, Koontz FP, Wenzel RP.
 Vancomycin
    resistance in Staphylococcus haemolyticus causing colonization
 and
    bloodstream infection. J Clin Microbiol 1990;28:2064-8.  
    Degener JE, Heck MEOC, Vanleeuwen WJ, et al. Nosocomial
 infection by
    Staphylococcus haemolyticus and typing methods for
 epidemiological
    study. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:2260-5.  
    Small PM, Chambers HF. Vancomycin for Staphylococcus aureus
    endocarditis in intravenous drug users. Antimicrob Agents
 Chemother
    1990;34:1227-31.  
    Cantoni L, Glauser MP, Bille J. Comparative efficacy of
 daptomycin,
    vancomycin, and cloxacillin for the treatment of
 Staphylococcus aureus
    endocarditis in rats and role of test conditions in this
    determination. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1990;34:2348-53.  
    American Heart Association Committee on Rheumatic Fever and
 Infective
    Endocarditis. Prevention of bacterial endocarditis.
 Circulation
    1984;70:1123-4.  
    Maki DG, Bohn MJ, Stolz SM, Kroncke GM, Acher CW, Myerowitz
 PD.
    Comparative study of cefazolin, cefamandole, and vancomycin
 for
    surgical prophylaxis in cardiac and vascular operations: a
    double-blind randomized trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
 1992;104:
    1423-34.  
    Classen DC, Evans RS, Pestotnik SL, Horn SD, Menlove RL, Burke
 JP. The
    timing of prophylactic administration of antibiotics and the
 risk of
    surgical-wound infection. N Engl J Med 1992; 326:281-6.  
    Conte JE Jr, Cohen SN, Roe BB, Elashoff RM. Antibiotic
 prophylaxis and
    cardiac surgery: a prospective double-blind comparison of
 single-dose
    versus multiple-dose regimens. Ann Intern Med 1972;76:943-9.  
    DiPiro JT, Cheung RP, Bowden TA Jr, Mansberger JA. Single-dose
    systemic antibiotic prophylaxis of surgical wound infections.
 Am J
    Surg 1986;152:552-9.  
    Heydemann JS, Nelson CL. Short-term preventive antibiotics.
 Clin
    Orthop 1986;205:184-7.  
    Rubin M, Hathorn JW, Marshall D, Gress J, Steinberg SM, Pizzo
 PA.
    Gram-positive infections and the use of vancomycin in 550
 episodes of
    fever and neutropenia. Ann Intern Med 1988; 108:30-5.  
    Shenep JL, Hughes WT, Roberson PK, et al. Vancomycin,
 ticarcillin, and
    amikacin compared with ticarcillin-clavulanate and amikacin in
 the
    empirical treatment of febrile neutropenic children with
 cancer. N
    Engl J Med 1988;319:1053-8.  
    Pizzo PA, Hathorn JW, Hiemenz J, et al. A randomized trial
 comparing
    ceftazidime alone with combination antibiotic therapy in
 cancer
    patients with fever and neutropenia. N Engl J Med
 1986;315:552-8.  
    Karp JE, Dick JD, Angelopulos C, et al. Empiric use of
 vancomycin
    during prolonged treatment-induced granulocytopenia:
 randomized,
    double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients
 with acute
    leukemia. Am J Med 1986;81:237-42.  
    European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
 (EORTC)
    International Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group,
 National Cancer
    Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Vancomycin added to
    empirical combination antibiotic therapy for fever in
 granulocytopenic
    cancer patients. J Infect Dis 1991;163:951-8.  
    Riikonen P. Imipenem compared with ceftazidime plus vancomycin
 as
    initial therapy for fever in neutropenic children with cancer.
 Pediatr
    Infect Dis 1991;10:918-23.  
    Lamy T, Michelet C, Dauriac C, Grulois I, Donio PY, Le Prise
 PY.
    Benefit of prophylaxis by intravenous systemic vancomycin in
    granulocytopenic patients: a prospective, randomized trial
 among 59
    patients. Acta Haematol 1993;90:109-13.  
    Isaacman DJ, Karasic RB. Lack of effect of changing needles on
    contamination of blood cultures. Pediatr Infect Dis J
 1990;9:274-8.  
    Krumholz HM, Cummings S, York M. Blood culture phlebotomy:
 switching
    needles does not prevent contamination. Ann Intern Med
 1990;113:290-2.  
    Strand CL, Wajsbort RR, Sturmann K. Effect of iodophor vs
 iodine
    tincture skin preparation on blood culture contamination rate.
 JAMA
    1993;269:1004-6.  
    Maki DG, Schuna AA. A study of antimicrobial misuse in a
 university
    hospital. Am J Med Sci 1978;275:271-82.  
    Ranson MR, Oppenheim BA, Jackson A, Kamthan AG, Scarffe JH.
    Double-blind placebo controlled study of vancomycin
 prophylaxis for
    central venous catheter insertion in cancer patients. J Hosp
 Infect
    1990;15:95-102.  
    Henrickson KJ, Powell KR, Schwartz CL. A dilute solution of
 vancomycin
    and heparin retains antibacterial and anticoagulant
 activities. J
    Infect Dis 1988;157:600-1.  
    Schwartz C, Henrickson KJ, Roghmann K, Powell K. Prevention of
    bacteremia attributed to luminal colonization of tunneled
 central
    venous catheters with vancomycin-susceptible organism. J Clin
 Oncol
    1990;8:1591-7.  
    Henrickson KJ, Dunne WM Jr. Modification of central venous
 catheter
    flush solution improves in vitro antimicrobial activity. J
 Infect Dis
    1992;166:944-6.  
    Gaillard JL, Merlino R, Pajot N, et al. Conventional and
    nonconventional modes of vancomycin administration to
 decontaminate
    the internal surface of catheters colonized with
 coagulase-negative
    staphylococci. J Paren Enter Nutr 1990;14:593-7.  
    Spafford PS, Sinkin RA, Cox C, Reubens L, Powell KR.
 Prevention of
    central venous catheter-related coagulase-negative
 staphylococcal
    sepsis in neonates. J Pediatr 1994;125:259-63.  
    Kaplan AH, Gilligan PH, Facklam RR. Recovery of resistant
 enterococci
    during vancomycin prophylaxis. J Clin Microbiol
 1988;26:1216-8.  
    Gradon JD, Wu EH, Lutwick LI. Aerosolized vancomycin therapy
    facilitating nursing home placement. Ann Pharmacother
 1992;26:209-10.  
    Weathers L, Riggs D, Santeiro M, Weibley RE. Aerosolized
 vancomycin
    for treatment of airway colonization by methicillin-resistant
    Staphylococcus aureus. Pediatr Infect Dis 1990;9:220-1.  
    Johnson S, Homann SR, Bettin KM, et al. Treatment of
 asymptomatic
    Clostridium difficile carriers (fecal excretors) with
 vancomycin or
    metronidazole. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:297-302.  
    Kacica MS, Horgan MJ, Ochoa L, Sandler R, Lepow ML, Venezia
 RA.
    Prevention of gram-positive sepsis in neonates weighing less
 than 1500
    grams. J Pediatr 1994;125:253-8.  
    Lam TY, Vas SI, Oreopoulos DG. Long-term intraperitoneal
 vancomycin in
    the prevention of recurrent peritonitis during CAPD:
 preliminary
    results. Perit Dial Int 1991;11:281-2.  
    Bastani B, Freer K, Read D, et al. Treatment of gram-positive
    peritonitis with two intraperitoneal doses of vancomycin in
 continuous
    ambulatory peritoneal dialysis patients. Nephron
 1987;45:283-5.  
    Newman LN, Tessman M, Hanslik T, Schulak J, Mayes J,
 Friedlander M. A
    retrospective view of factors that affect catheter healing:
 four years
    of experience. Adv Perit Dial 1993;9:217-22.  
    Capdevila JA, Segarra A, Planes AM, et al. Successful
 treatment of
    haemodialysis catheter-related sepsis without catheter
 removal.
    Nephrol Dial Transplant 1993;8:231-4.  
    Edell LS, Westby GR, Gould SR. An improved method of
 vancomycin
    administration to dialysis patients. Clin Nephrol
 1988;29:86-7.  
    Soumerai SB, McLaughlin TJ, Avorn J. Quality assurance for
 drug
    prescribing. Qual Assur Health Care 1990;2:37-58.  
    Everitt DE, Soumerai SB, Avorn J, Klapholz H, Wessels M.
 Changing
    surgical antimicrobial prophylaxis practices through education
    targeted at senior department leaders. Infect Control Hosp
 Epidemiol
    1990;11:578-83.  
    Soumerai SB, Avorn J, Taylor WC, Wessels M, Maher D, Hawley
 SL.
    Improving choice of prescribed antibiotics through concurrent
    reminders in an educational order form. Med Care
 1993;31:552-8.  
    Soumerai SB, McLaughlin TJ, Avorn J. Improving drug
 prescribing in
    primary care: a critical analysis of the experimental
 literature.
    Milbank Q 1989;67:268-317.  
    National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Methods
 for
    dilution antimicrobial susceptibility tests for bacteria that
 grow
    aerobically. 3rd ed. Villanova, PA: National Committee for
 Clinical
    Laboratory Standards, 1993; publication M7-A3.  
    Swenson JM, Ferraro MJ, Sahm DF, Charache P, Tenover FC,
 National
    Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards Working Group on
    Enterococci. New vancomycin disk diffusion breakpoints for
    enterococci. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:2525-8.  
    CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in
 health-care
    settings. MMWR 1987;36(No. 2S).  
    Swenson JM, Clark NC, Ferraro MJ, et al. Development of a
 standardized
    screening method for detection of vancomycin-resistant
 Enterococci. J
    Clin Microbiol 1994;32:1700-4.  
    Edberg SC, Hardalo CJ, Kontnick C, Campbell S. Rapid detection
 of
    vancomycin-resistant enterococci. J Clin Microbiol
 1994;32:2182-4.  
    Nettleman MD, Trilla A, Fredrickson M, Pfaller M. Assigning
    responsibility: using feedback to achieve sustained control of
    methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Am J Med
 1991;91(suppl
    3B):228S-232S.  
    Doebbeling BN, Stanley GL, Sheetz CT, et al. Comparative
 efficacy of
    alternative hand-washing agents in reducing nosocomial
 infections in
    intensive care units. N Engl J Med 1992;327:88-93.  
    Jones MV, Rowe GB, Jackson B, Pritchard NJ. The use of alcohol
 paper
    wipes for routine hand cleansing: results of trials in two
 hospitals.
    J Hosp Infect 1986;8:268-74.  
    Nicoletti G, Boghossian V, Borland R. Hygienic hand
 disinfection: a
    comparative study with chlorhexidine detergents and soap. J
 Hosp
    Infect 1990;15:323-37.  
    Butz AM, Laughon BE, Gullette DL, Larson EL.
 Alcohol-impregnated wipes
    as an alternative in hand hygiene. Am J Infect Control
 1990;18:70-6.  
    Korniewicz DM, Laughon BE, Butz A, Larson E. Integrity of
 vinyl and
    latex procedure gloves. Nurs Res 1989;38:144-6.  
    Korniewicz DM, Kirwin M, Cresci K, Markut C, Larson E. In-use
    comparison of latex gloves in two high-risk units: surgical
 intensive
    care and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Heart Lung
 1992;21:81-4.  
    DeGroot-Kosolcharoen J, Jones JM. Permeability of latex and
 vinyl
    gloves to water and blood. Am J Infect Control
 1989;17:196-201.  
    Paulssen J, Eidem T, Kristiansen R. Perforations in surgeons'
 gloves.
    J Hosp Infect 1988; 11:82-5.  
    Korniewicz DM, Laughon BE, Cyr WH, Lytle CD, Larson E. Leakage
 of
    virus through used vinyl and latex examination gloves. J Clin
    Microbiol 1990;28:787-8.  
    Wade JJ, Desai N, Casewell MW. Hygienic hand disinfection for
 the
    removal of epidemic vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium
 and
    gentamicin-resistant Enterobacter cloacae. J Hosp Infect
 1991;18:
    211-8.  
    Favero MS, Bond WW. Sterilization, disinfection, and
 antisepsis in the
    hospital. Chapter 24. In: Balows A, Hausler WJ Jr, Herrman KL,
    Isenberg HD, Shadomy HJ, eds. Manual of clinical microbiology.
 5th ed.
    Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology,
 1991:183-200.  
    Zervos MJ, Kauffman CA, Therasse PM, Bregman AG, Mikesell TS,
 Schaberg
    DR. Nosocomial infection by gentamicin-resistant Streptococcus
    faecalis: an epidemiologic study. Ann Intern Med
 1987;106:687-91.  
    Wells VD, Wong ES, Murray BE, Coudron PE, Williams DS,
 Markowitz SM.
    Infections due to beta-lactamase-producing, high-level
    gentamicin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis. Ann Intern Med
 1992;116:
    285-92.  
    Orberg PK, Sandine WE. Common occurrence of plasmid DNA and
 vancomycin
    resistance in Leuconostoc spp. Appl Environ Microbiol
 1984;48:1129-33.  
    Schwalbe RS, Ritz WJ, Verma PR, Barranco EA, Gilligan PH.
 Selection
    for vancomycin resistance in clinical isolates of
 Staphylococcus
    haemolyticus. J Infect Dis 1990;161:45-51.  
    Garner JS, Simmons BP. Guideline for isolation precautions in
 
 
 
 hospitals.
 Infect
 Control
 1983;4(suppl):245-325.
 
+-------------------------------------------------------------------
-------+
|            
                                                              |
|                     Erratum: Vol. 44, No. RR-12
                          |
|            
                                                              |
|            SOURCE: MMWR 44(41);782   DATE: Oct 20, 1995
                  |
|            
                                                              |
|      In the MMWR Recommendations and Reports "Recommendations for
        |
| Preventing the Spread of Vancomycin Resistance: Recommendations
 of the   |
| Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
 (HICPAC)," the   |
| publication date printed at the top of even-numbered pages ii-12
 should  |
| have been September 22, 1995.
                                            |
|            
                                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------
-------+  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 09/19/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00039349.htm
