Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Dental  personnel  may  be
exposed to a wide variety of
 microorganisms in
the blood and saliva of patients they treat in the dental
 operatory. These
include Mycobacterium tuberculosis, hepatitis B virus,
 staphylococci,
streptococci, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus types I and II,
 human T-
lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus
 (HTLV-III/LAV),
and a number of viruses that infect the upper respiratory tract.
 Infections
may be transmitted in dental practice by blood or saliva through
 direct
contact, droplets, or aerosols. Although not documented, indirect
 contact
transmission of infection by contaminated instruments is possible.
 Patients
and dental health-care workers (DHCWs) have the potential of
 transmitting
infections to each other (1).  A common set of infection-control strategies should be
 effective for
preventing hepatitis B, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, and
 other
infectious diseases caused by bloodborne viruses (2-4). The ability
 of
hepatitis B virus to survive in the environment (5) and the high
 titers of
virus in blood (6) make this virus a good model for
 infection-control
practices to prevent transmission of a large number of other
 infectious
agents by blood or saliva. Because all infected patients cannot be
 identified
by history, physical examination, or readily available laboratory
 tests (3),
the following recommendations should be used routinely in the care
 of all
patients  in  dental  practices.   MEDICAL  HISTORY   Always  obtain  a  thorough  medical
history. Include specific
 questions
about medications, current illnesses, hepatitis, recurrent
 illnesses,
unintentional weight loss, lymphadenopathy, oral soft tissue
 lesions, or
other infections. Medical consultation may be indicated when a
 history of
active  infection  or  systemic  disease  is  elicited.   USE  OF  PROTECTIVE  ATTIRE  AND
BARRIER TECHNIQUES  
    For protection of personnel and patients, gloves must
 always be worn  when touching blood, saliva, or mucous membranes (7-10). Gloves
 must be worn
by DHCWs when touching blood-soiled items, body fluids, or
 secretions, as
well as surfaces contaminated with them. Gloves must be worn when
 examining
all oral lesions. All work must be completed on one patient, where
 possible,
and the hands must be washed and regloved before performing
 procedures on
another patient. Repeated use of a single pair of gloves is not
 recommended,
since such use is likely to produce defects in the glove material,
 which will
diminish its value as an effective barrier.  2.  Surgical masks and protective eyewear or
chin-length
 plastic face
shields must be worn when splashing or spattering of blood or other
 body
fluids is likely, as is common in dentistry (11,12).  3.  Reusable or disposable gowns,
laboratory coats, or uniforms
 must be
worn when clothing is likely to be soiled with blood or other body
 fluids. If
reusable gowns are worn, they may be washed, using a normal laundry
 cycle.
Gowns should be changed at least daily or when visibly soiled with
 blood
(13).  4.  Impervious-backed paper, aluminum foil, or clear plastic
 wrap may be
used to cover surfaces (e.g., light handles or x-ray unit heads)
 that may be
contaminated by blood or saliva and that are difficult or
 impossible to
disinfect. The coverings should be removed (while DHCWs are
 gloved),
discarded, and then replaced (after ungloving) with clean material
 between
patients.  5.  All procedures and manipulations of potentially infective
 materials
should be performed carefully to minimize the formation of
 droplets,
spatters, and aerosols, where possible. Use of rubber dams, where
appropriate, high-speed evacuation, and proper patient positioning
 should
facilitate this process.  HANDWASHING AND CARE OF HANDS  Hands must always be
washed between patient treatment contacts
 (following
removal of gloves), after touching inanimate objects likely to be
contaminated by blood or saliva from other patients, and before
 leaving the
operatory. The rationale for handwashing after gloves have been
 worn is that
gloves become perforated, knowingly or unknowingly, during use and
 allow
bacteria to enter beneath the glove material and multiply rapidly.
 For many
routine dental procedures, such as examinations and nonsurgical
 techniques,
handwashing with plain soap appears to be adequate, since soap and
 water will
remove transient microorganisms acquired directly or indirectly
 from patient
contact (13). For surgical procedures, an antimicrobial surgical
 handscrub
should be used (14). Extraordinary care must be used to avoid hand
 injuries
during procedures. However, when gloves are torn, cut, or
 punctured, they
must be removed immediately, hands thoroughly washed, and regloving
accomplished before completion of the dental procedure. DHCWs who
 have
exudative lesions or weeping dermatitis should refrain from all
 direct
patient care and from handling dental patient-care equipment until
 the
condition resolves (15).  USE AND CARE OF SHARP INSTRUMENTS AND NEEDLES  
    Sharp items (needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp
 instruments)  should be considered as potentially infective and must be handled
 with
extraordinary  care  to  prevent  unintentional  injuries.   2.   Disposable  syringes  and
needles, scalpel blades, and other
 sharp
items must be placed into puncture-resistant containers located as
 close as
practical to the area in which they were used. To prevent
 needlestick
injuries, disposable needles should not be recapped; purposefully
 bent or
broken; removed from disposable syringes; or otherwise manipulated
 by hand
after use.  3.  Recapping of a needle increases the risk of unintentional
 needlestick
injury. There is no evidence to suggest that reusable
 aspirating-type
syringes used in dentistry should be handled differently from other
 syringes.
Needles of these devices should not be recapped, bent, or broken
 before
disposal.  4.  Because certain dental procedures on an individual patient
 may
require multiple injections of anesthetic or other medications from
 a single
syringe, it would be more prudent to place the unsheathed needle
 into a
"sterile field" between injections rather than to recap the needle
 between
injections. A new (sterile) syringe and a fresh solution should be
 used for
each patient.  INDICATIONS FOR HIGH-LEVEL DISINFECTION OR STERILIZATION OF
 INSTRUMENTS  Surgical and other instruments that normally penetrate soft
 tissue and/or
bone (e.g., forceps, scalpels, bone chisels, scalers, and surgical
 burs)
should be sterilized after each use. Instruments that are not
 intended to
penetrate oral soft tissues or bone (e.g., amalgam condensers,
 plastic
instruments, and burs) but that may come into contact with oral
 tissues
should also be sterilized after each use, if possible; however, if
 sterili-
zation is not feasible, the latter instruments should receive
 high-level
disinfection  (3,13,16).   METHODS  FOR  HIGH-LEVEL  DISINFECTION  OR  STERILIZATION  
Before high-level disinfection or sterilization, instruments
 should be
cleaned to remove debris. Cleaning may be accomplished by a
 thorough
scrubbing with soap and water or a detergent, or by using a
 mechanical device
(e.g., an ultrasonic cleaner). Persons involved in cleaning and
 decontam-
inating instruments should wear heavy-duty rubber gloves to prevent
 hand
injuries. Metal and heat-stable dental instruments should be
 routinely
sterilized between use by steam under pressure (autoclaving), dry
 heat, or
chemical vapor. The adequacy of sterilization cycles should be
 verified by
the periodic use of spore-testing devices (e.g., weekly for most
 dental
practices) (13). Heat- and steam-sensitive chemical indicators may
 be used on
the outside of each pack to assure it has been exposed to a
 sterilizing
cycle. Heat-sensitive instruments may require up to 10 hours'
 exposure in a
liquid chemical agent registered by the U.S. Environmental
 Protection Agency
(EPA) as a disinfectant/sterilant; this should be followed by
 rinsing with
sterile water. High-level disinfection may be accomplished by
 immersion in
either boiling water for at least 10 minutes or an EPA-registered
 disinfec-
tant/sterilant chemical for the exposure time recommended by the
 chemical's
manufacturer.  DECONTAMINATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL SURFACES  At the completion
of work activities, countertops and surfaces
 that may
have become contaminated with blood or saliva should be wiped with
 absorbent
toweling to remove extraneous organic material, then disinfected
 with a
suitable chemical germicide. A solution of sodium hypochlorite
 (household
bleach) prepared fresh daily is an inexpensive and very effective
 germicide.
Concentrations ranging from 5,000 ppm (a 1:10 dilution of household
 bleach)
to 500 ppm (a 1:100 dilution) sodium hypochlorite are effective,
 depending on
the amount of organic material (e.g., blood, mucus, etc.) present
 on the
surface to be cleaned and disinfected. Caution should be exercised,
 since
sodium hypochlorite is corrosive to metals, especially aluminum.  DECONTAMINATION
OF LABORATORY SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS  Blood and saliva should be thoroughly and
carefully cleaned
 from
laboratory supplies and materials that have been used in the mouth
 (e.g.,
impression materials, bite registration), especially before
 polishing and
grinding intra-oral devices. Materials, impressions, and intra-oral
appliances should be cleaned and disinfected before being handled,
 adjusted,
or sent to a dental laboratory (17). These items should also be
 cleaned and
disinfected when returned from the dental laboratory and before
 placement in
the patient's mouth. Because of the ever-increasing variety of
 dental
materials used intra-orally, DHCWs are advised to consult with
 manufacturers
as to the stability of specific materials relative to disinfection
procedures. A chemical germicide that is registered with the EPA as
 a
"hospital disinfectant" and that has a label claim for
 mycobactericidal
(e.g., tuberculocidal) activity is preferred, because mycobacteria
 represent
one of the most resistant groups of microorganisms; therefore,
 germicides
that are effective against mycobacteria are also effective against
 other
bacterial and viral pathogens (15). Communication between a dental
 office and
a dental laboratory with regard to handling and decontamination of
 supplies
and materials is of the utmost importance.  USE AND CARE OF ULTRASONIC SCALERS,
HANDPIECES, AND DENTAL UNITS  
    Routine sterilization of handpieces between patients is
 desirable;  however, not all handpieces can be sterilized. The present physical
 config-
urations of most handpieces do not readily lend them to high-level
 disin-
fection of both external and internal surfaces (see 2 below);
 therefore, when
using handpieces that cannot be sterilized, the following cleaning
 and disin-
fection procedures should be completed between each patient: After
 use, the
handpiece should be flushed (see 2 below), then thoroughly scrubbed
 with a
detergent and water to remove adherent material. It should then be
 thoroughly
wiped with absorbent material saturated with a chemical germicide
 that is
registered with the EPA as a "hospital disinfectant" and is
 mycobactericidal
at use-dilution (15). The disinfecting solution should remain in
 contact with
the handpiece for a time specified by the disinfectant's
 manufacturer.
Ultrasonic scalers and air/water syringes should be treated in a
 similar
manner between patients. Following disinfection, any chemical
 residue should
be removed by rinsing with sterile water.  2.  Because water retraction valves within the
dental units may
 aspirate
infective materials back into the handpiece and water line, check
 valves
should be installed to reduce the risk of transfer of infective
 material
(18). While the magnitude of this risk is not known, it is prudent
 for water-
cooled handpieces to be run and to discharge water into a sink or
 container
for 20-30 seconds after completing care on each patient. This is
 intended to
physically flush out patient material that may have been aspirated
 into the
handpiece or water line. Additionally, there is some evidence that
 overnight
bacterial accumulation can be significantly reduced by allowing
 water-cooled
handpieces to run and to discharge water into a sink or container
 for several
minutes at the beginning of the clinic day (19). Sterile saline or
 sterile
water should be used as a coolant/irrigator when performing
 surgical
procedures  involving  the  cutting  of  soft  tissue  or  bone.   HANDLING  OF  BIOPSY
SPECIMENS  In general, each specimen should he put in a sturdy container
 with a
secure lid to prevent leaking during transport. Care should be
 taken when
collecting specimens to avoid contamination of the outside of the
 container.
If the outside of the container is visibly contaminated, it should
 be cleaned
and disinfected, or placed in an impervious bag (20).  DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIALS 
All sharp items (especially needles), tissues, or blood should
 be
considered potentially infective and should be handled and disposed
 of with
special precautions. Disposable needles, scalpels, or other sharp
 items
should be placed intact into puncture-resistant containers before
 disposal.
Blood, suctioned fluids, or other liquid waste may be carefully
 poured into
a drain connected to a sanitary sewer system. Other solid waste
 contaminated
with blood or other body fluids should be placed in sealed, sturdy
 impervious
bags to prevent leakage of the contained items. Such contained
 solid wastes
can then be disposed of according to requirements established by
 local or
state environmental regulatory agencies and published
 recommendations
(13,20).  Developed by Dental Disease Prevention Activity, Center for
 Prevention Svcs,
Hospital  Infections  Program,  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.   Editorial  Note:  All
DHCWs must be made aware of sources and methods
 of
transmission of infectious diseases. The above recommendations for
 infection
control in dental practices incorporate procedures that should be
 effective
in preventing the transmission of infectious agents from dental
 patients to
DHCWs and vice versa. Assessment of quantifiable risks to dental
 personnel
and patients for specific diseases requires further research. There
 is no
current documentation of patient-to-patient blood- or saliva-borne
 disease
transmission from procedures performed in dental practice. While
 few in
number, reported outbreaks of dentist-to-patient transmission of
 hepatitis B
have resulted in serious and even fatal consequences (9). Herpes
 simplex
virus has been transmitted to over 20 patients from the fingers of
 a DHCW
(10). Serologic markers for hepatitis B in dentists have increased
dramatically in the United States over the past several years,
 which suggests
current infection-control practices have been insufficient to
 prevent the
transmission of this infectious agent in the dental operatory.
 While
vaccination for hepatitis B is strongly recommended for dental
 personnel
(21), vaccination alone is not cause for relaxation of strict
 adherence to
accepted  methods  of  asepsis,  disinfection,  and  sterilization.   Various  infection-control
guidelines exist for hospitals and
 other
clinical settings. Dental facilities located in hospitals and other
institutional settings have generally utilized existing guidelines
 for
institutional practice. These recommendations are offered as
 guidance to
DHCWs in noninstitutional settings for enhancing infection-control
 practices
in dentistry; they may be useful in institutional settings also.  References  
    Ahtone J, Goodman RA. Hepatitis B and dental personnel:
 transmission to
    patients and prevention issues. J Am Dent Assoc
 1983;106:219-22.  
    Crawford JJ. State-of-the-art practical infection control in
 dentistry.
    J Am Dent Assoc 1985;110:629-33.  
    Cottone JA, Mitchell EW, Baker CH, et al. Proceedings of the
 National
    Symposium on Hepatitis B and the Dental Profession. J Am Dent
 Assoc
    1985;110:614-49.  
    CDC. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): precautions for
 health-
    care workers and allied professionals. MMWR 1983;32:450-1.  
    Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard
 JE.
    Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and storage for one
 week
    {Letter}. Lancet 1981;I:550-1.  
    Shikata T, Karasawa T, Abe K, et al. Hepatitis B e antigen and
    infectivity of hepatitis B virus. J Infect Dis 1977;136:571-6.  
    Hadler SC, Sorley DL, Acree KH, et al. An outbreak of hepatitis
 B in a
    dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1981;95:133-8.  
    Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Risk of
 hepatitis B
    infection for workers in the health care delivery system and
 suggested
    methods for risk reduction. U.S. Department of Labor 1983;(CPL
 2-2.36).  
    CDC. Hepatitis B among dental patients -- Indiana. MMWR
 1985;34:73-5.  
    Manzella JP, McConville JH, Valenti W, Menegus MA, Swierkosz
 EM, Arens M.
    An outbreak of herpes simplex virus type 1 gingivostomatitis in
 a dental
    hygiene practice. JAMA 1984;252:2019-22.  
    Petersen NJ, Bond WW, Favero MS. Air sampling for hepatitis B
 surface
    antigen in a dental operatory. J Am Dent Assoc 1979;99:465-7.  
    Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS, Ebert JW, Maynard JE.
 Transmission of
    type B vital hepatitis B via eye inoculation of a chimpanzee. J
 Clin
    Microbiol 1982;15:533-4.  
    Garner JS, Favero MS. Guideline for handwashing and hospital
 environ-
    mental control, 1985. Atlanta, Georgia: Centers for Disease
 Control,
    1985; publication no. 99-1117.  
    Garner JS. Guideline for prevention of surgical wound
 infections, 1985.
    Atlanta, Georgia: Centers for Disease Control, 1985;
 publication no.
    99-2381.  
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infection
 with human
    T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus
 in the
    workplace. MMWR 1985;34:682-6, 691-5.  
    Favero MS. Sterilization, disinfection, and antisepsis in the
 hospital.
    In: Lennette EH, Balows A, Hauslen WJ, Shadomy HJ. Manual of
 clinical
    microbiology. Washington, D.C.: American Society of
 Microbiology,
    1985:129-37.  
    Council on Dental Therapeutics and Council on Prosthetic
 Services and
    Dental Laboratory Relations, American Dental Association.
 Guidelines for
    infection control in the dental office and the commercial
 laboratory. J
    Am Dent Assoc 1985;110:969-72.  
    Bagga BSR, Murphy RA, Anderson AW, Punwani I. Contamination of
 dental
    unit cooling water with oral microorganisms and its prevention.
 J Am Dent
    Assoc 1984;109:712-6.  
    Scheid RC, Kim CK, Bright JS, Whitely MS, Rosen S. Reduction of
 microbes
    in handpieces by flushing before use. J Am Dent Assoc
 1982;105:658-60.  
    Garner JS, Simmons BP. CDC guideline for isolation precautions
 in
    hospitals. Atlanta, Georgia: Centers for Disease Control. 1983;
 HHS
    publication no. (CDC) 83-8314.  
    ACIP. Inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR
 1982;31:317-22, 327-8.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00033634.htm
