Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Transmission of hepatitis B virus
(HBV) from mother to infant
during the perinatal period represents one of the most efficient
 modes
of HBV infection and often leads to severe long-term sequelae.
 Infants
born to mothers positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
 and
hepatitis B "e" antigen (HBeAg) have a 70%-90% chance of acquiring
perinatal HBV infection, and 85%-90% of infected infants will
 become
chronic HBV carriers (1,2). It has been estimated that more than
 25%
of these carriers will die from primary hepatocellular carcinoma
 or
cirrhosis of the liver (3). These deaths usually occur during
adulthood, when familial and financial responsibilities make them
particularly devastating. In the United States, an estimated
 16,500
births occur to HBsAg-positive women each year (about 4,300 of
 whom
are also HBeAg- positive), and approximately 3,500 of these
 infants
become chronic HBV carriers. Prenatal screening of all pregnant
 women
would identify those who are HBsAg- positive and thus would allow
treatment of their newborns with hepatitis B immune globulin
 (HBIG)
and hepatitis B (HB) vaccine, a regimen that is 85%-95% effective
 in
preventing the development of the HBV chronic carrier state
 (2,4-6).  In 1984, the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP)
recommended that pregnant women in certain groups at high risk for
 HBV
infection be screened for HBsAg during a prenatal visit and, if
 found
to be HBsAg-positive, that their newborns receive HBIG and HB
 vaccine
at birth (7). No data are available regarding the proportion of
high-risk women currently being screened in clinical practice, but
several studies and the experience of public health workers
 indicate
that major problems have been encountered in implementing these
recommendations (8-12). These include 1) concerns about the
sensitivity, specificity, and practicality of the current ACIP
guidelines for identifying HBV carrier mothers; 2) lack of
 knowledge
among prenatal health-care providers about the risks of perinatal
transmission of HBV and about recommended screening and treatment
procedures; 3) poor coordination among medical-care workers who
provide treatment and follow-up of mothers and infants; and 4)
 refusal
of some public and private third-party payers to reimburse for HBV
screening of pregnant women and treatment of their infants. In
addition, concern has been expressed that these recommendations
 may
not be practical or applicable in some U.S. jurisdictions where
 HBV
infection is highly endemic, such as parts of Alaska and certain
Pacific Islands.  The problems encountered in implementing the currently
 recommended
strategy of screening high-risk women have been examined by a
 number
of investigators. Recent studies in several large inner-city
hospitals, where all pregnant women were tested for HBsAg, have
 found
that only about 35%-65% of HBsAg-positive mothers would have been
identified by following the current ACIP guidelines (8-12). In
 these
studies, the prevalence of HBsAg in inner-city black (0.4%-1.5%)
 and
Hispanic women was higher than expected. Several investigators
expressed concern that many health-care providers are too busy or
 may
be reluctant to obtain the sexual and drug-use history necessary
 to
identify high-risk patients for screening. In addition, persons
providing health care to pregnant women often are not aware of the
risks of perinatal transmission of HBV and of the recommended
screening and treatment guidelines. In one study, 40% of
 obstetricians
could name no more than two groups at high risk for HBV infection,
 and
only 28% knew the recommended treatment for infants born to HBV
carrier mothers (CDC, unpublished data).  Given these limitations, it is now evident that
routine
 screening
of all pregnant women is the only strategy that will provide
acceptable control of perinatal transmission of HBV infection in
 the
United States. Screening the approximately 3.5 million pregnant
 women
per year for HBsAg would identify 16,500 positive women and allow
treatment that would prevent about 3,500 infants from becoming HBV
carriers. Recent studies also indicate that the costs and benefits
 of
universal testing of mothers are comparable to those encountered
 in
other widely implemented programs of prenatal and blood-donor
screening (13,14). The cost of an HBsAg test ranges from an
 estimated
$3.50 per test in blood-bank laboratories to $21.00 per test in
private commercial laboratories. If one assumes an average
 screening
cost ranging from $12.00 to $20.00 per test plus $150.00 for the
 HBIG
and vaccine needed to treat each infant of an HBsAg-positive
 mother,
the cost to prevent one newborn infant from becoming a chronic HBV
carrier would be between $12,700 and $20,700.  HBsAg testing should be done early in
pregnancy when other
 routine
prenatal testing is done. The HBsAg test is widely available and
 can
be added to the routine prenatal "panel" of tests without
 requiring
additional patient visits. The advantages of making HBsAg testing
routine during early pregnancy include 1) the ability to identify
 HBV
carrier mothers that is not dependent on the health-care
 provider's
identifying high-risk women or ordering HBsAg as a special test;
 2)
the availability of test results before delivery so that infants
 can
receive HBIG and vaccine without delay after birth; and 3)
 appropriate
counseling of families before delivery (15).  Because more than 90% of women found to
be HBsAg-positive on
routine screening will be HBV carriers, routine follow-up testing
later in pregnancy is not necessary for the purpose of screening.
 In
special situations, such as when the mother is thought to have
 acute
hepatitis, when there has been a history of exposure to hepatitis,
 or
when particularly high-risk behavior such as parenteral drug abuse
 has
occurred during the pregnancy, an additional HBsAg test can be
 ordered
during the third trimester. Few women in populations at low risk
 for
HBV infection will have a change in HBsAg status during subsequent
pregnancies. However, because of the expected benefits of making
 HBsAg
testing a routine part of each prenatal panel, testing should be
 done
during each pregnancy.  Women who present for delivery without prenatal care or
 without
medical records documenting the results of HBsAg screening should
 have
the HBsAg test done as soon as possible after admission, since
 delay
in administration of HBIG to infants of carrier mothers will
 decrease
the efficacy of therapy. In the studies that demonstrated the
 highest
efficacy (85%-95%) of combined HBIG and HB vaccine prophylaxis,
 HBIG
was administered within 2-12 hours after birth (2,4-6). In one
 study
in which only HBIG was used for prophylaxis, no efficacy was found
 if
HBIG was given more than 7 days after birth, and a significant
decrease in efficacy was observed if it was given more than 48
 hours
after birth (16). Only one-third of U.S. hospitals currently
 perform
the HBsAg test as an in-house procedure, and many of these have
technicians who are trained to do the test available on only one
shift. Hospitals that cannot rapidly test for HBsAg should either
develop this capability or arrange for testing to be done at a
 local
laboratory or blood bank where test results can be obtained within
 24
hours.  The commercially available HBsAg tests have an extremely high
sensitivity and specificity if positive tests are repeated and
confirmed by neutralization as recommended by the manufacturers of
 the
reagent kits. Testing for other markers of HBV infection, such as
HBeAg, is not necessary for maternal screening. Mothers who are
positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg have the highest likelihood of
transmitting HBV to their newborns. However, infants of mothers
 who
are HBsAg-positive but HBeAg- negative may become infected and
 develop
severe, even fatal, fulminant hepatitis B during infancy (17,18).
 For
this reason, HBIG and HB vaccine treatment of all babies born to
HBsAg-positive  women  is  recommended.   HBsAg-positive  mothers  identified  during
screening may have
HBV-related acute or chronic liver disease and should be evaluated
 by
a physician. Identification of women who are HBV carriers through
prenatal screening presents an opportunity to vaccinate
 susceptible
household members and sexual partners of HBV carriers, as
 previously
recommended (19). Screening and vaccination of susceptible
 contacts
should be done by the family's pediatrician, primary health-care
provider, or the physician evaluating the clinical status of the
HBsAg-positive pregnant women.  Implementation of the recommendations to prevent
perinatal
transmission requires maternal screening, treatment of the newborn
 in
the hospital, and administration of subsequent doses of HB vaccine
 to
the infant during pediatric visits at 1 and 6 months of age. This
multistep process requires effective transfer of information among
several groups of health-care providers, knowledge of recommended
treatment, and availability of HBIG and vaccine at separate
facilities. Treatment failures due to lack of communication among
health-care providers can occur, especially in situations where
prenatal, obstetric, and pediatric care are provided in different
facilities (20). Central coordination of the treatment of these
infants by city, county, or state health departments would improve
 the
education of the health-care providers involved and increase the
likelihood  that  proper  treatment  is  provided.   In  certain  populations  under  U.S.
jurisdiction, including
 Alaskan
Natives and Pacific Islanders, as well as in many other parts of
 the
world, HBV infection is highly endemic in the general population,
 and
transmission occurs primarily during childhood (21). In such
 groups,
universal vaccination of newborns with HB vaccine is recommended
 to
prevent disease transmission both during the perinatal period and
during childhood. Several studies have shown that HB vaccine given
without HBIG will prevent 70%-85% of perinatal HBV infections and
 95%
of early childhood infections (22,23). In many of these areas with
highly endemic HBV infection, prenatal screening is impractical
because the population is isolated, laboratory facilities are not
available, and/or health-care budgets and personnel are limited.
 In
these areas, control of HBV infection can be better achieved by
directing available resources into programs to vaccinate all
 children
with HB vaccine. Programs for screening all mothers for HBsAg and
providing HBIG to infants born to carrier mothers are costly and
 will
add only modestly to disease prevention. They should be considered
only after the program for universal vaccination of children has
 been
implemented.  RECOMMENDATIONS  All pregnant women should be routinely tested for
HBsAg during
 an
early prenatal visit in each pregnancy. This testing should be
 done at
the same time that other routine prenatal screening tests are
 ordered.
In special situations, such as when acute hepatitis is suspected,
 when
there has been a history of exposure to hepatitis, or when the
 mother
has a particularly high-risk behavior such as intravenous drug
 abuse,
an additional HBsAg test can be ordered later in the pregnancy.  If a woman has not
been screened prenatally or if test results
 are
not available at the time of admission for delivery, HBsAg testing
should be done at the time of admission, or as soon as possible
thereafter. If the mother is identified as HBsAg- positive more
 than 1
month after giving birth, the infant should first be tested for
 HBsAg;
if negative, the infant should be treated with HBIG and HB
 vaccine.
Hospitals where infants are delivered should have HBsAg testing
capabilities or should be able to obtain HBsAg results within 24
 hours
from a local laboratory.  If a serum specimen is positive for HBsAg, the same specimen
should be tested again, and then the test results should be
 confirmed
by neutralization. It is unnecessary to test for other HBV markers
during maternal screening, although HBsAg- positive mothers
 identified
during screening may have HBV-related acute or chronic liver
 disease
and  should  be  evaluated  by  their  physician.   Infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers
should receive HBIG
 (0.5
mL) intramuscularly (IM) once they are physiologically stable,
preferably within 12 hours after birth. HB vaccine, either
plasma-derived (10 *gmg per dose) or recombinant (5 *gmg per
 dose),
should be administered IM in three doses of 0.5 mL each. The first
dose should be given concurrently with HBIG but at a different
 site.
If vaccine is not immediately available, the first dose can be
 given
within 7 days after birth. The second and third doses should be
 given
1 month and 6 months after the first. Testing the infant for HBsAg
 and
its antibody (anti-HBs) is recommended at 12-15 months of age to
monitor the effectiveness of therapy. If HBsAg is not detectable
 and
anti-HBs is present, the child can be considered protected.
 Testing
for antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) is not useful,
since maternal anti-HBc can persist for more than a year. HBIG and
 HB
vaccination do not interfere with the routine childhood
 immunizations.  Household members and sexual partners of HBV carriers
 identified
through prenatal screening should be tested to determine
susceptibility to HBV infection and, if susceptible, should
 receive HB
vaccine. Screening and vaccination of susceptible contacts should
 be
done by the family's pediatrician, primary health-care provider,
 or
the physician evaluating the clinical status of the HBsAg-positive
pregnant women.  Obstetric and pediatric staff should be notified directly
 about
HBsAg-positive mothers so that the neonate can receive therapy
 without
delay after birth and follow-up doses of vaccine can be given.
Hospitals, as well as state, county, and city health departments,
should establish programs to educate appropriate health-care
 providers
about perinatal transmission of HBV and its control through
 maternal
screening, treatment of infants, and vaccination of susceptible
household  and  sexual  contacts  of  HBV  carrier  women.   Programs  to  coordinate  the
activities of those providing
 prenatal
care, hospital- based obstetrical services, and pediatric
 well-baby
care must be established to assure proper follow-up and treatment
 of
infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers and other susceptible
 household
and sexual contacts.  In populations under U.S. jurisdiction in which hepatitis B
infection is highly endemic, including certain Alaskan Native and
Pacific Island groups, vaccination of all newborns with HB vaccine
 is
the most effective strategy for HB control. In these populations,
 such
vaccination programs should be given highest priority. In areas
 where
HBsAg screening of mothers and use of HBIG in infants born to HBV
carrier mothers are not practical, the vaccination of all newborns
with HB vaccine should be considered the appropriate treatment.
Editorial Note:   Hepatitis B vaccine is the first human vaccine
 that
can prevent both serious chronic disease and a uniformly fatal
 type of
cancer. These recommendations, developed in consultation with
representatives of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics, represent a
major step toward control of perinatal hepatitis B transmission in
 the
United States. Programs for universal screening of pregnant women
 are
currently in progress in Hawaii, certain Canadian provinces,
 Italy,
West Germany, New Zealand, Australia, and Japan. More extensive
 infant
HB vaccination programs are in progress in Alaska, American Samoa,
Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and the People's Republic of China. A
 number
of U.S. health-care facilities have already begun to screen all
pregnant women for HBsAg.  State and local health departments can facilitate
 implementation
of these recommendations by 1) working to assure that all women
receiving prenatal care in both public and private sector programs
 are
offered screening and appropriate treatment; 2) working to assure
 that
costs of screening and treatment are covered by public and private
third-party payers; 3) establishing programs to coordinate the
transfer of information between prenatal, obstetric, and pediatric
health-care providers; and 4) providing health education about
hepatitis B to the public and to health-care providers. CDC will
continue to work with state and local health agencies and
 professional
associations in hepatitis B prevention and control.
References  
    Stevens CE, Beasley RP, Tsui J, Lee W-C. Vertical transmission
 of
    hepatitis B antigen in Taiwan. N Engl J Med 1975;292:771-4.  
    Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B
 virus
    transmission in the United States: prevention by
 passive-active
    immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740-5.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y. Epidemiology of hepatocellular
 carcinoma.
    In: Vyas GN, Dienstag JL, Hoofnagle JH, eds. Viral hepatitis
 and
    liver disease. Orlando, Florida: Grune & Stratton,
 1984:209-24.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee GC-Y, et al. Prevention of
 perinatally
    transmitted hepatitis B virus infections with hepatitis B
 immune
    globulin and hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1983;2:1099-102.  
    Wong VCW, Ip HMH, Reesink HW, et al. Prevention of the HBsAg
    carrier state in newborn infants of mothers who are chronic
    carriers of HBsAg and HBeAg by administration of hepatitis-B
    vaccine and hepatitis-B immunoglobulin: double-blind
 randomised
    placebo- controlled study. Lancet 1984;1:921-6.  
    Stevens CE, Taylor PE, Tong MJ, et al. Yeast-recombinant
 hepatitis
    B vaccine: efficacy with hepatitis B immune globulin in
 prevention
    of perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission. JAMA
 1987;257:2612-6.  
    Immunization Practices Advisory Committee. Postexposure
    prophylaxis of hepatitis B. MMWR 1984;33:285-90.  
    Kumar ML, Dawson NV, McCullough AJ, et al. Should all pregnant
    women be screened for hepatitis B? Ann Intern Med
 1987;107:273-7.  
    Jonas MM, Schiff ER, O'Sullivan MJ, et al. Failure of Centers
 for
    Disease Control criteria to identify hepatitis B infection in
 a
    large municipal obstetrical population. Ann Intern Med
    1987;107:335-7.  
    Summers PR, Biswas MK, Pastorek JG II, Pernoll ML, Smith LG,
 Bean
    BE. The pregnant hepatitis B carrier: evidence favoring
    comprehensive antepartum screening. Obstet Gynecol
 1987;69:701-4.  
    Wetzel AM, Kirz DS. Routine hepatitis screening in adolescent
    pregnancies: is it cost effective? Am J Obstet Gynecol
    1987;156:166-9.  
    Delage G, Montplaisir S, Raemy-Prince S, Pierri E. Hepatitis B
    Virus Immunization Study Group. Prevalence of hepatitis B
 virus
    infection in pregnant women in the Montreal area. Can Med
 Assoc J
    1986;134:897-901.  
    Arevalo JA, Washington AE. Cost-effectiveness of prenatal
    screening and immunization for hepatitis B virus. JAMA
    1988;259:365-9.  
    Kane MA, Hadler SC, Margolis HS, Maynard JE. Routine prenatal
    screening for hepatitis B surface antigen. JAMA
 1988;259:408-9.  
    Hershow RC, Hadler SC, Kane MA. Adoption of children from
    countries with endemic hepatitis B: transmission risks and
 medical
    issues. Pediatr Infect Dis 1987;6:431-7.  
    Beasley RP, Stevens CE. Vertical transmission of HBV and
    interruption with globulin. In: Vyas GN, Cohen SN, Schmid R,
 eds.
    Viral hepatitis: a contemporary assessment of etiology,
    epidemiology, pathogenesis and prevention. Philadelphia:
 Franklin
    Institute Press, 1978:333-45.  
    Sinatra FR, Shah P, Weissman JY, Thomas DW, Merritt RJ, Tong
 MJ.
    Perinatal transmitted acute icteric hepatitis B in infants
 born to
    hepatitis B surface antigen-positive and anti- hepatitis
    Be-positive carrier mothers. Pediatrics 1982;70:557-9.  
    Delaplane D, Yogev R, Crussi F, Shulman ST. Fatal hepatitis B
 in
    early infancy: the importance of identifying HBsAg-positive
    pregnant women and providing immunoprophylaxis to their
 newborns.
    Pediatrics 1983;72:176-80.  
    Immunization Practices Advisory Committee. Recommendations for
    protection against viral hepatitis. MMWR
 1985;34:313-24,329-35.  
    Klontz KC. A program to provide hepatitis B immunoprophylaxis
 to
    infants born to HBsAg-positive Asian and Pacific Island women.
    West J Med 1987;146:195-9.  
    McMahon BJ, Rhoades ER, Heyward WL, et al. A comprehensive
    programme to reduce the incidence of hepatitis B virus
 infection
    and its sequelae in Alaskan Natives. Lancet 1987;2:1134-6.  
    Xu Z-Y, Liu C-B, Francis DP, et al. Prevention of perinatal
    acquisition of hepatitis B virus carriage using vaccine:
    preliminary report of a randomized, double-blind
    placebo-controlled and comparative trial. Pediatrics
    1985;76:713-8.  
    Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Chotard J, et al. Seven-year study of
    hepatitis B vaccine efficacy in infants from an endemic area
    (Senegal). Lancet 1986;2:1143-5.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00000036.htm
