Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Summary   This  document
updates previously published CDC recommendations
for infection-control practices in dentistry to reflect new data,
materials, technology, and equipment. When implemented, these
recommendations should reduce the risk of disease transmission in
the dental environment, from patient to dental health-care worker
(DHCW), from DHCW to patient, and from patient to patient. Based on
principles of infection control, the document delineates specific
recommendations related to vaccination of DHCWs; protective attire
and barrier techniques; handwashing and care of hands; the use and
care of sharp instruments and needles; sterilization or
disinfection of instruments; cleaning and disinfection of the
dental unit and environmental surfaces; disinfection and the dental
laboratory; use and care of handpieces, antiretraction valves, and
other intraoral dental devices attached to air and water lines of
dental units; single-use disposable instruments; the handling of
biopsy specimens; use of extracted teeth in dental educational
settings; disposal of waste materials; and implementation of
recommendations.  INTRODUCTION  This document updates previously published CDC
recommendations
for infection-control practices for dentistry (1-3) and offers
guidance for reducing the risks of disease transmission among
dental health-care workers (DHCWs) and their patients. Although the
principles of infection control remain unchanged, new technologies,
materials, equipment, and data require continuous evaluation of
current infection-control practices. The unique nature of most
dental procedures, instrumentation, and patient-care settings also
may require specific strategies directed to the prevention of
transmission of pathogens among DHCWs and their patients.
Recommended infection-control practices are applicable to all
settings in which dental treatment is provided. These recommended
practices should be observed in addition to the practices and
procedures for worker protection required by the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) final rule on Occupational
Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens (29 CFR 1910.1030), which was
published  in  the  Federal  Register  on  December  6,  1991  (4).   Dental  patients  and
DHCWs may be exposed to a variety of
microorganisms via blood or oral or respiratory secretions. These
microorganisms may include cytomegalovirus, hepatitis B virus
(HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
staphylococci, streptococci, and other viruses and bacteria --
specifically, those that infect the upper respiratory tract.
Infections may be transmitted in the dental operatory through
several routes, including direct contact with blood, oral fluids,
or other secretions; indirect contact with contaminated
instruments, operatory equipment, or environmental surfaces; or
contact with airborne contaminants present in either droplet
spatter or aerosols of oral and respiratory fluids. Infection via
any of these routes requires that all three of the following
conditions be present (commonly referred to as "the chain of
infection"): a susceptible host; a pathogen with sufficient
infectivity and numbers to cause infection; and a portal through
which the pathogen may enter the host. Effective infection-control
strategies are intended to break one or more of these "links" in
the chain, thereby preventing infection.  A set of infection-control strategies common to
all
health-care delivery settings should reduce the risk of
transmission of infectious diseases caused by bloodborne pathogens
such as HBV and HIV (2,5-10). Because all infected patients cannot
be identified by medical history, physical examination, or
laboratory tests, CDC recommends that blood and body fluid
precautions be used consistently for all patients (2,5 ). This
extension of blood and body fluid precautions, referred to as
"universal precautions," must be observed routinely in the care of
all dental patients (2). In addition, specific actions have been
recommended to reduce the risk of tuberculosis transmission in
dental and other ambulatory health-care facilities (11).  CONFIRMED TRANSMISSION OF
HBV AND HIV IN DENTISTRY  Although the possibility of transmission of bloodborne
infections from DHCWs to patients is considered to be small (12-
15), precise risks have not been quantified in the dental setting
by carefully designed epidemiologic studies. Reports published from
1970 through 1987 indicate nine clusters in which patients were
infected with HBV associated with treatment by an infected DHCW
(16-25). In addition, transmission of HIV to six patients of a
dentist with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome has been reported
(26,27). Transmission of HBV from dentists to patients has not been
reported since 1987, possibly reflecting such factors as incomplete
ascertainment and reporting, increased adherence to universal
precautions -- including routine glove use by dentists -- and
increased levels of immunity due to use of hepatitis B vaccine.
However, isolated sporadic cases of infection are more difficult to
link with a health-care worker than are outbreaks involving
multiple patients. For both HBV and HIV, the precise event or
events resulting in transmission of infection in the dental setting
have not been determined; epidemiologic and laboratory data
indicate that these infections probably were transmitted from the
DHCWs to patients, rather than from one patient to another (26,28).
Patient-to-patient transmission of bloodborne pathogens has been
reported,  however,  in  several  medical  settings  (29-31).   VACCINES  FOR  DENTAL
HEALTH-CARE  WORKERS   Although  HBV  infection  is  uncommon  among  adults  in  the
United
States (1%-2%), serologic surveys have indicated that 10%-30% of
health-care or dental workers show evidence of past or present HBV
infection (6,32). The OSHA bloodborne pathogens final rule requires
that employers make hepatitis B vaccinations available without cost
to their employees who may be exposed to blood or other infectious
materials (4). In addition, CDC recommends that all workers,
including DHCWs, who might be exposed to blood or
blood-contaminated substances in an occupational setting be
vaccinated for HBV (6-8). DHCWs also are at risk for exposure to
and possible transmission of other vaccine-preventable diseases
(33); accordingly, vaccination against influenza, measles, mumps,
rubella, and tetanus may be appropriate for DHCWs.  PROTECTIVE ATTIRE AND BARRIER
TECHNIQUES  For protection of personnel and patients in dental-care
settings, medical gloves (latex or vinyl) always must be worn by
DHCWs when there is potential for contacting blood,
blood-contaminated saliva, or mucous membranes (1,2,4-6).
Nonsterile gloves are appropriate for examinations and other
nonsurgical procedures (5); sterile gloves should be used for
surgical procedures. Before treatment of each patient, DHCWs should
wash their hands and put on new gloves; after treatment of each
patient or before leaving the dental operatory, DHCWs should remove
and discard gloves, then wash their hands. DHCWs always should wash
their hands and reglove between patients. Surgical or examination
gloves should not be washed before use; nor should they be washed,
disinfected, or sterilized for reuse. Washing of gloves may cause
"wicking" (penetration of liquids through undetected holes in the
gloves) and is not recommended (5). Deterioration of gloves may be
caused by disinfecting agents, oils, certain oil-based lotions, and
heat treatments, such as autoclaving.  Chin-length plastic face shields or surgical masks
and
protective eyewear should be worn when splashing or spattering of
blood or other body fluids is likely, as is common in dentistry
(2,5,6,34,35). When a mask is used, it should be changed between
patients or during patient treatment if it becomes wet or moist.
Face shields or protective eyewear should be washed with an
appropriate cleaning agent and, when visibly soiled, disinfected
between patients.  Protective clothing such as reusable or disposable gowns,
laboratory coats, or uniforms should be worn when clothing is
likely to be soiled with blood or other body fluids (2,5,6).
Reusable protective clothing should be washed, using a normal
laundry cycle, according to the instructions of detergent and
machine manufacturers. Protective clothing should be changed at
least daily or as soon as it becomes visibly soiled (9). Protective
garments and devices (including gloves, masks, and eye and face
protection) should be removed before personnel exit areas of the
dental  office  used  for  laboratory  or  patient-care  activities.   Impervious-backed  paper,
aluminum foil, or plastic covers
should be used to protect items and surfaces (e.g., light handles
or x-ray unit heads) that may become contaminated by blood or
saliva during use and that are difficult or impossible to clean and
disinfect. Between patients, the coverings should be removed (while
DHCWs are gloved), discarded, and replaced (after ungloving and
washing of hands) with clean material.  Appropriate use of rubber dams, high-velocity
air evacuation,
and proper patient positioning should minimize the formation of
droplets, spatter, and aerosols during patient treatment. In
addition, splash shields should be used in the dental laboratory.  HANDWASHING AND
CARE OF HANDS  DHCWs should wash their hands before and after treating each
patient (i.e., before glove placement and after glove removal) and
after barehanded touching of inanimate objects likely to be
contaminated by blood, saliva, or respiratory secretions (2,5,6,9).
Hands should be washed after removal of gloves because gloves may
become perforated during use, and DHCWs' hands may become
contaminated through contact with patient material. Soap and water
will remove transient microorganisms acquired directly or
indirectly from patient contact (9); therefore, for many routine
dental procedures, such as examinations and nonsurgical techniques,
handwashing with plain soap is adequate. For surgical procedures,
an antimicrobial surgical handscrub should be used (10).  When gloves are torn, cut, or
punctured, they should be
removed as soon as patient safety permits. DHCWs then should wash
their hands thoroughly and reglove to complete the dental
procedure. DHCWs who have exudative lesions or weeping dermatitis,
particularly on the hands, should refrain from all direct patient
care and from handling dental patient-care equipment until the
condition resolves (12). Guidelines addressing management of
occupational exposures to blood and other fluids to which universal
precautions apply have been published previously (6-8,36).  USE AND CARE OF SHARP
INSTRUMENTS AND NEEDLES  Sharp items (e.g., needles, scalpel blades, wires)
contaminated with patient blood and saliva should be considered as
potentially infective and handled with care to prevent injuries
(2,5,6).  Used needles should never be recapped or otherwise manipulated
utilizing both hands, or any other technique that involves
directing the point of a needle toward any part of the body
(2,5,6). Either a one-handed "scoop" technique or a mechanical
device designed for holding the needle sheath should be employed.
Used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades, and other
sharp items should be placed in appropriate puncture-resistant
containers located as close as is practical to the area in which
the items were used (2,5,6). Bending or breaking of needles before
disposal requires unnecessary manipulation and thus is not
recommended.  Before attempting to remove needles from nondisposable
aspirating syringes, DHCWs should recap them to prevent injuries.
Either of the two acceptable techniques may be used. For procedures
involving multiple injections with a single needle, the unsheathed
needle should be placed in a location where it will not become
contaminated or contribute to unintentional needlesticks between
injections. If the decision is made to recap a needle between
injections, a one-handed "scoop" technique or a mechanical device
designed to hold the needle sheath is recommended.  STERILIZATION OR DISINFECTION
OF INSTRUMENTS
Indications for Sterilization or Disinfection of Dental Instruments
  As with other medical and surgical instruments, dental
instruments are classified into three categories -- critical,
semicritical, or noncritical -- depending on their risk of
transmitting infection and the need to sterilize them between uses
(9,37-40). Each dental practice should classify all instruments as
follows:  Critical. Surgical and other instruments used to penetrate
soft tissue or bone are classified as critical and should be
sterilized after each use. These devices include forceps, scalpels,
bone chisels, scalers, and burs.  Semicritical. Instruments such as mirrors and amalgam
condensers that do not penetrate soft tissues or bone but contact
oral tissues are classified as semicritical. These devices should
be sterilized after each use. If, however, sterilization is not
feasible because the instrument will be damaged by heat, the
instrument  should  receive,  at  a  minimum,  high-level  disinfection.   Noncritical.
Instruments or medical devices such as external
components of x-ray heads that come into contact only with intact
skin are classified as noncritical. Because these noncritical
surfaces have a relatively low risk of transmitting infection, they
may be reprocessed between patients with intermediate-level or
low-level disinfection (see Cleaning and Disinfection of Dental
Unit and Environmental Surfaces) or detergent and water washing,
depending on the nature of the surface and the degree and nature of
the contamination (9,38).
Methods  of  Sterilization  or  Disinfection  of  Dental  Instruments   Before  sterilization  or
high-level disinfection, instruments
should be cleaned thoroughly to remove debris. Persons involved in
cleaning and reprocessing instruments should wear heavy-duty
(reusable utility) gloves to lessen the risk of hand injuries.
Placing instruments into a container of water or
disinfectant/detergent as soon as possible after use will prevent
drying of patient material and make cleaning easier and more
efficient. Cleaning may be accomplished by thorough scrubbing with
soap and water or a detergent solution, or with a mechanical device
(e.g., an ultrasonic cleaner). The use of covered ultrasonic
cleaners, when possible, is recommended to increase efficiency of
cleaning  and  to  reduce  handling  of  sharp  instruments.   All  critical  and  semicritical
dental instruments that are heat
stable should be sterilized routinely between uses by steam under
pressure (autoclaving), dry heat, or chemical vapor, following the
instructions of the manufacturers of the instruments and the
sterilizers. Critical and semicritical instruments that will not be
used  immediately  should  be  packaged  before  sterilization.   Proper  functioning  of
sterilization cycles should be verified
by the periodic use (at least weekly) of biologic indicators (i.e.,
spore tests) (3,9). Heat-sensitive chemical indicators (e.g., those
that change color after exposure to heat) alone do not ensure
adequacy of a sterilization cycle but may be used on the outside of
each pack to identify packs that have been processed through the
heating cycle. A simple and inexpensive method to confirm heat
penetration to all instruments during each cycle is the use of a
chemical indicator inside and in the center of either a load of
unwrapped instruments or in each multiple instrument pack (41);
this procedure is recommended for use in all dental practices.
Instructions provided by the manufacturers of medical/dental
instruments and sterilization devices should be followed closely.  In all dental and other
health-care settings, indications for
the use of liquid chemical germicides to sterilize instruments
(i.e., "cold sterilization") are limited. For heat-sensitive
instruments, this procedure may require up to 10 hours of exposure
to a liquid chemical agent registered with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) as a "sterilant/disinfectant." This
sterilization process should be followed by aseptic rinsing with
sterile water, drying, and, if the instrument is not used
immediately,  placement  in  a  sterile  container.   EPA-registered  "sterilant/disinfectant"
chemicals are used to
attain high-level disinfection of heat-sensitive semicritical
medical and dental instruments. The product manufacturers'
directions regarding appropriate concentration and exposure time
should be followed closely. The EPA classification of the liquid
chemical agent (i.e., "sterilant/disinfectant") will be shown on
the chemical label. Liquid chemical agents that are less potent
than the "sterilant/disinfectant" category are not appropriate for
reprocessing critical or semicritical dental instruments.  CLEANING AND DISINFECTION
OF DENTAL UNIT AND ENVIRONMENTAL SURFACES
  After treatment of each patient and at the completion of daily
work activities, countertops and dental unit surfaces that may have
become contaminated with patient material should be cleaned with
disposable toweling, using an appropriate cleaning agent and water
as necessary. Surfaces then should be disinfected with a suitable
chemical germicide.  A chemical germicide registered with the EPA as a "hospital
disinfectant" and labeled for "tuberculocidal" (i.e.,
mycobactericidal) activity is recommended for disinfecting surfaces
that have been soiled with patient material. These
intermediate-level disinfectants include phenolics, iodophors, and
chlorine-containing compounds. Because mycobacteria are among the
most resistant groups of microorganisms, germicides effective
against mycobacteria should be effective against many other
bacterial and viral pathogens (9,38-40,42). A fresh solution of
sodium hypochlorite (household bleach) prepared daily is an
inexpensive and effective intermediate-level germicide.
Concentrations ranging from 500 to 800 ppm of chlorine (a 1:100
dilution of bleach and tap water or 1/4 cup of bleach to 1 gallon
of water) are effective on environmental surfaces that have been
cleaned of visible contamination. Caution should be exercised,
since chlorine solutions are corrosive to metals, especially
aluminum.  Low-level disinfectants -- EPA-registered "hospital
disinfectants" that are not labeled for "tuberculocidal" activity
(e.g., quaternary ammonium compounds) -- are appropriate for
general housekeeping purposes such as cleaning floors, walls, and
other housekeeping surfaces. Intermediate- and low-level
disinfectants are not recommended for reprocessing critical or
semicritical  dental  instruments.   DISINFECTION  AND  THE  DENTAL  LABORATORY  
Laboratory materials and other items that have been used in
the mouth (e.g., impressions, bite registrations, fixed and
removable prostheses, orthodontic appliances) should be cleaned and
disinfected before being manipulated in the laboratory, whether an
on-site or remote location (43). These items also should be cleaned
and disinfected after being manipulated in the dental laboratory
and before placement in the patient's mouth (2). Because of the
increasing variety of dental materials used intraorally, DHCWs are
advised to consult with manufacturers regarding the stability of
specific materials relative to disinfection procedures. A chemical
germicide having at least an intermediate level of activity (i.e.,
"tuberculocidal hospital disinfectant") is appropriate for such
disinfection. Communication between dental office and dental
laboratory personnel regarding the handling and decontamination of
supplies and materials is important.  USE AND CARE OF HANDPIECES, ANTIRETRACTION
VALVES, AND OTHER
INTRAORAL DENTAL DEVICES ATTACHED TO AIR AND WATER LINES OF DENTAL
UNITS  Routine between-patient use of a heating process capable of
sterilization (i.e., steam under pressure {autoclaving}, dry heat,
or heat/chemical vapor) is recommended for all high-speed dental
handpieces, low-speed handpiece components used intraorally, and
reusable prophylaxis angles. Manufacturers' instructions for
cleaning, lubrication, and sterilization procedures should be
followed closely to ensure both the effectiveness of the
sterilization process and the longevity of these instruments.
According to manufacturers, virtually all high-speed and low-speed
handpieces in production today are heat tolerant, and most
heat-sensitive models manufactured earlier can be retrofitted with
heat-stable components.  Internal surfaces of high-speed handpieces, low-speed
handpiece components, and prophylaxis angles may become
contaminated with patient material during use. This retained
patient material then may be expelled intraorally during subsequent
uses (44-46). Restricted physical access -- particularly to
internal surfaces of these instruments -- limits cleaning and
disinfection or sterilization with liquid chemical germicides.
Surface disinfection by wiping or soaking in liquid chemical
germicides is not an acceptable method for reprocessing high-speed
handpieces, low-speed handpiece components used intraorally, or
reusable prophylaxis angles.  Because retraction valves in dental unit water lines may
cause
aspiration of patient material back into the handpiece and water
lines, antiretraction valves (one-way flow check valves) should be
installed to prevent fluid aspiration and to reduce the risk of
transfer of potentially infective material (47). Routine
maintenance of antiretraction valves is necessary to ensure
effectiveness; the dental unit manufacturer should be consulted to
establish an appropriate maintenance routine.  High-speed handpieces should be run to
discharge water and air
for a minimum of 20-30 seconds after use on each patient. This
procedure is intended to aid in physically flushing out patient
material that may have entered the turbine and air or water lines
(46). Use of an enclosed container or high-velocity evacuation
should be considered to minimize the spread of spray, spatter, and
aerosols generated during discharge procedures. Additionally, there
is evidence that overnight or weekend microbial accumulation in
water lines can be reduced substantially by removing the handpiece
and allowing water lines to run and to discharge water for several
minutes at the beginning of each clinic day (48). Sterile saline or
sterile water should be used as a coolant/irrigator when surgical
procedures  involving  the  cutting  of  bone  are  performed.   Other  reusable  intraoral
instruments attached to, but
removable from, the dental unit air or water lines -- such as
ultrasonic scaler tips and component parts and air/water syringe
tips -- should be cleaned and sterilized after treatment of each
patient in the same manner as handpieces, which was described
previously. Manufacturers' directions for reprocessing should be
followed to ensure effectiveness of the process as well as
longevity of the instruments.  Some dental instruments have components that are heat
sensitive or are permanently attached to dental unit water lines.
Some items may not enter the patient's oral cavity, but are likely
to become contaminated with oral fluids during treatment
procedures, including, for example, handles or dental unit
attachments of saliva ejectors, high-speed air evacuators, and
air/water syringes. These components should be covered with
impervious barriers that are changed after each use or, if the
surface permits, carefully cleaned and then treated with a chemical
germicide having at least an intermediate level of activity. As
with high-speed dental handpieces, water lines to all instruments
should be flushed thoroughly after the treatment of each patient;
flushing  at  the  beginning  of  each  clinic  day  also  is  recommended.   SINGLE-USE
DISPOSABLE  INSTRUMENTS   Single-use  disposable  instruments  (e.g.,  prophylaxis
angles;
prophylaxis cups and brushes; tips for high-speed air evacuators,
saliva ejectors, and air/water syringes) should be used for one
patient only and discarded appropriately. These items are neither
designed nor intended to be cleaned, disinfected, or sterilized for
reuse.  HANDLING OF BIOPSY SPECIMENS  In general, each biopsy specimen should be
put in a sturdy
container with a secure lid to prevent leaking during transport.
Care should be taken when collecting specimens to avoid
contamination of the outside of the container. If the outside of
the container is visibly contaminated, it should be cleaned and
disinfected or placed in an impervious bag (49).  USE OF EXTRACTED TEETH IN DENTAL
EDUCATIONAL SETTINGS  Extracted teeth used for the education of DHCWs should be
considered infective and classified as clinical specimens because
they contain blood. All persons who collect, transport, or
manipulate extracted teeth should handle them with the same
precautions as a specimen for biopsy (2). Universal precautions
should be adhered to whenever extracted teeth are handled; because
preclinical educational exercises simulate clinical experiences,
students enrolled in dental educational programs should adhere to
universal precautions in both preclinical and clinical settings. In
addition, all persons who handle extracted teeth in dental
educational  settings  should  receive  hepatitis  B  vaccine  (6-8).   Before  extracted  teeth
are manipulated in dental educational
exercises, the teeth first should be cleaned of adherent patient
material by scrubbing with detergent and water or by using an
ultrasonic cleaner. Teeth should then be stored, immersed in a
fresh solution of sodium hypochlorite (household bleach diluted
1:10 with tap water) or any liquid chemical germicide suitable for
clinical specimen fixation (50).  Persons handling extracted teeth should wear gloves.
Gloves
should be disposed of properly and hands washed after completion of
work activities. Additional personal protective equipment (e.g.,
face shield or surgical mask and protective eyewear) should be worn
if mucous membrane contact with debris or spatter is anticipated
when the specimen is handled, cleaned, or manipulated. Work
surfaces and equipment should be cleaned and decontaminated with an
appropriate liquid chemical germicide after completion of work
activities (37,38,40,51).  The handling of extracted teeth used in dental educational
settings differs from giving patients their own extracted teeth.
Several states allow patients to keep such teeth, because these
teeth are not considered to be regulated (pathologic) waste (52) or
because the removed body part (tooth) becomes the property of the
patient and does not enter the waste system (53).  DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIALS 
Blood, suctioned fluids, or other liquid waste may be poured
carefully into a drain connected to a sanitary sewer system.
Disposable needles, scalpels, or other sharp items should be placed
intact into puncture-resistant containers before disposal. Solid
waste contaminated with blood or other body fluids should be placed
in sealed, sturdy impervious bags to prevent leakage of the
contained items. All contained solid waste should then be disposed
of according to requirements established by local, state, or
federal environmental regulatory agencies and published
recommendations  (9,49).   IMPLEMENTATION  OF  RECOMMENDED  INFECTION-CONTROL
PRACTICES FOR
DENTISTRY  Emphasis should be placed on consistent adherence to
recommended infection-control strategies, including the use of
protective barriers and appropriate methods of sterilizing or
disinfecting instruments and environmental surfaces. Each dental
facility should develop a written protocol for instrument
reprocessing, operatory cleanup, and management of injuries (3).
Training of all DHCWs in proper infection-control practices should
begin in professional and vocational schools and be updated with
continuing  education.   ADDITIONAL  NEEDS  IN  DENTISTRY   Additional  information  is
needed for accurate assessment of
factors that may increase the risk for transmission of bloodborne
pathogens and other infectious agents in a dental setting. Studies
should address the nature, frequency, and circumstances of
occupational exposures. Such information may lead to the
development and evaluation of improved designs for dental
instruments, equipment, and personal protective devices. In
addition, more efficient reprocessing techniques should be
considered in the design of future dental instruments and
equipment. Efforts to protect both patients and DHCWs should
include improved surveillance, risk assessment, evaluation of
measures to prevent exposure, and studies of postexposure
prophylaxis. Such efforts may lead to development of safer and more
effective medical devices, work practices, and personal protective
equipment that are acceptable to DHCWs, are practical and
economical, and do not adversely affect patient care (54,55 ).  References  
    CDC.  Recommended  infection-control  practices  for  dentistry.   MMWR
1986;35:237-42.  2. CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV in health-care
settings. MMWR 1987;36:(No. 2S).  3. US Department of Health and Human Services.
Infection control
file: practical infection control in the dental office. Atlanta,
GA/Rockville, MD:CDC/FDA, 1989. (Available through the US
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, or the National
Technical Information Services, Springfield, VA.)  4. Department of Labor, Occupational
Safety and Health
Administration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030, occupational exposure to
bloodborne pathogens; final rule. Federal Register
56(235):64004-182, 1991.  5. CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of
transmission of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus,
and other bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR
1988;37:377-82,387-8.  6. CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and
public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(suppl. No. S-6):1-37.  7. CDC. Protection against
viral hepatitis: recommendations of the
Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1990;39(No.
RR-2).  8. CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for
eliminating transmission in the United States through universal
childhood vaccination. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).  9. Garner JS, Favero MS. Guideline
for handwashing and hospital
environmental control, 1985. Atlanta: CDC, 1985; publication no.
99-1117.
10. Garner JS. Guideline for prevention of surgical wound
infections, 1985. Atlanta: CDC, 1985; publication no. 99-2381.
11. CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of tuberculosis
in health-care settings, with special focus on HIV-related issues.
MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-17).
12. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus during exposure-prone
invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
13. CDC. Update:investigations of patients who have been treated by
HIV-infected health-care workers. MMWR 1992;41:344-6.
14. Chamberland ME, Bell DM. HIV transmission from health care
worker to patient: what is the risk? Ann Intern Med 1992;116:871-3.
15. Siew C, Chang B, Gruninger SE, Verrusio AC, Neidle EA.
Self-reported percutaneous injuries in dentists: implications for
HBV, HIV transmission risk. J Am Dent Assoc 1992;123:37-44.
16. Ahtone J, Goodman RA. Hepatitis B and dental personnel:
transmission to patients and prevention issues. J Am Dent Assoc
1983;106:219-22.
17. Hadler SC, Sorley DL, Acree KH, et al. An outbreak of hepatitis
B in a dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1981;5:133-8.
18. CDC. Hepatitis B among dental patients -- Indiana. MMWR
1985;34:73-5.
19. Levin ML, Maddrey WC, Wands JR, et al. Hepatitis B transmission
by dentists. JAMA 1974;228:1139-40.
20. Rimland D, Parkin WE, Miller GB, et al. Hepatitis B outbreak
traced to an oral surgeon. N Engl J Med 1977;296:953-8.
21. Goodwin D, Fannin SL, McCracken BB. An oral surgeon-related
hepatitis B outbreak. Calif Morbid 1976;14.
22. Reingold AL, Kane MA, Murphy EL, et al. Transmission of
hepatitis B by an oral surgeon. J Infect Dis 1982;145:262-8.
23. Goodman RA, Ahtone JL, Finton RJ. Hepatitis B transmission from
dental personnel to patients: unfinished business. Ann Intern Med
1982;96:119.
24. Shaw FE, Barrett CL, Hamm R, et al. Lethal outbreak of
hepatitis B in a dental practice. JAMA 1986;255:3261-4.
25. CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis B associated with an oral surgeon,
New Hampshire. MMWR 1987;36:132-3.
26. Ciesielski C, Marianos D, Chin-Yih OU, et al. Transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus in a dental practice. Ann Intern Med
1992;116:798-805.
27. CDC. Investigations of patients who have been treated by
HIV-infected health-care workers -- United States. MMWR
 1993;42:329-
31, 337.
28. Gooch B, Marianos D, Ciesielski C, et al. Lack of evidence for
patient-to-patient transmission of HIV in a dental practice. J Am
Dent Assoc 1993;124:38-44.
29. Canter J, Mackey K, Good LS, et al. An outbreak of hepatitis B
associated with jet injections in a weight reduction clinic. Arch
Intern Med 1990;150:1923-7.
30. Kent GP, Brondum J, Keenlyside RA, LaFazia LM, Scott HD. A
large outbreak of acupuncture-associated hepatitis B. Am J
Epidemiol 1988;127:591-8.
31. Polish LB, Shapiro CN, Bauer F, et al. Nosocomial transmission
of hepatitis B virus associated with the use of a spring-loaded
finger-stick device. N Engl J Med 1992;326:721-5.
32. Siew C, Gruninger SE, Mitchell EW, Burrell KH. Survey of
hepatitis B exposure and vaccination in volunteer dentists. J Am
Dent Assoc 1987;114:457-9.
33. CDC. Immunization recommendations for health-care-workers.
Atlanta, GA: CDC, Division of Immunization, Center for Prevention
Services, 1989.
34. Petersen NJ, Bond WW, Favero MS. Air sampling for hepatitis B
surface antigen in a dental operatory. J Am Dent Assoc 1979;99:465-
7.
35. Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS, Ebert JW, Maynard JE.
Transmission of type B viral hepatitis B via eye inoculation of a
chimpanzee. J Clin Microbiol 1982;15:533-4.
36. CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of
occupational exposure to human immunodeficiency virus, including
considerations regarding zidovudine postexposure use. MMWR
1990;39(No. RR-1).
37. Miller CH, Palenik CJ. Sterilization, disinfection, and asepsis
in dentistry. In: Block SS, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and
preservation, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1991:676-95.
38. Favero MS, Bond WW. Chemical disinfection of medical and
surgical materials. In: Block SS, ed. Disinfection, sterilization,
and preservation, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1991:617-41.
39. FDA, Office of Device Evaluation, Division of General and
Restorative Devices, Infection Control Devices Branch. Guidance on
the content and format of premarket notification {510 (k)}
submissions for liquid chemical germicides. Rockville, MD: FDA,
January 31, 1992:49.
40. Rutala WA. APIC guideline for selection and use of
disinfectants. Am J Infect Control 1990;18:99-117.
41. Proposed American National Standard/American Dental Association
Specification No. 59 for portable steam sterilizers for use in
dentistry. Chicago: ADA, April 1991.
42. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infection
with human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated
virus in the workplace. MMWR 1985;34:682-6,691-5.
43. Council on Dental Materials, Instruments, and Equipment; Dental
Practice; and Dental Therapeutics. American Dental Association.
Infection control recommendations for the dental office and the
dental laboratory. J Am Dent Assoc 1988;1126:241-8.
44. Lewis DL, Boe RK. Cross infection risks associated with current
procedures for using high-speed dental handpieces. J Clin Microbiol
1992;30:401-6.
45. Crawford JJ, Broderius RK. Control of cross infection risks in
the dental operatory: prevention of water retraction by bur cooling
spray systems. J Am Dent Assoc 1988;116:685-7.
46. Lewis DL, Arens M, Appleton SS, et al. Cross-contamination
potential with dental equipment. Lancet 1992;340:1252-4.
47. Bagga BSR, Murphy RA, Anderson AW, Punwani I. Contamination of
dental unit cooling water with oral microorganisms and its
prevention. J Am Dent Assoc 1984;109:712-6.
48. Scheid RC, Kim CK, Bright JS, Whitely MS, Rosen S. Reduction of
microbes in handpieces by flushing before use. J Am Dent Assoc
1982;105:658-60.
49. Garner JS, Simmons BP. CDC guideline for isolation precautions
in hospitals. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 1983; HHS publication no.
(CDC)83-8314.
50. Tate WH, White RR. Disinfection of human teeth for educational
purposes. J Dent Educ 1991;55:583-5.
51. Favero MS, Bond WW. Sterilization, disinfection, and antisepsis
in the hospital. In: Balows A, Hausler WJ, Herrmann KL, Isenberg
HD, Shadomy HJ, eds. Manual of clinical microbiology, 5th ed.
Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology, 1991:183-200.
52. The Michigan Medical Waste Regulatory Act of 1990, Act No. 368
of the Public Health Acts of 1978, Part 138, Medical Waste, Section
13807 -- Definitions.
53. Oregon Health Division. Infectious waste disposal; questions
and answers pertaining to the Administrative Rules 333-18-040
through 333-18-070. Portland, OR: Oregon Health Division, 1989.
54. Bell DM. Human immunodeficiency virus transmission in health
care settings: risk and risk reduction. Am J Med 1991;91(suppl.
3B):294-300.
55. Bell DM, Shapiro CN, Gooch BF. Preventing HIV transmission to
patients during invasive procedures: the CDC perspective. J Public
Health Dent (in press).  SUGGESTED CITATION:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommended
 infection-control
practices for dentistry, 1993. MWMR 1993;42(No. RR-8):{inclusive
 page
numbers}.  Use of trade names is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the Public Health Service or the U.S. Department of
 Health
and Human Services.  CIO Responsible for this publication:
National Center for Prevention Services,  Division of Oral Health 
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or
messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text into
HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in
the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the
electronic  PDF  version  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,
figures,  and  tables.   An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC
20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  Page
converted: 09/19/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00021095.htm
