Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Please note: An update has been
published  for  this  report.  To  view  the  update,  please  click  here.  Supplements  to  the
MMWR are published by the Epidemiology Program
 Office,
Centers for Disease Control, Public Health Service, U.S. Department
 of
Health and Human Services, Atlanta, Georgia 30333.  SUGGESTED CITATION  Centers
for Disease Control. Recommendations for prevention of HIV
transmission in health-care settings. MMWR 1987;36 (suppl no. 2S)
:{inclusive  page  numbers}.   Centers  for  Disease  Control  .................  James  O.  Mason,
M.D.,
 Dr,P.H.  The material in this report was developed (in collaboration with
 the Center
for Prevention Services, the National Institute for Occupational
 Safety and
Health,  and  the  Training  and  Laboratory  Program  Office)  by:   Center  for  Infectious
Diseases ....... Frederick A. Murphy,
 D,V.M., Ph,D.  Acting
 Director  Hospital Infections Program ....................  James M.
 Hughes, M.D.  Director  AIDS Program .................................... James W.
 Curran, M.D.  Director  Publications and Graphics .................... Frances H.
 Porcher, M,A.  Chief  Karen L.
 Foster, M.A.  This report was prepared in:  Epidemiology Program Office ....................
Carl W. Tyler,
 Jr., M.D.  Michael B.
 Gregg, M,D.  Editorial Services ......................... R. Elliott
 Churchill, M,A.  Chief  Ruth
 Greenberg
Editorial
 Assistant  Introduction  Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the virus that causes
 acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), is transmitted through sexual
 contact and
exposure to infected blood or blood components and perinatally from
 mother
to neonate. HIV has been isolated from blood, semen, vaginal
 secretions,
saliva, tears, breast milk, cerebrospinal fluid, amniotic fluid,
 and urine
and is likely to be isolated from other body fluids, secretions,
 and
excretions. However, epidemiologic evidence has implicated only
 blood,
semen, vaginal secretions, and possibly breast milk in
 transmission.  The increasing prevalence of HIV increases the risk that
 health-care
workers will be exposed to blood from patients infected with HIV,
especially when blood and body-fluid precautions are not followed
 for all
patients. Thus, this document emphasizes the need for health-care
 workers
to consider ALL patients as potentially infected with HIV and/or
 other
blood-borne pathogens and to adhere rigorously to infection-control
precautions for minimizing the risk of exposure to blood and body
 fluids of
all patients.  The recommendations contained in this document consolidate and
 update
CDC recommendations published earlier for preventing HIV
 transmission in
health-care settings: precautions for clinical and laboratory
 staffs (1)
and precautions for health-care workers and allied professionals
 (2);
recommendations for preventing HIV transmission in the workplace
 (3) and
during invasive procedures (4); recommendations for preventing
 possible
transmission of HIV from tears (5); and recommendations for
 providing
dialysis treatment for HIV-infected patients (6). These
 recommendations
also update portions of the "Guideline for Isolation Precautions in
Hospitals" (7) and reemphasize some of the recommendations
 contained in
"Infection Control Practices for Dentistry" (8). The
 recommendations
contained in this document have been developed for use in
 health-care
settings and emphasize the need to treat blood and other body
 fluids from
ALL patients as potentially infective. These same prudent
 precautions also
should be taken in other settings in which persons may be exposed
 to blood
or  other  body  fluids.   Definition  of  Health-Care  Workers   Health-care  workers  are
defined as persons, including students
 and
trainees, whose activities involve contact with patients or with
 blood or
other body fluids from patients in a health-care setting.  Health-Care Workers with AIDS 
As of July 10, 1987, a total of 1,875 (5.8%) of 32,395 adults
 with
AIDS, who had been reported to the CDC national surveillance system
 and for
whom occupational information was available, reported being
 employed in a
health-care or clinical laboratory setting. In comparison, 6.8
 million
persons -- representing 5.6% of the U.S. labor force -- were
 employed in
health services. Of the health-care workers with AIDS, 95% have
 been
reported to exhibit high-risk behavior; for the remaining 5%, the
 means of
HIV acquisition was undetermined. Health-care workers with AIDS
 were
significantly more likely than other workers to have an
 undetermined risk
(5% versus 3%, respectively). For both health-care workers and
 non-health-
care workers with AIDS, the proportion with an undetermined risk
 has not
increased since 1982.  AIDS patients initially reported as not belonging to recognized
 risk
groups are investigated by state and local health departments to
 determine
whether possible risk factors exist. Of all health-care workers
 with AIDS
reported to CDC who were initially characterized as not having an
identified risk and for whom follow-up information was available,
 66% have
been reclassified because risk factors were identified or because
 the
patient was found not to meet the surveillance case definition for
 AIDS. Of
the 87 health-care workers currently categorized as having no
 identifiable
risk, information is incomplete on 16 (18%) because of death or
 refusal to
be interviewed; 38 (44%) are still being investigated. The
 remaining 33
(38%) health-care workers were interviewed or had other follow-up
information available. The occupations of these 33 were as follows:
 five
physicians (15%), three of whom were surgeons; one dentist (3%);
 three
nurses (9%); nine nursing assistants (27%); seven housekeeping or
maintenance workers (21%); three clinical laboratory technicians
 (9%); one
therapist (3%); and four others who did not have contact with
 patients
(12%). Although 15 of these 33 health-care workers reported
 parenteral
and/or other non-needlestick exposure to blood or body fluids from
 patients
in the 10 years preceding their diagnosis of AIDS, none of these
 exposures
involved  a  patient  with  AIDS  or  known  HIV  infection.   Risk  to  Health-Care  Workers  of
Acquiring HIV in Health-Care
 Settings  Health-care workers with documented percutaneous or
 mucous-membrane
exposures to blood or body fluids of HIV-infected patients have
 been
prospectively evaluated to determine the risk of infection after
 such
exposures. As of June 30, 1987, 883 health-care workers have been
 tested
for antibody to HIV in an ongoing surveillance project conducted by
 CDC
(9). Of these, 708 (80%) had percutaneous exposures to blood, and
 175 (20%)
had a mucous membrane or an open wound contaminated by blood or
 body fluid.
Of 396 health-care workers, each of whom had only a
 convalescent-phase
serum sample obtained and tested greater than or equal to 90 days
 post-
exposure, one -- for whom heterosexual transmission could not be
 ruled
out -- was seropositive for HIV antibody. For 425 additional
 health-care
workers, both acute- and convalescent-phase serum samples were
 obtained and
tested; none of 74 health-care workers with nonpercutaneous
 exposures
seroconverted, and three (0.9%) of 351 with percutaneous exposures
seroconverted. None of these three health-care workers had other
 documented
risk factors for infection.  Two other prospective studies to assess the risk of nosocomial
acquisition of HIV infection for health-care workers are ongoing in
 the
United States. As of April 30, 1987, 332 health-care workers with a
 total
of 453 needlestick or mucous-membrane exposures to the blood or
 other body
fluids of HIV-infected patients were tested for HIV antibody at the
National Institutes of Health (10). These exposed workers included
 103 with
needlestick injuries and 229 with mucous-membrane exposures; none
 had
seroconverted. A similar study at the University of California of
 129
health-care workers with documented needlestick injuries or
 mucous-membrane
exposures to blood or other body fluids from patients with HIV
 infection
has not identified any seroconversions (11). Results of a
 prospective study
in the United Kingdom identified no evidence of transmission among
 150
health-care workers with parenteral or mucous-membrane exposures to
 blood
or other body fluids, secretions, or excretions from patients with
 HIV
infection (12).  In addition to health-care workers enrolled in prospective
 studies,
eight persons who provided care to infected patients and denied
 other risk
factors have been reported to have acquired HIV infection. Three of
 these
health-care workers had needlestick exposures to blood from
 infected
patients (13-15). Two were persons who provided nursing care to
 infected
persons; although neither sustained a needlestick, both had
 extensive
contact with blood or other body fluids, and neither observed
 recommended
barrier precautions (16, 17). The other three were health-care
 workers with
non-needlestick exposures to blood from infected patients (18).
 Although
the exact route of transmission for these last three infections is
 not
known, all three persons had direct contact of their skin with
 blood from
infected patients, all had skin lesions that may have been
 contaminated by
blood, and one also had a mucous-membrane exposure.  A total of 1,231 dentist and
hygienists, many of whom practiced
 in
areas with many AIDS cases, participated in a study to determine
 the
prevalence of antibody to HIV; one dentist (0.1%) had HIV antibody.
Although no exposure to a known HIV-infected person could be
 documented,
epidemiologic investigation did not identify any other risk factor
 for
infection. The infected dentist, who also had a history of
 sustaining
needlestick injuries and trauma to his hands, did not routinely
 wear gloves
when providing dental care (19).  Precautions To Prevent Transmission of HIV  Universal
Precautions  Since medical history and examination cannot reliably identify
 all
patients infected with HIV or other blood-borne pathogens, blood
 and body-
fluid precautions should be consistently used for ALL patients.
 This
approach, previously recommended by CDC (3,4), and referred to as
"universal blood and body-fluid precautions" or "universal
 precautions,"
should be used in the care of ALL patients, especially including
 those in
emergency-care settings in which the risk of blood exposure is
 increased
and the infection status of the patient is usually unknown (20).  
    All health-care workers should routinely use appropriate
 barrier
    precautions to prevent skin and mucous-membrane exposure
 when
    contact with blood or other body fluids of any patient is
 antici-
    pated. Gloves should be worn for touching blood and body
 fluids,
    mucous membranes, or non-intact skin of all patients, for
 handling
    items or surfaces soiled with blood or body fluids, and for
    performing venipuncture and other vascular access
 procedures. Gloves
    should be changed after contact with each patient. Masks and
    protective eyewear or face shields should be worn during
 procedures
    that are likely to generate droplets of blood or other body
 fluids
    to prevent exposure of mucous membranes of the mouth, nose,
 and
    eyes. Gowns or aprons should be worn during procedures that
 are
    likely to generate splashes of blood or other body fluids.  
    Hands and other skin surfaces should be washed immediately
 and
    thoroughly if contaminated with blood or other body fluids.
 Hands
    should be washed immediately after gloves are removed.  
    All health-care workers should take precautions to prevent
 injuries
    caused by needles, scalpels, and other sharp instruments or
 devices
    during procedures; when cleaning used instruments; during
 disposal
    of used needles; and when handling sharp instruments after
    procedures. To prevent needlestick injuries, needles should
 not be
    recapped, purposely bent or broken by hand, removed from
 disposable
    syringes, or otherwise manipulated by hand. After they are
 used,
    disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades, and other
 sharp
    items should be placed in puncture-resistant containers for
    disposal; the puncture-resistant containers should be
 located as
    close as practical to the use area. Large-bore reusable
 needles
    should be placed in a puncture-resistant container for
 transport to
    the reprocessing area.  
    Although saliva has not been implicated in HIV transmission,
 to
    minimize the need for emergency mouth-to-mouth
 resuscitation, mouth-
    pieces, resuscitation bags, or other ventilation devices
 should be
    available for use in areas in which the need for
 resuscitation is
    predictable.  
    Health-care workers who have exudative lesions or weeping
 dermatitis
    should refrain from all direct patient care and from
 handling
    patient-care equipment until the condition resolves.  
    Pregnant health-care workers are not known to be at greater
 risk of
    contracting HIV infection than health-care workers who are
 not
    pregnant; however, if a health-care worker develops HIV
 infection
    during pregnancy, the infant is at risk of infection
 resulting from
    perinatal transmission. Because of this risk, pregnant
 health-care
    workers should be especially familiar with and strictly
 adhere to
    precautions to minimize the risk of HIV transmission.
    Implementation of universal blood and body-fluid precautions
 for ALL  patients eliminates the need for use of the isolation category of
 "Blood
and Body Fluid Precautions" previously recommended by CDC (7) for
 patients
known or suspected to be infected with blood-borne pathogens.
 Isolation
precautions (e.g., enteric, "AFB" {7}) should be used as necessary
 if
associated conditions, such as infectious diarrhea or tuberculosis,
 are
diagnosed  or  suspected.   Precautions  for  Invasive  Procedures   In  this  document,  an
invasive procedure is defined as surgical
 entry
into tissues, cavities, or organs or repair of major traumatic
 injuries
1)in an operating or delivery room, emergency department, or
 outpatient
setting, including both physicians' and dentists' offices; 2)
 cardiac
catheterization and angiographic procedures; 3) a vaginal or
 cesarean
delivery or other invasive obstetric procedure during which
 bleeding may
occur; or 4) the manipulation, cutting, or removal of any oral or
 perioral
tissues, including tooth structure, during which bleeding occurs or
 the
potential for bleeding exists. The universal blood and body-fluid
precautions listed above, combined with the precautions listed
 below,
should be the minimum precautions for ALL such invasive procedures.
  
    All health-care workers who participate in invasive
 procedures must
    routinely use appropriate barrier precautions to prevent
 skin and
    mucous-membrane contact with blood and other body fluids of
 all
    patients. Gloves and surgical masks must be worn for all
 invasive
    procedures. Protective eyewear or face shields should be
 worn for
    procedures that commonly result in the generation of
 droplets,
    splashing of blood or other body fluids, or the generation
 of bone
    chips. Gowns or aprons made of materials that provide an
 effective
    barrier should be worn during invasive procedures that are
 likely to
    result in the splashing of blood or other body fluids. All
 health-
    care workers who perform or assist in vaginal or cesarean
 deliveries
    should wear gloves and gowns when handling the placenta or
 the
    infant until blood and amniotic fluid have been removed from
 the
    infant's skin and should wear gloves during post-delivery
 care of
    the umbilical cord.  
    If a glove is torn or a needlestick or other injury occurs,
 the
    glove should be removed and a new glove used as promptly as
 patient
    safety permits; the needle or instrument involved in the
 incident
    should also be removed from the sterile field.  Precautions for Dentistry *  Blood,
saliva, and gingival fluid from ALL dental patients
 should be
considered infective. Special emphasis should be placed on the
 following
precautions for preventing transmission of blood-borne pathogens in
 dental
practice in both institutional and non-institutional settings.  
    In addition to wearing gloves for contact with oral mucous
 membranes
    of all patients, all dental workers should wear surgical
 masks and
    protective eyewear or chin-length plastic face shields
 during dental
    procedures in which splashing or spattering of blood,
 saliva, or
    gingival fluids is likely. Rubber dams, high-speed
 evacuation and
    proper patient positioning, when appropriate, should be
 utilized to
    minimize generation of droplets and spatter.  
    Handpieces should be sterilized after use with each patient,
 since
    blood, saliva, or gingival fluid of patients may be
 aspirated into
    the handpiece or waterline. Handpieces that cannot be
 sterilized
    should at least be flushed, the outside surface cleaned and
 wiped
    with a suitable chemical germicide, and then rinsed.
 Handpieces
    should be flushed at the beginning of the day and after use
 with
    each patient. Manufacturers' recommendations should be
 followed for
    use and maintenance of waterlines and check valves and for
 flushing
    of handpieces. The same precautions should be used for
 ultrasonic
    scalers and air/water syringes.  
    Blood and saliva should be thoroughly and carefully cleaned
 from
    material that has been used in the mouth (e.g., impression
    materials, bite registration), especially before polishing
 and
    grinding intra-oral devices. Contaminated materials,
 impressions,
    and intra-oral devices should also be cleaned and
 disinfected before
    being handled in the dental laboratory and before they are
 placed in
    the patient's mouth. Because of the increasing variety of
 dental
    materials used intra-orally, dental workers should consult
 with
    manufacturers as to the stability of specific materials when
 using
    disinfection procedures.  
    Dental equipment and surfaces that are difficult to
 disinfect (e.g.,
    light handles or X-ray-unit heads) and that may become
 contaminated
    should be wrapped with impervious-backed paper, aluminum
 foil, or
    clear plastic wrap. The coverings should be removed and
 discarded,
    and clean coverings should be put in place after use with
 each
    patient.  Precautions for Autopsies or Morticians' Services  In addition to the universal
blood and body-fluid precautions
 listed
above, the following precautions should be used by persons
 performing
postmortem procedures:  
    All persons performing or assisting in postmortem procedures
 should
    wear gloves, masks, protective eyewear, gowns, and
 waterproof
    aprons.  
    Instruments and surfaces contaminated during postmortem
 procedures
    should be decontaminated with an appropriate chemical
 germicide.   Precautions  for  Dialysis   Patients  with  end-stage  renal  disease  who  are
undergoing
 maintenance
dialysis and who have HIV infection can be dialyzed in
 hospital-based or
free-standing dialysis units using conventional infection-control
precautions (21). Universal blood and body-fluid precautions should
 be used
when dialyzing ALL patients.  Strategies for disinfecting the dialysis fluid pathways of
the
hemodialysis machine are targeted to control bacterial
 contamination and
generally consist of using 500-750 parts per million (ppm) of
 sodium
hypochlorite (household bleach) for 30-40 minutes or 1.5%-2.0%
 formaldehyde
overnight. In addition, several chemical germicides formulated to
 disinfect
dialysis machines are commercially available. None of these
 protocols or
procedures need to be changed for dialyzing patients infected with
 HIV.  Patients infected with HIV can be dialyzed by either
 hemodialysis or
peritoneal dialysis and do not need to be isolated from other
 patients. The
type of dialysis treatment (i.e., hemodialysis or peritoneal
 dialysis)
should be based on the needs of the patient. The dialyzer may be
 discarded
after each use. Alternatively, centers that reuse dialyzers -- i.e.
 a
specific single-use dialyzer is issued to a specific patient,
 removed,
cleaned, disinfected, and reused several times on the same patient
 only --
may include HIV-infected patients in the dialyzer-reuse program. An
individual  dialyzer  must  never  be  used  on  more  than  one  patient.   Precautions  for
Laboratories **  Blood and other body fluids from ALL patients should be
 considered
infective. To supplement the universal blood and body-fluid
 precautions
listed above, the following precautions are recommended for
 health-care
workers in clinical laboratories.  
    All specimens of blood and body fluids should be put in a
 well-
    constructed container with a secure lid to prevent leaking
 during
    transport. Care should be taken when collecting each
 specimen to
    avoid contaminating the outside of the container and of the
    laboratory form accompanying the specimen.  
    All persons processing blood and body-fluid specimens (e.g.,
    removing tops from vacuum tubes) should wear gloves. Masks
 and
    protective eyewear should be worn if mucous-membrane contact
 with
    blood or body fluids is anticipated. Gloves should be
 changed and
    hands washed after completion of specimen processing.  
    For routine procedures, such as histologic and pathologic
 studies or
    microbiologic culturing, a biological safety cabinet is not
    necessary. However, biological safety cabinets (Class I or
 II)
    should be used whenever procedures are conducted that have a
 high
    potential for generating droplets. These include activities
 such as
    blending, sonicating, and vigorous mixing.  
    Mechanical pipetting devices should be used for manipulating
 all
    liquids in the laboratory. Mouth pipetting must not be done.
  
    Use of needles and syringes should be limited to situations
 in which
    there is no alternative, and the recommendations for
 preventing
    injuries with needles outlined under universal precautions
 should be
    followed.  
    Laboratory work surfaces should be decontaminated with an
    appropriate chemical germicide after a spill of blood or
 other body
    fluids and when work activities are completed.  
    Contaminated materials used in laboratory tests should be
 decon-
    taminated before reprocessing or be placed in bags and
 disposed of
    in accordance with institutional policies for disposal of
 infective
    waste (24).  
    Scientific equipment that has been contaminated with blood
 or other
    body fluids should be decontaminated and cleaned before
 being
    repaired in the laboratory or transported to the
 manufacturer.  
    All persons should wash their hands after completing
 laboratory
    activities and should remove protective clothing before
 leaving the
    laboratory.
    Implementation of universal blood and body-fluid precautions
 for ALL  patients eliminates the need for warning labels on specimens since
 blood
and other body fluids from all patients should be considered
 infective.   Environmental  Considerations  for  HIV  Transmission   No  environmentally
mediated mode of HIV transmission has been
documented. Nevertheless, the precautions described below should be
 taken
routinely  in  the  care  of  ALL  patients.   Sterilization  and  Disinfection   Standard
sterilization and disinfection procedures for
 patient-care
equipment currently recommended for use (25, 26) in a variety of
 health-
care settings -- including  hospitals, medical and dental clinics
 and
offices, hemodialysis centers, emergency-care facilities, and
 long-term
nursing-care facilities -- are adequate to sterilize or disinfect
instruments, devices, or other items contaminated with blood or
 other body
fluids from persons infected with blood-borne pathogens including
 HIV (21,
23).  Instruments or devices that enter sterile tissue or the
 vascular system
of any patient or through which blood flows should be sterilized
 before
reuse. Devices or items that contact intact mucous membranes should
 be
sterilized or receive high-level disinfection, a procedure that
 kills
vegetative organisms and viruses but not necessarily large numbers
 of
bacterial spores. Chemical germicides that are registered with the
 U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as "sterilants" may be used
 either
for sterilization or for high-level disinfection depending on
 contact time.  Contact lenses used in trial fittings should be disinfected
 after each
fitting by using a hydrogen peroxide contact lens disinfecting
 system or,
if compatible, with heat (78 C-80 C {172.4 F-176.0 F}) for 10
 minutes.  Medical devices or instruments that require sterilization or
disinfection should be thoroughly cleaned before being exposed to
 the
germicide, and the manufacturer's instructions for the use of the
 germicide
should be followed. Further, it is important that the
 manufacturer's
specifications for compatibility of the medical device with
 chemical
germicides be closely followed. Information on specific label
 claims of
commercial germicides can be obtained by writing to the
 Disinfectants
Branch, Office of Pesticides, Environmental Protection Agency, 401
 M
Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20460.  Studies have shown that HIV is inactivated rapidly
after being
 exposed
to commonly used chemical germicides at concentrations that are
 much lower
than used in practice (27-30). Embalming fluids are similar to the
 types of
chemical germicides that have been tested and found to completely
inactivate HIV. In addition to commercially available chemical
 germicides,
a solution of sodium hypochlorite (household bleach) prepared daily
 is an
inexpensive and effective germicide. Concentrations ranging from
approximately 500 ppm (1:100 dilution of household bleach) sodium
hypochlorite to 5,000 ppm (1:10 dilution of household bleach) are
 effective
depending on the amount of organic material (e.g., blood, mucus)
 present on
the surface to be cleaned and disinfected. Commercially available
 chemical
germicides may be more compatible with certain medical devices that
 might
be corroded by repeated exposure to sodium hypochlorite, especially
 to the
1:10  dilution.   Survival  of  HIV  in  the  Environment   The  most  extensive  study  on  the
survival of HIV after drying
 involved
greatly concentrated HIV samples, i.e., 10 million tissue-culture
infectious doses per milliliter (31). This concentration is at
 least
100,000 times greater than that typically found in the blood or
 serum of
patients with HIV infection. HIV was detectable by tissue-culture
techniques 1-3 days after drying, but the rate of inactivation was
 rapid.
Studies performed at CDC have also shown that drying HIV causes a
 rapid
(within several hours) 1-2 log (90%-99%) reduction in HIV
 concentration. In
tissue-culture fluid, cell-free HIV could be detected up to 15 days
 at room
temperature, up to 11 days at 37 C (98.6 F), and up to 1 day if the
 HIV was
cell-associated.  When considered in the context of environmental conditions in
 health-
care facilities, these results do not require any changes in
 currently
recommended sterilization, disinfection, or housekeeping
 strategies. When
medical devices are contaminated with blood or other body fluids,
 existing
recommendations include the cleaning of these instruments, followed
 by
disinfection or sterilization, depending on the type of medical
 device.
These protocols assume "worst-case" conditions of extreme virologic
 and
microbiologic contamination, and whether viruses have been
 inactivated
after drying plays no role in formulating these strategies.
 Consequently,
no changes in published procedures for cleaning, disinfecting, or
sterilizing  need  to  be  made.   Housekeeping   Environmental  surfaces  such  as  walls,
floors, and other
 surfaces are
not associated with transmission of infections to patients or
 health-care
workers. Therefore, extraordinary attempts to disinfect or
 sterilize these
environmental surfaces are not necessary. However, cleaning and
 removal of
soil should be done routinely.  Cleaning schedules and methods vary according to the
area of
 the
hospital or institution, type of surface to be cleaned, and the
 amount and
type of soil present. Horizontal surfaces (e.g., bedside tables and
 hard-
surfaced flooring) in patient-care areas are usually cleaned on a
 regular
basis, when soiling or spills occur, and when a patient is
 discharged.
Cleaning of wails, blinds, and curtains is recommended only if they
 are
visibly soiled. Disinfectant fogging is an unsatisfactory method of
decontaminating  air  and  surfaces  and  is  not  recommended.   Disinfectant-detergent
formulations registered by EPA can be
 used for
cleaning environmental surfaces, but the actual physical removal of
microorganisms by scrubbing is probably at least as important as
 any
antimicrobial effect of the cleaning agent used. Therefore, cost,
 safety,
and acceptability by housekeepers can be the main criteria for
 selecting
any such registered agent. The manufacturers' instructions for
 appropriate
use should be followed.  Cleaning and Decontaminating Spills of Blood or Other Body
Fluids  Chemical germicides that are approved for use as "hospital
disinfectants" and are tuberculocidal when used at recommended
 dilutions
can be used to decontaminate spills of blood and other body fluids.
Strategies for decontaminating spills of blood and other body
 fluids in a
patient-care setting are different than for spills of cultures or
 other
materials in clinical, public health, or research laboratories. In
 patient-
care areas, visible material should first be removed and then the
 area
should be decontaminated. With large spills of cultured or
 concentrated
infectious agents in the laboratory, the contaminated area should
 be
flooded with a liquid germicide before cleaning, then
 decontaminated with
fresh germicidal chemical. In both settings, gloves should be worn
 during
the cleaning and decontaminating procedures.  Laundry  Although soiled linen has been
identified as a source of large
 numbers
of certain pathogenic microorganisms, the risk of actual disease
transmission is negligible. Rather than rigid procedures and
 specifi-
cations, hygienic and common-sense storage and processing of clean
 and
soiled linen are recommended (26). Soiled linen should be handled
 as little
as possible and with minimum agitation to prevent gross microbial
contamination of the air and of persons handling the linen. All
 soiled
linen should be bagged at the location where it was used; it should
 not be
sorted or rinsed in patient-care areas. Linen soiled with blood or
 body
fluids should be placed and transported in bags that prevent
 leakage. If
hot water is used, linen should be washed with detergent in water
 at least
71 C (160 F) for 25 minutes. If low-temperature (less than or equal
 to 70 C
{158 F}) laundry cycles are used, chemicals suitable for
 low-temperature
washing  at  proper  use  concentration  should  be  used.   Infective  Waste   There  is  no
epidemiologic evidence to suggest that most
 hospital waste
is any more infective than residential waste. Moreover, there is no
epidemiologic evidence that hospital waste has caused disease in
 the
community as a result of improper disposal. Therefore, identifying
 wastes
for which special precautions are indicated is largely a matter of
 judgment
about the relative risk of disease transmission. The most practical
approach to the management of infective waste is to identify those
 wastes
with the potential for causing infection during handling and
 disposal and
for which some special precautions appear prudent. Hospital wastes
 for
which special precautions appear prudent include microbiology
 laboratory
waste, pathology waste, and blood specimens or blood products.
 While any
item that has had contact with blood, exudates, or secretions may
 be
potentially infective, it is not usually considered practical or
 necessary
to treat all such waste as infective (23, 26). Infective waste, in
 general,
should either be incinerated or should be autoclaved before
 disposal in a
sanitary landfill. Bulk blood, suctioned fluids, excretions, and
 secretions
may be carefully poured down a drain connected to a sanitary sewer.
Sanitary sewers may also be used to dispose of other infectious
 wastes
capable of being ground and flushed into the sewer.  Implementation of Recommended
Precautions  Employers of health-care workers should ensure that policies
 exist for:  
    Initial orientation and continuing education and training of
 all
    health-care workers -- including students and trainees -- on
 the
    epidemiology, modes of transmission, and prevention of HIV
 and other
    blood-borne infections and the need for routine use of
 universal
    blood and body-fluid precautions for ALL patients.  
    Provision of equipment and supplies necessary to minimize
 the risk
    of infection with HIV and other blood-borne pathogens.  
    Monitoring adherence to recommended protective measures.
 When
    monitoring reveals a failure to follow recommended
 precautions,
    counseling, education, and/or re-training should be
 provided, and,
    if necessary, appropriate disciplinary action should be
 considered.
    Professional associations and labor organizations, through
 continuing  education efforts, should emphasize the need for health-care
 workers to
follow recommended precautions.  Serologic Testing for HIV Infection  Background  A
person is identified as infected with HIV when a sequence of
 tests,
starting with repeated enzyme immunoassays (EIA) and including a
 Western
blot or similar, more specific assay, are repeatedly reactive.
 Persons
infected with HIV usually develop antibody against the virus within
 6-12
weeks after infection.  The sensitivity of the currently licensed EIA tests is at least
 99%
when they are performed under optimal laboratory conditions on
 serum
specimens from persons infected for greater than or equal to 12
 weeks.
Optimal laboratory conditions include the use of reliable reagents,
provision of continuing education of personnel, quality control of
 proce-
dures, and participation in performance-evaluation programs. Given
 this
performance, the probability of a false-negative test is remote
 except
during the first several weeks after infection, before detectable
 antibody
is present. The proportion of infected persons with a
 false-negative test
attributed to absence of antibody in the early stages of infection
 is
dependent on both the incidence and prevalence of HIV infection in
 a
population (Table 1).  The specificity of the currently licensed EIA tests is
 approximately
99% when repeatedly reactive tests are considered. Repeat testing
 of
initially reactive specimens by EIA is required to reduce the
 likelihood of
laboratory error. To increase further the specificity of serologic
 tests,
laboratories must use a supplemental test, most often the Western
 blot, to
validate repeatedly reactive EIA results. Under optimal laboratory
conditions, the sensitivity of the Western blot test is comparable
 to or
greater than that of a repeatedly reactive EIA, and the Western
 blot is
highly specific when strict criteria are used to interpret the test
results. The testing sequence of a repeatedly reactive EIA and a
 positive
Western blot test is highly predictive of HIV infection, even in a
population with a low prevalence of infection (Table 2). If the
 Western
blot test result is indeterminant, the testing sequence is
 considered
equivocal for HIV infection. When this occurs, the Western blot
 test should
be repeated on the same serum sample, and, if still indeterminant,
 the
testing sequence should be repeated on a sample collected 3-6
 months later.
Use of other supplemental tests may aid in interpreting of results
 on
samples  that  are  persistently  indeterminant  by  Western  blot.   Testing  of  Patients  
Previous CDC recommendations have emphasized the value of HIV
 serologic
testing of patients for: 1 ) management of parenteral or
 mucous-membrane
exposures of health-care workers, 2) patient diagnosis and
 management, and
3) counseling and serologic testing to prevent and control HIV
 transmission
in the community. In addition, more recent recommendations have
 stated that
hospitals, in conjunction with state and local health departments,
 should
periodically determine the prevalence of HIV infection among
 patients from
age  groups  at  highest  risk  of  infection  (32).   Adherence  to  universal  blood  and
body-fluid precautions
 recommended for
the care of all patients will minimize the risk of transmission of
 HIV and
other blood-borne pathogens from patients to health-care workers.
 The
utility of routine HIV serologic testing of patients as an adjunct
 to
universal precautions is unknown. Results of such testing may not
 be
available in emergency or outpatient settings. In addition, some
 recently
infected patients will not have detectable antibody to HIV (Table
 1).  Personnel in some hospitals have advocated serologic testing of
patients in settings in which exposure of health-care workers to
 large
amounts of patients' blood may be anticipated. Specific patients
 for whom
serologic testing has been advocated include those undergoing major
operative procedures and those undergoing treatment in
 critical-care units,
especially if they have conditions involving uncontrolled bleeding.
Decisions regarding the need to establish testing programs for
 patients
should be made by physicians or individual institutions. In
 addition, when
deemed appropriate, testing of individual patients may be performed
 on
agreement  between  the  patient  and  the  physician  providing  care.   In  addition  to  the
universal precautions recommended for all
 patients,
certain additional precautions for the care of HIV-infected
 patients
undergoing major surgical operations have been proposed by
 personnel in
some hospitals. For example, surgical procedures on an HIV-infected
 patient
might be altered so that hand-to-hand passing of sharp instruments
 would be
eliminated; stapling instruments rather than hand-suturing
 equipment might
be used to perform tissue approximation; electrocautery devices
 rather than
scalpels might be used as cutting instruments; and, even though
uncomfortable, gowns that totally prevent seepage of blood onto the
 skin of
members of the operative team might be worn. While such
 modifications might
further minimize the risk of HIV infection for members of the
 operative
team, some of these techniques could result in prolongation of
 operative
time and could potentially have an adverse effect on the patient.  Testing programs, if
developed, should include the following
principles:  
    Obtaining consent for testing.  
    Informing patients of test results, and providing counseling
 for
    seropositive patients by properly trained persons.  
    Assuring that confidentiality safeguards are in place to
 limit
    knowledge of test results to those directly involved in the
 care of
    infected patients or as required by law.  
    Assuring that identification of infected patients will not
 result in
    denial of needed care or provision of suboptimal care.  
    Evaluating prospectively 1) the efficacy of the program in
 reducing
    the incidence of parenteral, mucous-membrane, or significant
    cutaneous exposures of health-care workers to the blood or
 other body
    fluids of HIV-infected patients and 2) the effect of modified
    procedures on patients.  Testing of Health-Care Workers  Although transmission of
HIV from infected health-care workers
 to
patients has not been reported, transmission during invasive
 procedures
remains a possibility. Transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) -- a
 blood-
borne agent with a considerably greater potential for nosocomial
 spread --
from health-care workers to patients has been documented. Such
 transmission
has occurred in situations (e.g., oral and gynecologic surgery) in
 which
health-care workers when tested had very high concentrations of HBV
 in
their blood (at least 100 million infectious virus particles per
milliliter, a concentration much higher than occurs with HIV
 infection),
and the health-care workers sustained a puncture wound while
 performing
invasive procedures or had exudative or weeping lesions or
 microlacerations
that allowed virus to contaminate instruments or open wounds of
 patients
(33, 34).  The hepatitis B experience indicates that only those
 health-care
workers who perform certain types of invasive procedures have
 transmitted
HBV to patients. Adherence to recommendations in this document will
minimize the risk of transmission of HIV and other blood-borne
 pathogens
from health-care workers to patients during invasive procedures.
 Since
transmission of HIV from infected health-care workers performing
 invasive
procedures to their patients has not been reported and would be
 expected to
occur only very rarely, if at all, the utility of routine testing
 of such
health-care workers to prevent transmission of HIV cannot be
 assessed. If
consideration is given to developing a serologic testing program
 for
health-care workers who perform invasive procedures, the frequency
 of
testing, as well as the issues of consent, confidentiality, and
consequences of test results -- as previously outlined for testing
 programs
for  patients  --  must  be  addressed.   Management  of  Infected  Health-Care  Workers  
Health-care workers with impaired immune systems resulting from
 HIV
infection or other causes are at increased risk of acquiring or
experiencing serious complications of infectious disease. Of
 particular
concern is the risk of severe infection following exposure to
 patients with
infectious diseases that are easily transmitted if appropriate
 precautions
are not taken (e.g., measles, varicella). Any health-care worker
 with an
impaired immune system should be counseled about the potential risk
associated with taking care of patients with any transmissible
 infection
and should continue to follow existing recommendations for
 infection
control to minimize risk of exposure to other infectious agents (7,
 35).
Recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
 (ACIP) and
institutional policies concerning requirements for vaccinating
 health-care
workers with live-virus vaccines (e.g., measles, rubella) should
 also be
considered.  The question of whether workers infected with HIV -- especially
 those
who perform invasive procedures -- can adequately and safely be
 allowed to
perform patient-care duties or whether their work assignments
 should be
changed must be determined on an individual basis. These decisions
 should
be made by the health-care worker's personal physician(s) in
 conjunction
with the medical directors and personnel health service staff of
 the
employing  institution  or  hospital.   Management  of  Exposures   If  a  health-care  worker
has a parenteral (e.g., needlestick or
 cut) or
mucous-membrane (e.g., splash to the eye or mouth) exposure to
 blood or
other body fluids or has a cutaneous exposure involving large
 amounts of
blood or prolonged contact with blood -- especially when the
 exposed skin
is chapped, abraded, or afflicted with dermatitis -- the source
 patient
should be informed of the incident and tested for serologic
 evidence of HIV
infection after consent is obtained. Policies should be developed
 for
testing source patients in situations in which consent cannot be
 obtained
(e.g.,  an  unconscious  patient).   If  the  source  patient  has  AIDS,  is  positive  for  HIV
antibody,
 or
refuses the test, the health-care worker should be counseled
 regarding the
risk of infection and evaluated clinically and serologically for
 evidence
of HIV infection as soon as possible after the exposure. The
 health-care
worker should be advised to report and seek medical evaluation for
 any
acute febrile illness that occurs within 12 weeks after the
 exposure. Such
an illness -- particularly one characterized by fever, rash, or
lymphadenopathy -- may be indicative of recent HIV infection.
 Seronegative
health-care workers should be retested 6 weeks post-exposure and on
 a
periodic basis thereafter (e.g., 12 weeks and 6 months after
 exposure) to
determine whether transmission has occurred. During this follow-up
 period  
    especially the first 6-12 weeks after exposure, when most
 infected
    persons are expected to seroconvert -- exposed health-care workers
 should
    follow U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) recommendations for
 preventing
    transmission of HIV (36, 37).  No further follow-up of a health-care worker exposed to
 infection as
described above is necessary if the source patient is seronegative
 unless
the source patient is at high risk of HIV infection. In the latter
 case, a
subsequent specimen (e.g., 12 weeks following exposure) may be
 obtained
from the health-care worker for antibody testing. If the source
 patient
cannot be identified, decisions regarding appropriate follow-up
 should be
individualized. Serologic testing should be available to all
 health-care
workers who are concerned that they may have been infected with
 HIV.  If a patient has a parenteral or mucous-membrane exposure to
 blood or
other body fluid of a health-care worker, the patient should be
 informed of
the incident, and the same procedure outlined above for management
 of
exposures should be followed for both the source health-care worker
 and the
exposed patient.  
    General infection-control precautions are more specifically
 addressed in  previous recommendations for infection-control practices for
 dentistry (8).
** Additional precautions for research and industrial laboratories
 are
addressed elsewhere (22,23).  References  
    CDC. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): Precautions for
    clinical and laboratory staffs. MMWR 1982;31:577-80.  
    CDC. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): Precautions for
 health-
    care workers and allied professionals. MMWR 1983;32:450-1.  
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infection
 with
    human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated
 virus
    in the workplace. MMWR 1985;34:681-6, 691-5.  
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infection
 with
    human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated
 virus
    during invasive procedures. MMWR 1986;35:221-3.  
    CDC. Recommendations for preventing possible transmission of
 human
    T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus
 from
    tears. MMWR 1985;34:533-4.  
    CDC. Recommendations for providing dialysis treatment to
 patients
    infected with human T-lymphotropic virus type
 III/lymphadenopathy-
    associated virus infection. MMWR 1986;35:376-8, 383.  
    Garner JS, Simmons BP. Guideline for isolation precautions in
    hospitals. Infect Control 1983;4 (suppl):245-325.  
    CDC. Recommended infection control practices for dentistry.
 MMWR
    1986;35:237-42.  
    McCray E, The Cooperative Needlestick Surveillance Group.
 Occupational
    risk of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome among health
 care
    workers. N Engl J Med 1986;314:1127-32.  
    Henderson DK, Saah AJ, Zak BJ, et al. Risk of nosocomial
 infection with
    human T-cell lymphotropic virus type
 III/lymphadenopathy-associated
    virus in a large cohort of intensively exposed health care
 workers. Ann
    Intern Med 1986;104:644-7.  
    Gerberding JL, Bryant-LeBlanc CE, Nelson K, et al. Risk of
 transmitting
    the human immunodeficiency virus, cytomegalovirus, and
 hepatitis B
    virus to health care workers exposed to patients with AIDS and
 AIDS-
    related conditions. J Infect Dis 1987;156:1-8.  
    McEvoy M, Porter K, Mortimer P, Simmons N, Shanson D.
 Prospective study
    of clinical, laboratory, and ancillary staff with accidental
 exposures
    to blood or other body fluids from patients infected with HIV.
 Br Med J
    1987;294:1595-7.  
    Anonymous. Needlestick transmission of HTLV-III from a patient
 infected
    in Africa. Lancet 1984;2:1376-7.  
    Oksenhendler E, Harzic M, Le Roux JM, Rabian C, Clauvel JP. HIV
    infection with seroconversion after a superficial needlestick
 injury
    to the finger. N Engl J Med 1986;315:582.  
    Neisson-Vernant C, Arfi S, Mathez D, Leibowitch J, Monplaisir
 N.
    Needlestick HIV seroconversion in a nurse. Lancet 1986;2:814.  
    Grint P, McEvoy M. Two associated cases of the acquired immune
    deficiency syndrome (AIDS). PHLS Commun Dis Rep 1985;42:4.  
    CDC. Apparent transmission of human T-lymphotropic virus type
 III/
    lymphadenopathy-associated virus from a child to a mother
 providing
    health care. MMWR 1986;35:76-9.  
    CDC. Update: Human immunodeficiency virus infections in
 health-care
    workers exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR
 1987;36:285-9.  
    Kline RS, Phelan J, Friedland GH, et al. Low occupational risk
 for HIV
    infection for dental professionals {Abstract}. In: Abstracts
 from the
    III International Conference on AIDS, 1-5 June 1985.
 Washington, DC:
    155.  
    Baker JL, Kelen GD, Sivertson KT, Quinn TC. Unsuspected human
 immuno-
    deficiency virus in critically ill emergency patients. JAMA
 1987;257:
    2609-11.  
    Favero MS. Dialysis-associated diseases and their control. In:
 Bennett
    JV, Brachman PS, eds. Hospital infections. Boston: Little,
 Brown and
    Company, 1985:267-84.  
    Richardson JH, Barkley WE, eds. Biosafety in microbiological
 and
    biomedical laboratories, 1984. Washington, DC: US Department of
 Health
    and Human Services, Public Health Service. HHS publication no.
 (CDC)
    84-8395.  
    CDC. Human T-lymphotropic virus type
 III/lymphadenopathy-associated
    virus: Agent summary statement. MMWR 1986;35:540-2, 547-9.  
    Environmental Protection Agency. EPA guide for infectious waste
    management. Washington, DC:U.S. Environmental Protection
 Agency, May
    1986 (Publication no. EPA/530-SW-86-014).  
    Favero MS. Sterilization, disinfection, and antisepsis in the
 hospital.
    In: Manual of clinical microbiology. 4th ed, Washington, DC:
 American
    Society for Microbiology, 1985;129-37.  
    Garner JS, Favero MS. Guideline for handwashing and hospital
 environ-
    mental control, 1985. Atlanta: Public Health Service, Centers
 for
    Disease Control, 1985. HHS publication no. 99-1117.  
    Spire B, Montagnier L, Barre-Sinoussi F, Chermann JC.
 Inactivation of
    lymphadenopathy associated virus by chemical disinfectants.
 Lancet
    1984;2:899-901.  
    Martin LS, McDougal JS, Loskoski SL. Disinfection and
 inactivation of
    the human T lymphotropic virus type
 III/lymphadenopathy-associated
    virus. J Infect Dis 1985;152:400-3.  
    McDougal JS, Martin LS, Cort SP, et al. Thermal inactivation of
 the
    acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
 virus-III/lymphadenopathy-associated
    virus, with special reference to antihemophilic factor. J Clin
 Invest
    1985;76:875-7.  
    Spire B, Barre-Sinoussi F, Dormont D, Montagnier L, Chermann
 JC.
    Inactivation of lymphadenopathy-associated virus by heat, gamma
 rays,
    and ultraviolet light. Lancet 1985;1:188-9.  
    Resnik L, Veren K, Salahuddin SZ, Tondreau S, Markham PD.
 Stability and
    inactivation of HTLV-III/LAV under clinical and laboratory
 environ-
    ments. JAMA 1986;255:1887-91.  
    CDC. Public Health Service (PHS) guidelines for counseling and
 antibody
    testing to prevent HIV infection and AIDS. MMWR 1987;3:509-15.  
    Kane MA, Lettau LA. Transmission of HBV from dental personnel
 to
    patients. J Am Dent Assoc 1985;110:634-6.  
    Lettau LA, Smith JD, Williams D, et. al. Transmission of
 hepatitis B
    with resultant restriction of surgical practice. JAMA
 1986;255:934-7.  
    Williams WW. Guideline for infection control in hospital
 personnel.
    Infect Control 1983;4 (suppl):326-49.  
    CDC. Prevention of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS):
 Report
    of inter-agency recommendations. MMWR 1983;32:101-3.  
    CDC. Provisional Public Health Service inter-agency
 recommendations for
    screening donated blood and plasma for antibody to the virus
 causing
    acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. MMWR 1985;34:1-5.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00023587.htm
