A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Take steps to reduce your risk of infection
with  avian  influenza  A  viruses  associated  with  severe  disease  when  working  with
animals or materials, including raw milk, confirmed infected or potentially infected with
these novel influenza A viruses. Examples of people working with or exposed to animals
include: Avoid unprotected direct or close physical contact with: If you must work in or
enter any not yet disinfected buildings where these materials or sick or dead cattle or
other  animals  confirmed  infected  or  potentially  infected  are  or  were  present,  wear
appropriate  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  in  addition  to  the  PPE  you  might  be
using  for  your  normal  duties  (e.g.,  waterproof  apron,  hearing  protection,  etc.).
Appropriate PPE depends on the hazards present and a site-specific risk assessment. If
you  have  questions  on  the  type  of  PPE  to  use  or  how  to  fit  it  properly,  ask  your
supervisor. Recommended PPE to protect against novel influenza A viruses includes: Put
PPE on in this order and in a clean environment avoiding contamination: Remove PPE in
this order* making sure to dispose of all disposable PPE appropriately and to set aside
all reusable PPE for cleaning after each use: Note: Take off PPE by touching the least
contaminated  part  of  the  PPE.  *Any  change  to  the  order  of  removing  PPE  should
consider that the aim of the chosen sequence should be to minimize any contaminant
transfer from potential contaminated protective clothing and equipment to the person’s
skin  or  regular  clothing.  All  PPE  should  be  used  in  accordance  with  OSHA  regulations
found  at  29  CFR  part  1910,  Subpart  I  (Personal  Protective  Equipment),  including
identifying appropriate PPE based on a site-specific risk assessment. Workers must be
trained  on  and  demonstrate  an  understanding  of  when  to  use  PPE;  what  PPE  is
necessary; what it looks like when PPE is properly fitted; how to properly put on, use,
take off, dispose of, and maintain PPE; and understand the limitations of PPE. Respirator
use  should  be  in  the  context  of  a  comprehensive  respiratory  protection  program  in
accordance with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Respiratory
Protection  standard  (29  CFR  1910.134)  and  other  applicable  requirements.  Staff  who
will  need  to  wear  respirators  must  be  medically-cleared,  trained,  and  fit-tested  for
respirator  use.  Detailed  information  on  respiratory  protection  programs,  including  fit
testing  procedures,  can  be  accessed  at  OSHA's  Respiratory  Protection  eTool.  PPE
training  topics  should  include  all  the  following:  For  information  on  NIOSH  Approved®
respirators visit National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory. It is important to
wear the appropriate PPE for protection against dangerous hazards, including diseases,
in  the  workplace.  However,  there  are  certain  factors  pertaining  to  the  use  of  PPE  of
which  employers  and  workers  should  be  aware.  N95®  and  NIOSH  Approved®  are
certification  marks  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS)
registered in the United States and several international jurisdictions. Avian influenza or
bird flu refers to the disease caused by infection with avian (bird) influenza (flu) Type A
viruses. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/bird-flu/prevention/worker-protection-ppe.html
