A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Access  downloadable  distributions  of  minimum  inhibitory  concentration  (MIC)  for
bacteria and fungi.  CDC programs perform AST of bacterial and bloodstream Candida
isolates  collected  in  surveillance  programs  and  isolates  submitted  to  CDC  from  the
reference  laboratories  for  susceptibility  testing  because  of  unusual  resistance.  CDC
laboratories  default  method  is  broth  microdilution  using  frozen  in-house  prepared
panels  according  to  standards  established  by  the  Clinical  and  Laboratory  Standards
Institute  (CLSI  Documents:  M7  for  bacteria;  M27  with  M60  for  Candida).  Etest  is  a
reference  method  for  antifungal  susceptibility  to  amphotericin  B  in  accordance  with
CLSI M-27e4. CDC is making these data available online for use in setting breakpoints
for interpretation of antimicrobial susceptibility testing. The downloadable data contain
tables and graphic representations that display minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
distributions for various bacteria and Candida. We provide a description of the isolates
tested  with  each  dataset.  CDC  will  continue  to  expand  this  database  to  include  data
from  additional  bacterial  and  fungal  isolates  and  data  from  new  antimicrobial  drugs.
MIC data for Neisseria gonorrhoeae isolates can be found on the CDC Division of STD
Prevention (DSTDP) Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project (GISP) Profiles and Annual
Reports.  Acinetobacter  Coagulase-negative  Staphylococci  (CNS)  Enterobacteriaceae
Enterococcus  Pseudomonas  Staphylococcus  aureus  Candida  Description  of  AST  data
specifics  Reference  AST  Data:  Supplementary  Information  If  the  MIC  values  are  not
available or not determined within the they will appear in the dataset as one of these: If
any of the above appear in the dataset, they should be interpreted as "not determined."
Terms that require decoding: BAL = Bronchoalveolar lavage HAIs are associated with
medical  devices,  complications  following  surgery,  transmission  between  patients  and
healthcare  workers,  antibiotic  overuse,  and  more.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/php/lab-resources/reference-ast-data.html
