A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Reuse of Single-Use Medical Devices from
the Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities (2008). The reuse
of single-use medical devices began in the late 1970s. Before this time most devices
were  considered  reusable.  Reuse  of  single-use  devices  increased  as  a  cost-saving
measure. Approximately 20 to 30% of U.S. hospitals reported that they reuse at least
one type of single-use device. Reuse of single-use devices involves regulatory, ethical,
medical, legal and economic issues and has been extremely controversial for more than
two decades.990 The U.S. public has expressed increasing concern regarding the risk of
infection and injury when reusing medical devices intended and labeled for single use.
Although some investigators have demonstrated it is safe to reuse disposable medical
devices such as cardiac electrode catheters, 991-993 additional studies are needed to
define  the  risks  994  and  document  the  benefits.  In  August  2000,  FDA  released  a
guidance document on single-use devices reprocessed by third parties or hospitals.995
In this guidance document, FDA states that hospitals or third-party reprocessors will be
considered  "manufacturers"  and  regulated  in  the  same  manner.  A  reused  single-use
device will have to comply with the same regulatory requirements of the device when it
was originally manufactured. This document presents FDA's intent to enforce premarket
submission  requirements  within  6  months  (February  2001)  for  class  III  devices  (e.g.,
cardiovascular intra-aortic balloon pump, transluminal coronary angioplasty catheter);
12 months (August 2001) for class II devices (e.g., blood pressure cuff, bronchoscope
biopsy  forceps);  and  18  months  (February  2002)  for  class  I  devices  (e.g.,  disposable
medical scissors, ophthalmic knife). FDA uses two types of premarket requirements for
nonexempt class I and II devices, a 510(k) submission that may have to show that the
device is as safe and effective as the same device when new, and a premarket approval
application. The 510(k) submission must provide scientific evidence that the device is
safe and effective for its intended use. FDA allowed hospitals a year to comply with the
nonpremarket  requirements  (registration  and  listing,  reporting  adverse  events
associated with medical devices, quality system regulations, and proper labeling). The
options for hospitals are to stop reprocessing single-use devices, comply with the rule,
or  outsource  to  a  third-party  reprocessor.  FDA  guidance  document  does  not  apply  to
permanently  implantable  pacemakers,  hemodialyzers,  opened  but  unused  single-use
devices, or healthcare settings other than acute-care hospitals. The reuse of single use
medical  devices  continues  to  be  an  evolving  area  of  regulations.  For  this  reason,
healthcare  workers  should  refer  to  FDA  for  the  latest  guidance.  996  CDC  provides
information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections
among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/reuse-single-use-devices.html
