Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  The  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)
recommends  that  persons  who  do  not  have  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to
measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  should  get  vaccinated  against  these  diseases  with
measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine or measles, mumps, rubella, varicella (MMRV)
vaccine. Only combination MMR and MMRV vaccines are licensed in the United States.
Presumptive evidence of immunity can be established in any of the following ways: CDC
recommends  two  doses  of  measles-containing  vaccine  routinely  for  children,  starting
with the first dose at age 12 through 15 months and the second dose at age 4 through
6  years  before  school  entry.  This  can  be  administered  as  MMR  or  MMRV  vaccine.
Children can receive the second dose of MMR vaccine earlier than 4 through 6 years, as
long as it is at least 28 days after the first dose.  A second dose of MMRV vaccine can
be given 3 months after the first dose up to 12 years of age. CDC recommends that
separate MMR and varicella vaccines be given for the first dose in children aged 12–47
months;  however,  MMRV  may  be  used  if  parents  or  caregivers  express  a  preference.
Adults  should  also  be  up  to  date  on  MMR  vaccinations  with  either  1  or  2  doses
(depending on risk factors) unless they have other presumptive evidence of immunity
to  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella.  One  dose  of  MMR  vaccine,  or  other  presumptive
evidence of immunity, is sufficient for most adults. Providers generally do not need to
actively screen adult patients for measles immunity in non-outbreak areas in the U.S.
After  vaccination,  it  is  also  not  necessary  to  test  patients  for  antibodies  to  confirm
immunity.  There  is  no  recommendation  for  a  catch-up  program  among  adults  for  a
second  dose  of  MMR  (e.g.,  persons  born  before  1989  or  otherwise).  Students  at
post-high  school  educational  institutions  who  do  not  have  presumptive  evidence  of
immunity should receive two doses of MMR vaccine, each dose separated by at least 28
days.  Persons  aged  6  months  and  older  who  will  be  traveling  internationally  to  any
country outside the United States who do not have presumptive evidence of immunity
should be vaccinated with measles-containing vaccine if they are not already protected
against  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella.  Before  any  international  travel—  Healthcare
personnel  without  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  should  get  two  doses  of  MMR
vaccine,  separated  by  at  least  28  days.  Although  birth  before  1957  is  considered
acceptable evidence of immunity, in routine circumstances, healthcare facilities should
consider  vaccinating  healthcare  personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory
evidence of immunity or laboratory confirmation of disease. People with compromised
immune systems are at high risk for severe complications if infected with measles. All
family  and  other  close  contacts  of  people  with  compromised  immune  systems  12
months  of  age  and  older  should  receive  two  doses  of  MMR  vaccine  separated  by  28
days,  unless  they  have  other  presumptive  evidence  of  measles  immunity.  People  12
months of age and older with HIV infection who do not have presumptive evidence of
measles immunity or evidence of severe immunosuppression should receive two doses
of MMR vaccine, separated by 28 days. Severe immunosuppression is defined as CD4
percentages  less  than  15%  for  6  months  or  longer  (for  children  five  years  of  age  or
younger) and CD4 percentages less than 15% and CD4 count less than 200 cells/mm3
for 6 months or longer (for persons older than five years). A very small proportion of
adults  (less  than  5%)  may  have  received  killed  measles  vaccine  from  1963  through
1967  during  childhood.   The  ACIP  recommends  re-vaccinating  anyone  who  received
measles vaccine of unknown type, inactivated measles vaccine, or further attenuated
measles vaccine accompanied by IG or high-titer measles immune globulin (no longer
available  in  the  United  States)  during  these  years  with  1  or  2  doses.  During  measles
outbreaks,  health  departments  may  provide  additional  recommendations  to  protect
their  communities.  The  at-risk  population  is  defined  by  local  and  state  health
departments and depends on the epidemiology of the outbreak (e.g., only specific age
groups  are  affected).  In  addition  to  the  routine  recommendations  for  MMR  vaccine,
health departments may recommend a second dose for adults or an earlier second dose
for children 1 to 4 years of age who are residing in or visiting the affected areas, with
the  second  dose  given  at  least  28  days  after  the  first  dose.  If  there  is  ongoing
community-wide  transmission  affecting  young  infants,  health  departments  may
recommend an early dose for infants 6 to 11 months of age. The decision to vaccinate
should be made carefully after weighing the risks of the potential long-term impact of
lower  immune  responses  when  infants  are  vaccinated  less  than  12  months  of  age
(versus greater than  or equal  to  12 months of age) compared  to  the benefit of early
protection when measles is circulating in the community.  Infants who get one dose of
MMR  vaccine  before  their  first  birthday  should  get  two  more  doses  according  to  the
routinely recommended schedule (first dose should be given at 12 through 15 months
of  age  and  the  second  dose  at  4  through  6  years  of  age.  The  second  dose  can  be
administered  earlier  as  long  as  at  least  28  days  have  elapsed  since  the  first  dose).
During an outbreak of measles in a healthcare facility, or in healthcare facilities serving
a measles outbreak area, two doses of MMR vaccine are recommended for healthcare
personnel,  regardless  of  birth  year,  who  lack  other  presumptive  evidence  of  measles
immunity There are no recommendations to receive a third dose of MMR vaccine during
measles outbreaks. Contraindications and precautions to vaccination generally dictate
circumstances when vaccines will not be given. Most contraindications and precautions
are  temporary,  and  the  vaccine  can  be  given  at  a  later  time.  A  contraindication  is  a
condition in a recipient that greatly increases the chance of a serious adverse reaction
(or  due  to  the  theoretical  risk  in  the  case  of  pregnant  women).  People  with  a
contraindication  for  MMR  or  MMRV  vaccine  should  not  receive  the  vaccine,  including
anyone who— A precaution is a condition in a recipient that might increase the chance
or severity of a serious adverse reaction, or that might compromise the ability of the
vaccine to produce immunity (such as administering MMR or MMRV vaccine to a person
with  passive  immunity  to  measles  from  a  blood  transfusion).  Precautions  for  MMR  or
MMRV vaccine include— People exposed to measles who cannot readily show that they
have adequate presumptive evidence of immunity against measles should be offered
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP).  Public  health  officials  can  help  identify  eligible
persons, assess any contraindications and weigh benefits. There are two types of PEP
for  measles:  For  more  information  on  measles  outbreak  control  and  post-exposure
prophylaxis, healthcare providers should consult their health department and refer to
the  measles  chapter  of  the  Manual  for  the  Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable
Diseases. For more on routine MMR or MMRV vaccination, please see the Measles tab. 
Some  special  considerations  for  mumps  vaccination  are  described  below.  During  a
mumps outbreak, children 12 months of age to 4 years of age who are unvaccinated
should  receive  one  dose  of  MMR  or  MMRV.  Persons  4  years  of  age  or  older  who  are
unvaccinated or have received only one dose of MMR or MMRV should receive MMR (2
doses for unvaccinated, and 1 dose for people who previously received the first dose,
administered 28 days apart). During mumps outbreaks, public health authorities might
also recommend that people who belong to groups at increased risk for getting mumps
receive an additional dose of MMR (second dose for persons previously vaccinated with
one dose or a third dose for persons previously vaccinated with 2 doses). Public health
authorities will communicate to providers which groups are at increased risk and should
receive  a  dose.  Related  page:  Strategies  for  the  Control  and  Investigation  of  Mumps
Outbreaks Unlike with measles, MMR vaccine is not effective at helping protect people
who  have  recently  been  infected  with  mumps  (post-exposure  prophylaxis,  or  PEP).
However,  vaccination  after  exposure  is  not  harmful  and  may  possibly  prevent  later
disease  if  re-exposed.  For  more  information  on  mumps  outbreak  control  and
post-exposure prophylaxis, healthcare providers should consult their health department
and
 refer
 to
 the
 mumps
 chapter
 of
 the
 Manual
 for
 the
 Surveillance
 of
Vaccine-Preventable Diseases. For more on routine MMR or MMRV vaccination, please
see the Measles tab.  Some special considerations for rubella vaccination are described
below. All women of childbearing age, especially those who grew up outside the United
States in areas where routine rubella vaccination might not occur, should be vaccinated
with  one  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  or  have  other  acceptable  presumptive  evidence  of
rubella immunity. Only a positive serologic test for rubella antibody or documentation of
appropriate vaccination should be accepted as presumptive evidence of immunity for
women  who  may  become  pregnant.  Women  known  to  be  pregnant  or  attempting  to
become  pregnant  should  not  receive  a  live  virus  vaccine,  including  MMR  vaccine.
Although there is no evidence that rubella vaccine virus is harmful to the fetus during
pregnancy, as a precaution, women should not get pregnant for 4 weeks (28 days) after
MMR vaccination. Unlike with measles, MMR vaccine is not effective at helping protect
people  who  have  recently  been  infected  with  rubella  (post-exposure  prophylaxis,  or
PEP).  However,  vaccination  after  exposure  is  not  harmful  and  may  possibly  prevent
later  disease  if  re-exposed.  For  more  information  on  rubella  outbreak  control  and
post-exposure prophylaxis, healthcare providers should consult their health department
and
 refer
 to
 the
 rubella
 chapter
 of
 the
 Manual
 for
 the
 Surveillance
 of
Vaccine-Preventable Diseases.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/mmr/hcp/recommendations.html
