Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  RSV  Vaccine:  What  You  Need  to  Know  Current  Edition  Date:
10/19/2023  RSV  vaccine  can  prevent  lower  respiratory  tract  disease  caused  by
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). RSV is a common respiratory virus that usually causes
mild,  cold-like  symptoms.  RSV  can  cause  illness  in  people  of  all  ages  but  may  be
especially serious for infants and older adults. RSV spreads through direct contact with
the  virus,  such  as  droplets  from  another  person’s  cough  or  sneeze  contacting  your
eyes, nose, or mouth. It can also be spread by touching a surface that has the virus on
it, like a doorknob, and then touching your face before washing your hands. Symptoms
of  RSV  infection  may  include  runny  nose,  decrease  in  appetite,  coughing,  sneezing,
fever, or wheezing. In very young infants, symptoms of RSV may also include irritability
(fussiness),  decreased  activity,  or  apnea  (pauses  in  breathing  for  more  than  10
seconds). Most people recover in a week or two, but RSV can be serious, resulting in
shortness of breath and low oxygen levels. RSV can cause bronchiolitis (inflammation of
the  small  airways  in  the  lung)  and  pneumonia  (infection  of  the  lungs).  RSV  can
sometimes  lead  to  worsening  of  other  medical  conditions  such  as  asthma,  chronic
obstructive  pulmonary  disease  (a  chronic  disease  of  the  lungs  that  makes  it  hard  to
breathe),  or  congestive  heart  failure  (when  the  heart  can’t  pump  enough  blood  and
oxygen throughout the body). Older adults and infants who get very sick from RSV may
need to be hospitalized. Some may even die. CDC recommends adults 60 years of age
and older have the option to receive a single dose of RSV vaccine, based on discussions
between the patient and their health care provider. There are two options for protection
of  infants  against  RSV:  maternal  vaccine  for  the  pregnant  person  and  preventive
antibodies given to the baby. Only one of these options is needed for most babies to be
protected.  CDC  recommends  a  single  dose  of  RSV  vaccine  for  pregnant  people  from
week  32  through  week  36  of  pregnancy  for  the  prevention  of  RSV  disease  in  infants
under  6  months  of  age.  This  vaccine  is  recommended  to  be  given  from  September
through  January  for  most  of  the  United  States.   However,  in  some  locations  (the
territories, Hawaii, Alaska, and parts of Florida), the timing of vaccination may vary as
RSV circulating in these locations differs from the timing of the RSV season in the rest
of the U.S.  RSV vaccine may be given at the same time as other vaccines. Tell your
vaccination provider if the person getting the vaccine: In some cases, your health care
provider may decide to postpone RSV vaccination until a future visit. People with minor
illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill
should  usually  wait  until  they  recover  before  getting  RSV  vaccine.  Your  health  care
provider  can  give  you  more  information.  Serious  neurologic  conditions,  including
Guillain-Barré  syndrome  (GBS),  have  been  reported  after  RSV  vaccination  in  clinical
trials  of  older  adults.  It  is  unclear  whether  the  vaccine  caused  these  events.  Preterm
birth  and  high  blood  pressure  during  pregnancy,  including  pre-eclampsia,  have  been
reported among pregnant people who received RSV vaccine during clinical trials. It is
unclear whether these events were caused by the vaccine. People sometimes faint after
medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have
vision  changes  or  ringing  in  the  ears.  As  with  any  medicine,  there  is  a  very  remote
chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death. An
allergic  reaction  could  occur  after  the  vaccinated  person  leaves  the  clinic.  If  you  see
signs  of  a  severe  allergic  reaction  (hives,  swelling  of  the  face  and  throat,  difficulty
breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call 9-1-1 and get the person to
the nearest hospital. For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
(VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself.
Visit the VAERS website or call 1-800-822-7967. VAERS is only for reporting reactions,
and  VAERS  staff  members  do  not  give  medical  advice.  Many  vaccine  information
statements  are  available  in  Spanish  and  other  languages.  See  www.immunize.org/vis
Hojas de información sobre vacunas están disponibles en español y en muchos otros
idiomas. Visite www.immunize.org/vis Vaccine Information Statement
RSV Vaccine
(10/19/2023) Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Office Use Only
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-statements/rsv.html
