Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Authors: Tatiana Lanzieri, MD; Susan Redd; Emily Abernathy,
MS; Joseph Icenogle, PhD Rubella is a viral illness caused by a togavirus of the genus
Rubivirus and is characterized by a mild, maculopapular rash. The rubella rash occurs in
50%–80%  of  rubella-infected  persons  and  is  sometimes  misdiagnosed  as  measles  or
scarlet  fever.  Children  usually  develop  few  or  no  constitutional  symptoms,  but  adults
may  experience  a  1–5-day  prodrome  of  low-grade  fever,  headache,  malaise,  mild
coryza,
 and
 conjunctivitis.
 Postauricular,
 occipital
 and
 posterior
 cervical
lymphadenopathy is characteristic and precedes the rash by 5–10 days. Arthralgia or
arthritis  may  occur  in  up  to  70%  of  adult  women  with  rubella.  Rare  complications
include  thrombocytopenic  purpura  and  encephalitis.[1–3]  Rubella  is  transmitted
through direct or droplet contact from nasopharyngeal secretions and has an average
incubation  period  of  17  days  (range:  12–23  days).  Persons  with  rubella  are  most
infectious when rash is erupting, but they can shed virus from 7 days before to 7 days
after rash onset. When rubella infection occurs during pregnancy, especially during the
first  trimester,  serious  consequences  can  result.  These  include  miscarriages,  fetal
deaths/stillbirths,  and  a  constellation  of  severe  birth  defects  known  as  congenital
rubella  syndrome  (CRS).  The  most  common  congenital  defects  are  cataracts,  heart
defects and hearing impairment. See Chapter 15, “Congenital Rubella Syndrome,” for
more details. Before the availability of rubella vaccines in the United States, rubella was
a  common  disease  that  occurred  primarily  among  young  children.  Incidence  was
highest during the spring with epidemics every 6 to 9 years.[4] The last major epidemic
in the United States occurred during 1964–1965, when there were an estimated 12.5
million  rubella  cases  in  the  United  States,  resulting  in  2,000  cases  of  encephalitis,
11,250  therapeutic  or  spontaneous  abortions,  2,100  neonatal  deaths,  and  20,000
infants born with CRS.[5] In 1969, live attenuated rubella vaccines were licensed in the
United States. The goal of the rubella vaccination program was and continues to be to
prevent congenital infections, including those that result in CRS.[6] Following vaccine
licensure,  the  number  of  reported  cases  of  rubella  in  the  United  States  has  declined
dramatically. During the 1990s, the incidence of rubella among children younger than
15 years of age decreased (from 0.63 per 100,000 population in 1990 to 0.06 in 1999),
whereas  the  incidence  among  adults  15  to  44  years  of  age  increased  (from  0.13  per
100,000 in 1990 to 0.24 in 1999).[7] However, since 2001, the incidence both among
persons younger than 15 years of age and those 15 to 44 years of age has been less
than  1/10,000,000  population.[8,  9]  During  the  1990s  and  in  2000,  rubella  outbreaks
occurred among members of religious communities that traditionally refuse vaccination
and  among  adults  from  countries  without  a  history  of  routine  rubella  vaccination
programs.[7, 8] Since 2001, only 3 rubella outbreaks have been reported, each with 5
or fewer cases. In 2004, an independent panel of internationally recognized experts in
public  health,  infectious  diseases,  and  immunizations  reviewed  available  data  and
unanimously agreed that rubella elimination (i.e., the absence of endemic transmission)
was  achieved  in  the  United  States.[6]  Although  rubella  has  been  eliminated  in  the
United  States,  it  continues  to  be  endemic  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  It  is  estimated
that more than 100,000 infants worldwide are born annually with CRS.[10] According to
a survey of the member countries in the World Health Organization (WHO), the number
of  countries  that  have  incorporated  rubella-containing  vaccines  into  their  routine
national immunization programs increased from 83 in 1996 to 148 (76% of countries) in
2016.  As  of   December  2016,  the  WHO  Region  of  the  Americas  and  the  European
Region  have  established  rubella  elimination  goals,  verified  by  the  Region  of  the
Americas in 2015[11]. The South-East Asia region has a rubella/CRS reduction goal of
95%  by  2020;[12]  the  Western  Pacific  Region  has  established  a  rubella  elimination
target without a specific date; and the Eastern Mediterranean and African Regions do
not currently have elimination targets. In addition, in 2011, WHO recommended that all
countries  providing  2  doses  of  measles  vaccine  that  have  not  introduced  rubella
vaccine
 consider
 including
 rubella-containing
 vaccine
 in
 their
 immunization
program.[13] The United States elimination of rubella and CRS was reconfirmed in 2011
and maintenance of elimination was reported in 2014.[12,14] Top of Page The United
States  has  established  and  achieved  the  goal  of  eliminating  endemic  rubella
transmission and CRS. As noted above, elimination of endemic rubella was documented
and verified in the United States in 2004.[6] However, because of international travel
and  countries  without  routine  rubella  vaccination,  imported  cases  of  rubella  remain
likely.  To  maintain  elimination,  the  United  States  should  continue  to  maintain  high
vaccination rates among children; ensure that women of childbearing age, particularly
women  born  outside  of  the  United  States,  are  vaccinated;  and  maintain  sensitive
surveillance to detect both rubella and CRS. For specific information about the use of
rubella  vaccines,  refer  to  The  Pink  Book,  which  provides  general  recommendations,
including  vaccine  use  and  scheduling,  immunization  strategies  for  providers,  vaccine
content,  adverse  events  and  reactions,  vaccine  storage  and  handling,  and
contraindications  and  precautions.  Persons  who  have  written  documentation  of
adequate vaccination with at least 1 dose of live rubella virus-containing vaccine on or
after  12  months  of  age,  laboratory  evidence  of  rubella  immunity,  laboratory
confirmation of disease, or who were born before 1957, have acceptable presumptive
evidence  of  rubella  immunity.  Persons  who  do  not  have  acceptable  presumptive
evidence of rubella immunity should receive 1 dose of MMR vaccine. Top of Page The
following case definition for rubella was approved by the Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists  (CSTE)  in  2012.[15]  Suspected:  Any  generalized  rash  illness  of  acute
onset  that  does  not  meet  the  criteria  for  probable  or  confirmed  rubella  or  any  other
illness. Probable: In the absence of a more likely diagnosis, an illness characterized by
all  of  the  following:  Confirmed:  A  case  with  or  without  symptoms  who  has  laboratory
evidence of rubella infection confirmed by one or more of the following: OR An illness
characterized  by  all  of  the  following:  Internationally  imported  case:  An  internationally
imported  case  is  defined  as  a  case  in  which  rubella  results  from  exposure  to  rubella
virus outside the United States as evidenced by at least some of the exposure period
(12–23 days before rash onset) occurring outside the United States, and the onset of
rash within 23 days of entering the United States, and no known exposure to rubella in
the United States during that time. All other cases are considered US-acquired cases.
US-acquired case: A US-acquired case is defined as a case in which the patient had not
been outside the United States during the 23 days before rash onset or was known to
have been exposed to rubella within the United States. Import-linked case: Any case in
a chain of transmission that is epidemiologically linked to an internationally imported
case. Imported-virus case: A case for which an epidemiologic link to an internationally
imported  case  was  not  identified  but  for  which  viral  genetic  evidence  indicates  an
imported  rubella  genotype,  i.e.,  a  genotype  that  is  not  occurring  within  the  United
States  in  a  pattern  indicative  of  endemic  transmission.  An  endemic  genotype  is  the
genotype of any rubella virus that occurs in an endemic chain of transmission (i.e., ≥12
months).  Any  genotype  that  is  found  repeatedly  in  US-acquired  cases  should  be
thoroughly  investigated  as  a  potential  endemic  genotype,  especially  if  the  cases  are
closely  related  in  time  or  location.  Endemic  case:  A  case  for  which  epidemiologic  or
virologic evidence indicates an endemic chain of transmission. Endemic transmission is
defined as a chain of rubella virus transmission continuous for ≥12 months within the
United States. Unknown source case: A case for which an epidemiologic or virologic link
to  importation  or  to  endemic  transmission  within  the  United  States  cannot  be
established  after  a  thorough  investigation.  These  cases  must  be  carefully  assessed
epidemiologically to assure that they do not represent a sustained US-acquired chain of
transmission  within  the  United  States.  Note:  Internationally  imported,  import-linked,
and  imported-virus  cases  are  considered  collectively  to  be  import-associated  cases.
States  may  also  choose  to  classify  cases  as  “out-of-state-imported”  when  imported
from another state in the United States. For national reporting, however, cases will be
classified  as  either  internationally  imported  or  US-acquired.  Top  of  Page  Clinical
diagnosis of rubella is unreliable; therefore, cases must be laboratory confirmed. Virus
detection and serologic testing can be used to confirm acute or recent rubella infection.
Serologic tests can also be used to screen for rubella immunity. For detailed information
on laboratory testing for rubella and for specific information on specimen collection and
shipment, see Chapter 22, “Laboratory Support for Surveillance of Vaccine-Preventable
Diseases.” Specimen collection and shipping are important steps in obtaining laboratory
diagnosis  or  confirmation  for  vaccine  preventable  diseases.  Guidelines  have  been
published for specimen collection and handling for microbiologic agents. Information is
also  available  on  using  CDC  laboratories  as  support  for  reference  and  disease
surveillance;  this  includes  The  APHL/CDC  Vaccine  Preventable  Disease  Reference
Centers  [2  pages]  can  perform  real-time  RT-PCR  and  genotyping  for  rubella.  Specific
instructions for specimen collection and shipping may be obtained from the CDC rubella
website  or  by  contacting  the  CDC  Viral  Vaccine  Preventable  Diseases  Branch  at
404-639-4557. Specimens for virus isolation should be sent to CDC as directed by the
State  Health  Department.  Top  of  Page  Surveillance  data  are  needed  to  identify  and
control  rubella  virus  introductions  to  prevent  congenital  rubella  infections  and
consequent CRS as well as monitor maintenance of disease elimination. Although only
94  cases  of  rubella  and  8  cases  of  CRS  were  reported  between  2005  and  2015,  it  is
likely that not all cases were identified. Efforts should continue to promote physicians’
awareness  of  the  possibility  of  rubella  and  CRS.  When  evaluating  patients  with
suspected measles who have negative serologic tests for acute measles infection (i.e.,
negative  serum  measles  IgM),  officials  may  request  additional  testing  for  rubella.
Rubella-containing vaccines are not administered routinely in many countries; in others,
rubella-containing  vaccine  was  only  recently  added  to  the  childhood  immunization
schedule.  Thus,  many  persons  born  outside  the  United  States  or  who  received
childhood immunizations in other countries may have never received rubella vaccine.
Healthcare providers should have a heightened index of suspicion for rubella and CRS
births  in  persons  from  countries  without  a  history  of  routine  rubella  vaccination
programs or with recently implemented programs. Top of Page Each state and territory
(jurisdiction) has regulations or laws governing the reporting of diseases and conditions
of  public  health  importance.[16]  These  regulations  and  laws  list  the  diseases  to  be
reported and describe those persons or groups who are responsible for reporting, such
as  healthcare  providers,  hospitals,  laboratories,  schools,  daycare  and  childcare
facilities, and other institutions. Persons reporting should contact the jurisdiction/state
health department for jurisdiction-specific reporting requirements. Prompt identification
and  reporting  of  suspected,  probable,  or  confirmed  cases  of  rubella  is  important  to
avoid  exposure  of  susceptible  pregnant  women.  Rapid  case  identification  and
investigations are also important so that control measures can be initiated to prevent
spread of the disease. The Rubella Surveillance Worksheet is included as Appendix 16
[2 pages], to serve as a guide for data collection during investigation of reported cases.
Since  continuous  endemic  rubella  transmission  has  been  eliminated,  rubella  is  an
immediately  notifiable disease.  Rubella  cases should  be reported  promptly  (within  24
hours[3])  by  the  jurisdiction/state  health  department  to  the  CDC  by  e-mail
(RubellaReport@cdc.gov).  Notification  of  suspected,  probable,  or  confirmed  cases  of
rubella  should  be  sent  to  CDC  using  event  code  10200  in  the  National  Notifiable
Diseases  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS)  with  the  next  regularly  scheduled  electronic
transmission.  Case  notification  should  not  be  delayed  because  of  incomplete
information  or  confirmation;  following  completion  of  case  investigations,  data
previously submitted to NNDSS should be updated with the available new information.
The following data elements are epidemiologically important and should be collected in
the  course  of  a  case  investigation.  Additional  information  may  be  collected  at  the
direction of the state or local health department. Top of Page Because rubella has been
eliminated  in  the  United  States,  health  agencies  should  consider  1  case  a  potential
outbreak.  Rubella  is  an  infectious  disease  for  which  up  to  50%  of  cases  are
asymptomatic, and investigation of an apparently isolated case could reveal additional
cases.  Clinical  diagnosis  of  rubella  is  unreliable,  therefore,  cases  must  be  laboratory
confirmed,  especially  if  the  reported  cases  are  not  epidemiologically  linked  to  a
laboratory-confirmed  case.  Laboratory  testing  should  be  conducted  for  all  suspected
cases  of  rubella.  Laboratory  confirmation  of  rubella  infection  may  be  difficult  in
pregnant  women  with  unknown  immune  status  who  experience  a  rash  illness  or  who
are  exposed  to  rubella.  A  serum  specimen  should  be  obtained  as  soon  as  possible.
Aggressive  response  to  rubella  cases  may  interrupt  disease  transmission  and  will
increase vaccination coverage among persons who might otherwise not be protected.
The  main  strategies  are  to  define  populations  at  risk,  to  ensure  that  persons  without
evidence  of  immunity  are  rapidly  vaccinated  (or  excluded  from  exposure  if  a
contraindication  to  vaccination  exists);  and  to  maintain  active  surveillance  to  permit
modification  of  control  measures  if  the  situation  changes.  The  goal  of  rubella  case
investigation is to identify rubella infections, particularly infection in pregnant women,
and to prevent exposure of susceptible pregnant women, and thereby prevent cases of
CRS.  It  is  essential  that  exposed  pregnant  women  be  identified,  evaluated,  and
counseled  (see  section  on  laboratory  evaluation  of  exposed  pregnant  women).  The
Rubella Surveillance Worksheet [2 pages] may be used as a guideline in conducting a
case  investigation.  Case  investigation  and  identification  of  contacts  should  be
conducted for all suspected cases of rubella. Cases of rubella occurring within 10 days
of  rubella  vaccination  should  be  investigated,  and  specimens  should  be  obtained  for
virus isolation to determine if the rash is attributable to vaccine virus or wild-type virus.
Cases in persons vaccinated within 7 days of a rubella-like illness who are IgM positive
should be classified as confirmed cases of wild-type rubella if they are epidemiologically
linked  to  a  laboratory-confirmed  case.  Any  direct  contact  with  a  patient  with  rubella
during the infectious period (7 days before to 7 days after rash onset) is defined as an
exposure. Every effort should be made to identify all pregnant women who might have
been exposed to a patient and evaluate them serologically for rubella-specific IgM and
IgG  antibodies.  All  women  of  childbearing  age  who  are  contacts  of  a  person  with  a
suspected  or  confirmed  case  should  have  their  pregnancy  status  determined.  If  a
pregnant woman is infected with rubella, immediate medical consultation is necessary.
If a pregnant woman lacks laboratory evidence of rubella immunity, precautions should
be  taken  to  prevent  any  type  of  exposure  to  persons  infected  with  rubella;  these
precautions may include ensuring rubella immunity of household contacts and isolating
women from settings where rubella virus has been identified. Efforts should be made to
identify  the  source  of  infection  for  every  confirmed  case  of  rubella.  Case-patients  or
their  caregivers  should  be  asked  about  contact  with  other  known  cases.  Since  many
rubella cases are asymptomatic, identification of a source will not always be possible.
When  no  history  of  contact  with  a  known  case  can  be  elicited,  opportunities  for
exposure to unidentified cases in populations at high risk (e.g., foreign-born persons)
should be sought. Investigating sources of exposure should be directed to the place and
time  period  in  which  transmission  would  have  occurred.  Efforts  should  be  made  to
obtain  clinical  specimens  (throat  swabs  and  urine)  for  virus  detection  from  all
case-patients (or from at least some patients in each outbreak) at the time of the initial
investigation.  See  Appendix  15  [2  pages]  for  the  procedure  to  follow  in  collection  of
specimens. Exposed pregnant women should be tested for the presence of rubella IgG
and IgM antibodies regardless of symptom history. A blood specimen should be taken
as  soon  as  possible,  tested  for  rubella  IgG  and  IgM  antibody,  and  stored  for  possible
retesting. See Chapter 22, “Laboratory Support for Surveillance of Vaccine-Preventable
Diseases”  for  information  on  laboratory  testing.  All  pregnant  women  infected  with
rubella during pregnancy should be followed to document the pregnancy outcome (e.g.,
normal infant, termination, CRS). Outcomes that are documented should be reported to
CDC.  Active  surveillance  for  rubella  should  be  maintained  for  at  least  2  incubation
periods (46 days) following rash onset of the last case. Two incubation periods allow for
the  identification  of  transmission  from  a  subclinical  case.  In  addition,  surveillance  for
CRS should be implemented when confirmed or probable rubella cases are documented
in  a  setting  where  pregnant  women  might  have  been  exposed.  Women  who  contract
rubella infection while pregnant should be monitored for birth outcome, and appropriate
testing  should  be  performed  on  the  infant  after  birth.  Control  measures  should  be
implemented  as  soon  as  at  least  1  case  of  rubella  is  confirmed  in  a  community.  In
settings  where  pregnant  women  may  be  exposed,  control  measures  should  begin  as
soon as rubella is suspected and should not be postponed until laboratory confirmation.
Patients with rubella should be isolated for 7 days after rash onset. All persons at risk
who  cannot  readily  provide  acceptable  evidence  of  rubella  immunity  should  be
considered  susceptible  and  should  be  vaccinated.  In  schools  and  other  educational
institutions, exclusion of persons without acceptable evidence of rubella immunity may
limit  disease  transmission  and  may  help  to  rapidly  raise  the  vaccination  level  in  the
target  population.  All  persons  who  have  been  exempted  from  rubella  vaccination  for
medical, religious, or other reasons also should be excluded from attendance. Exclusion
should continue until 23 days after the onset of rash of the last reported case-patient in
the  outbreak  setting.  Unvaccinated  persons  who  receive  MMR  vaccine  as  part  of  the
outbreak control may be immediately readmitted to school provided all persons without
documentation  of  immunity  have  been  excluded.  In  healthcare  settings,  exposed
healthcare  personnel  without  adequate  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  should  be
excluded from duty beginning 7 days after exposure to rubella and continuing through
either  23  days  after  last  exposure  or  7  days  after  rash  appears.  Exposed  healthcare
personnel  who  are  vaccinated  as  part  of  control  measures  should  be  excluded  from
direct patient care for 23 days after the last exposure to rubella because effectiveness
of  postexposure  vaccination  in  preventing  rubella  infection  has  not  been  shown.  In
addition,  because  birth  before  1957  does  not  guarantee  rubella  immunity,  during
outbreaks  in  healthcare  settings,  healthcare  facilities  should  recommend  one  dose  of
MMR  vaccine  for  unvaccinated  personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory
evidence of rubella immunity or laboratory confirmation of infection or disease.[17] Top
of Page To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt14-rubella.html
