Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Signs and symptoms vary depending on how the person was
exposed, the amount of sarin (mass), and the length of time they were exposed. Sarin
has no perceivable odor, so until signs and symptoms develop, people may not know
they were exposed. People exposed to a low or moderate dose of sarin may experience
some  or  all  of  the  following  signs  and  symptoms  within  seconds  to  hours  after
exposure:  Even  a  small  drop  of  sarin  on  the  skin  can  cause  sweating  and  muscle
twitching  where  it  touched  the  skin.  Exposure  to  large  doses  of  sarin  by  any  route
would  likely  result  in  the  following  harmful  health  effects:  Taking  off  all  layers  of
clothing  (including  jewelry  and  accessories),  blotting  any  liquid,  and  showering  is  the
best  method  for  removing  sarin  from  your  body.  Ideally,  undress,  blot,  and  shower
immediately or as soon as you can, as described below. If you cannot take off all layers,
take  off  as  many  clothes  as  you  can.  Treatment  consists  of  removing  sarin  from  the
body as soon as possible and providing supportive medical care in a hospital setting or
by  trained  emergency  personnel.  Antidotes  for  sarin  are  available  in  a  healthcare
setting. They are most useful if given as soon as possible after exposure. If someone
has ingested sarin, do NOT induce vomiting. Because sarin breaks down slowly in the
body, repeated exposures to sarin or other nerve agents can build up in the body (have
a  cumulative  effect).  People  who  received  low  doses  usually  recover.  People  who
received higher doses of sarin may experience chronic or long-lasting symptoms, such
as  muscle  weakness,  paralysis,  pain,  and  pins  and  needles  sensations.  People  who
received very high doses are less likely to survive. For a comprehensive list of chemical
agent information, see Chemicals A-Z.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/chemicalemergencies/factsheets/sarin.html
