Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  September  25,  2020  /  69(38);1355–1359  On
September 16, 2020, this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. Lakshmi
Panagiotakopoulos,  MD1;  Tanya  R.  Myers,  PhD1;  Julianne  Gee,  MPH1;  Heather  S.
Lipkind, MD2; Elyse O. Kharbanda, MD3; Denison S. Ryan, MPH4; Joshua T.B. Williams,
MD5,6;  Allison  L.  Naleway,  PhD7;  Nicola  P.  Klein,  MD,  PhD8;  Simon  J.  Hambidge,  MD,
PhD5,6;  Steven  J.  Jacobsen,  MD,  PhD4;  Jason  M.  Glanz,  PhD9;  Lisa  A.  Jackson,  MD10;
Tom T. Shimabukuro, MD1; Eric S. Weintraub, MPH1 (View author affiliations) What is
already known about this topic? Pregnant women might be at increased risk for severe
illness  from  SARS-CoV-2  infection.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  Prevalences  of
prepregnancy  obesity  and  gestational  diabetes  were  higher  among  pregnant  women
hospitalized  for  COVID-19–related  illness  (e.g.,  worsening  respiratory  status)  than
among  those  admitted  for  pregnancy-related  treatment  or  procedures  (e.g.,  delivery)
and  found  to  have  COVID-19.  Intensive  care  was  required  for  30%  (13  of  43)  of
pregnant  women  admitted  for  COVID-19,  and  one  pregnant  woman  died  from
COVID-19.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?  Antenatal  counseling
emphasizing preventive measures, including use of masks, frequent hand washing, and
social  distancing,  might  help  prevent  COVID-19  among  pregnant  women,  especially
those  with  prepregnancy  obesity  and  gestational  diabetes.  Views  equals  page  views
plus PDF downloads Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Pregnant women might be at increased risk
for  severe  coronavirus  disease  2019  (COVID-19),  possibly  related  to  changes  in  their
immune system and respiratory physiology* (1). Further, adverse birth outcomes, such
as  preterm  delivery  and  stillbirth,  might  be  more  common  among  pregnant  women
infected  with  SARS-CoV-2,  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19  (2,3).  Information  about
SARS-CoV-2 infection during pregnancy is rapidly growing; however, data on reasons for
hospital  admission,  pregnancy-specific  characteristics,  and  birth  outcomes  among
pregnant  women  hospitalized  with  SARS-CoV-2  infections  are  limited.  During  March
1–May  30,  2020,  as  part  of  Vaccine  Safety  Datalink  (VSD)†  surveillance  of  COVID-19
hospitalizations,  105  hospitalized  pregnant  women  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection  were
identified, including 62 (59%) hospitalized for obstetric reasons (i.e., labor and delivery
or another pregnancy-related indication) and 43 (41%) hospitalized for COVID-19 illness
without an obstetric reason. Overall, 50 (81%) of 62 pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2
infection  who  were  admitted  for  obstetric  reasons  were  asymptomatic.  Among  43
pregnant women hospitalized for COVID-19, 13 (30%) required intensive care unit (ICU)
admission,  six  (14%)  required  mechanical  ventilation,  and  one  died  from  COVID-19.
Prepregnancy obesity was more common (44%) among pregnant women hospitalized
for COVID-19 than that among asymptomatic pregnant women hospitalized for obstetric
reasons  (31%).  Likewise,  the  rate  of  gestational  diabetes  (26%)  among  pregnant
women hospitalized for COVID-19 was higher than it was among women hospitalized for
obstetric  reasons  (8%).  Preterm  delivery  occurred  in  15%  of  pregnancies  among  93
women who delivered, and stillbirths (fetal death at ≥20 weeks’ gestation) occurred in
3%.  Antenatal  counseling  emphasizing  preventive  measures  (e.g.,  use  of  masks,
frequent  hand  washing,  and  social  distancing)  might  help  prevent  COVID-19  among
pregnant  women,§  especially  those  with  prepregnancy  obesity  and  gestational
diabetes,  which  might  reduce  adverse  pregnancy  outcomes.  VSD  is  a  collaboration
between  CDC’s  Immunization  Safety  Office  and  nine  U.S.  health  care  organizations
serving  more  than  12  million  persons  each  year.  Hospitalizations  with  a  patient
diagnosis  of  COVID-19  were  identified  using  COVID-19  International  Classification  of
Diseases,  Tenth  Revision,  Clinical  Modification,  (ICD-10-CM)¶  and  site-specific  internal
diagnosis codes during March 1–May 30, 2020. Pregnant women were identified using a
validated algorithm based on ICD-9 diagnosis and procedure codes (4) that has been
modified  for  ICD-10.  For  this  study,  medical  records  of  women  hospitalized  with
COVID-19 were reviewed by abstractors and adjudicated by a physician to identify the
primary
 reason
 for
 hospital
 admission,
 pregnancy
 characteristics,
 COVID-19
complications, and birth outcomes among women who delivered before July 31, 2020.
Pregnant  women  with  COVID-19  diagnoses  were  classified  into  the  following  three
groups based on the primary reason for admission: 1) treatment of COVID-19 without
an obstetric reason (e.g., worsening respiratory distress); 2) an obstetric reason, along
with  symptoms  consistent  with  COVID-19  (e.g.,  fever,  chills,  cough,  shortness  of
breath); and 3) an obstetric reason, without COVID-19–compatible symptoms (or with a
history of resolved COVID-19), but with a positive test result for SARS-CoV-2 at the time
of  admission.  Demographic  and  pregnancy  characteristics  among  pregnant  women
admitted  for  COVID-19  were  compared  with  those  of  women  admitted  for  obstetric
reasons. Birth outcomes in pregnant women with SARS-COV-2 infection were compared
with background rates among all pregnant women in eight VSD sites during the study
period.  This  activity  was  reviewed  by  CDC  and  was  conducted  consistent  with
applicable federal law and CDC policy.** SAS software (version 9.4; SAS Institute) was
used  to  conduct  all  analyses.  During  March  1–May  30,  among  4,408  persons
hospitalized with a COVID-19 diagnosis at VSD sites, 105 (2.4%) pregnant women were
identified.  SARS-CoV-2  real-time  reverse  transcription–polymerase  chain  reaction  test
results  were  positive  for  104  women.  One  additional  woman,  who  had  a  negative
SARS-CoV-2  test  result,  was  symptomatic  and  had  close  contacts  with  confirmed
COVID-19;  she  received  a  clinical  diagnosis  of  COVID-19.  Among  these  105  pregnant
women,  43  (41.0%)  were  hospitalized  for  COVID-19  illness  and  62  (59.0%)  were
admitted for obstetric reasons (Table 1). Among the 62 women admitted for obstetric
reasons,  12  (19.4%)  had  COVID-19–compatible  symptoms,  and  50  (80.6%)  were
asymptomatic. The median age of all women was 30 years (range = 17–54 years), and
61.9%  were  Hispanic  or  Latino  (Table  2).  ICU  admission  was  required  for  14  (13.3%)
hospitalized  pregnant women,  including  13 (30.2%) of  the 43 women  hospitalized  for
COVID-19; six of these women required mechanical ventilation, and one, admitted at 15
weeks’ gestation, died from COVID-19. The prevalence of prepregnancy obesity (body
mass  index  ≥30  kg/m2)  was  36.2%  overall  and  was  higher  among  the  43  women
hospitalized for COVID-19 (44.2%) than among the 62 hospitalized for obstetric reasons
(30.6%).  Similarly,  prevalence  of  gestational  diabetes  was  higher  among  women
hospitalized for COVID-19 (25.6%) than among those hospitalized for obstetric reasons
(8.1%). Among all 105 pregnant women hospitalized with COVID-19, 93 (88.6%) had a
pregnancy outcome before July 31 (Table 3), including 79 (84.9%) who delivered during
their initial hospitalization and 14 (15.1%) during a subsequent hospitalization. One of
the remaining 12 women died during initial hospitalization, and 11 were still pregnant
at  the  time  of  analysis.  Preterm  delivery  prevalence  was  15.1%  overall  and  12.2%
among  live  births,  which  is  nearly  70%  higher  than  baseline  rates  in  VSD  during  the
study period (8.9% among 43,571 live births and stillbirths in VSD). Stillbirth prevalence
(3.2%)  was  more  than  four  times  higher  among  women  with  SARS-CoV-2  than  the
baseline  rate  in  VSD  during  the  study  period  (0.6%).  All  three  stillbirths  were
antepartum: one with placental abruption and two with no identified etiology based on
adjudication. Top Among 105 hospitalized pregnant women with COVID-19 diagnoses in
VSD during March 1–May 30, 41% were hospitalized because of COVID-19 illness, and
59%  were  admitted  for  obstetric  reasons.  Approximately  80%  of  those  admitted  for
obstetric  reasons  were  asymptomatic  with  COVID-19.  This  percentage  is  similar  to
findings  from  a  New  York  City  study  that  reported  universal  screening  of  obstetrics
patients
 on
 admission
 and
 found
 that
 among
 13.7%
 of
 women
 with
SARS-CoV-2–positive  test  results,  87.9%  were  asymptomatic  (5).  Similarly,  among
pregnant women admitted to a large managed care organization in southern California
for  labor  and  delivery  who  were  offered  universal  screening,  the  prevalence  of
SARS-CoV-2  infection  was  0.4%,  and  all  women  with  positive  test  results  were
asymptomatic (6). Compared with background rates of all pregnant women in the VSD
population during the same period, the current findings indicate increased percentages
of preterm delivery and stillbirths occur among all pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2
infection. Other studies have also found higher rates of preterm delivery and stillbirth in
pregnant  women  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection  (symptomatic  and  asymptomatic),
compared  with  those  in  the  general  population  (2,3).  Higher  percentages  of
prepregnancy obesity and gestational diabetes were identified among pregnant women
hospitalized  for  COVID-19  illness  without  an  obstetric  reason,  compared  with  the
percentages  of  these  conditions  in  pregnant  women  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection  who
were  admitted  for  obstetric  reasons.  Underlying  medical  conditions,  including  obesity
and diabetes have been recognized as risk factors for severe COVID-19 disease (7,8). A
study  of  46  pregnant  women  with  COVID-19  (9)  found  that  nearly  all  women  with
severe  infection  were  overweight  or  obese.  This  study  also  identified  higher  rates  of
complications in pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2 infection (including the need for ICU
admission or mechanical ventilation) and death, which highlight the importance of all
pregnant women and their close contacts adhering to COVID-19 prevention measures.
The findings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First, the number of
pregnant  women  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection  was  small,  limiting  the  power  to  detect
significant  differences  among  comparison  groups.  Second,  during  this  study  period,
various  screening  policies  were  being  implemented  across  VSD  sites.  As  a  result,
asymptomatic women with SARS-CoV-2 infection hospitalized during pregnancy might
have  been  missed,  especially  earlier  in  the  study  period.  Third,  this  study  did  not
routinely  identify  pregnant  women  with  negative  SARS-CoV-2  test  results.  More
information is needed to understand whether a universal screening strategy should be
considered in the care of pregnant women, and, if so, when in pregnancy (timing and
setting) this should be implemented. Fourth, this study did not collect information on
prenatal  care,  which  is  known  to  affect  pregnancy  outcomes.  However,  VSD’s
surveillance population is primarily insured and has high rates of standard prenatal care
(10),  and  birth  outcomes  among  pregnant  women  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection  were
compared with background rates in VSD during the study period. Although studying a
primarily  insured  population  might  limit  generalizability  of  study  findings,  VSD  does
capture  publicly  insured  persons,  and  includes  one  large  integrated  urban  safety-net
health  system††  serving  uninsured  patients.  Finally,  this  study  did  not  control  for
important predisposing factors for adverse birth outcomes, such as pregnancy-related
conditions,  and  more  information  is  needed  to  understand  the  effects  of  SARS-CoV-2
infection  on  pregnancy  outcome.  This  report  addresses  gaps  in  previously  reported
surveillance  data  by  using  a  combination  of  diagnosis  codes,  medical  record  review,
and  physician  adjudication  to  identify  various  reasons  for  hospital  admission  among
pregnant women with COVID-19, their pregnancy characteristics, and birth outcomes.
This  report  highlights  the  importance  of  antenatal  counseling  in  pregnant  women,
especially those with prepregnancy obesity and gestational diabetes. Counseling should
emphasize  preventive  measures  for  all  pregnant  women  and  their  close  contacts,
including  use  of  masks,  frequent  hand  washing,  social  distancing,  and  avoidance  of
large  gatherings  to  help  prevent  SARS-CoV-2  infection  and  COVID-19–associated
pregnancy  complications.  Top  Vaccine  Safety  Datalink  project  managers,  data
managers,  and  chart  abstractors;  CDC  COVID-19  Vaccine  Safety  Team,  Vaccine
Planning
 Unit.
 Top
 Corresponding
 author:
 Lakshmi
 Panagiotakopoulos,
lpanagiotakopoulos@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of  Healthcare  Quality  Promotion,  National
Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  2Yale  University,  New
Haven, Connecticut; 3HealthPartners Institute, Minneapolis, Minnesota; 4Research and
Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, Pasadena, California; 5Ambulatory
Care Services, Denver Health, Denver, Colorado; 6Department of Pediatrics, University
of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado; 7Center for Health Research, Kaiser
Permanente  Northwest,  Portland,  Oregon;  8Kaiser  Permanente  Vaccine  Study  Center,
Kaiser  Permanente  Northern  California,  Oakland,  California;  9Institute  for  Health
Research,  Kaiser  Permanente  Colorado,  Aurora,  Colorado;  10Kaiser  Permanente
Washington  Health  Research  Institute,  Seattle,  Washington.  Top  All  authors  have
completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form
for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  Denison  S.  Ryan  reports  grants  from
Amgen,  Merck  &  Co.,  and  Radius  Health  and  other  support  from  O.N.  Diagnostics
outside the submitted work. Allison L. Naleway reports grants from Pfizer outside the
submitted  work.  Nicola  P.  Klein  reports  grants  from  Sanofi  Pasteur,  GlaxoSmithKline,
Pfizer, Merck & Co., and Protein Science outside the submitted work. No other potential
conflicts of interest were disclosed. Top * http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6938e1.
†
 https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/ensuringsafety/monitoring/vsd/.
 §
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/pregnancy-breastfe
eding.html. ¶ https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm. ** 45 C.F.R. part 46.102(l)(2),
21 C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C. Sect. 241(d); 5 U.S.C. Sect. 552a; 44 U.S.C. Sect. 3501 et
seq.  ††  https://www.denverhealth.org/about-denver-health.  Top  Top  Abbreviation:
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease 2019.
* Hospitalization with a COVID-19 diagnosis code.
† Percentages might not sum to 100 because of rounding.
§ Pregnant women with resolved COVID-19 who had positive test results for SARS-CoV-2
by  real-time  reverse  transcription–polymerase  chain  reaction.  Top  Abbreviations:
ARDS  =  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome;  COVID-19  =  coronavirus  disease  2019;
HFNC = high-flow nasal cannula; ICU = intensive care unit.
* Hospitalization with a COVID-19 diagnosis code.
† Includes women with COVID-19 symptoms who were admitted for labor and delivery,
pyelonephritis,  pre-eclampsia,  and  fetal  monitoring  after  motor  vehicle  accident  in
pregnancy.
§ Includes women asymptomatically infected with SARS-CoV-2 and who were admitted
for labor and delivery, vaginal bleeding, or placenta previa.
¶  Includes  one  non-Hispanic  Hawaiian,  one  non-Hispanic  American  Indian/Alaskan
Native, and four multiracial pregnant women.
**  Includes  one  non-Hispanic  Hawaiian,  one  non-Hispanic  American  Indian/Alaskan
Native, and one multiracial pregnant woman.
†† Includes three multiracial pregnant women.
§§ Subcategories are not mutually exclusive.
¶¶ Represents postpartum COVID-19 illness woman admitted for delivery.
***  Medical  treatments  and  interventions  were  ascertained  upon  review  of  hospital
admission  and  discharge  notes  and  medical  administration  records  and  were  only
included  if  determined  that  they  were  used  to  treat  COVID-19–related  complications;
these
 included
 albuterol,
 azithromycin,
 convalescent
 plasma,
 enoxaparin,
hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir/ritonavir, mechanical ventilation, oseltamivir, remdesivir,
supplemental oxygen, and systemic steroids.
††† Body mass index ≥30 kg/m2.
§§§ History of preterm delivery reported among women with previous pregnancies. Top
Abbreviations: COVID-19 = coronavirus disease 2019; NICU = neonatal intensive care
unit.
*  Includes  delivery,  pyelonephritis,  preeclampsia,  and  fetal  monitoring  after  motor
vehicle accident in pregnancy.
† Includes delivery, vaginal bleeding, and placenta previa.
§ Defined as the date of birth of fetus or infant.
¶ Median gestational age among preterm deliveries = 34 wks.
**  Includes  three  pregnant  women  with  COVID-19  with  respiratory  distress  in  whom
labor was induced.
†† Fetal death occurring at ≥20 wks’ gestation. Top Suggested citation for this article:
Panagiotakopoulos L, Myers TR, Gee J, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infection Among Hospitalized
Pregnant  Women:  Reasons  for  Admission  and  Pregnancy  Characteristics  —  Eight  U.S.
Health  Care  Centers,  March  1–May  30,  2020.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep
2020;69:1355–1359. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6938e2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6938e2.htm
