Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Figure 1. Components of the School Nutrition Environment and
Services Click to Enlarge
PDF [PDF – 5.5 MB] | JPEG | PNG   Most US children attend school for 6 hours a day and
consume  as  much  as  half  of  their  daily  calories  at  school.  The  school  nutrition
environment and services are part of the Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child
(WSCC) model and can help shape lifelong healthy eating behaviors. CDC recommends
that  schools  implement  policies  and  practices  to  create  a  nutrition  environment  that
supports  students  in  making  healthy  choices.  A  healthy  school  nutrition  environment
provides  students  with  nutritious  and  appealing  foods  and  beverages,  consistent  and
accurate messages about good nutrition, and ways to learn about and practice healthy
eating  throughout  the  time  children  spend  on  school  grounds—including  before-  and
after-school.  To  learn  about  the  benefits  of  healthy  eating  and  diet  and  academic
performance  visit  Childhood  Nutrition  Facts.  Additionally,  to  learn  more  about  how
schools can address energy drink consumption and other energy drinks facts, visit our
energy drinks page. For information on how school nutrition policies and practices can
support  the  social  and  emotional  climate  (SEC)  in  schools  and  social  and  emotional
learning  (SEL),  visit  School  Nutrition  and  the  Social  and  Emotional  Climate  and
Learning.  This  CDC  framework  [PDF  –  2MB]  describes  the  components  of  a  school
nutrition environment and how, together, they influence a student’s access to healthy
foods  and  beverages  at  school.    Healthy  Youth  To  receive  email  updates  about  this
page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthyschools/nutrition/schoolnutrition.htm
