Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Recommendations and Reports / March 10, 2023 / 72(1);1–25
Please  note:  This  report  has  been  corrected.  An  erratum  has  been  published.  Erin  E.
Conners, PhD1; Lakshmi Panagiotakopoulos, MD1; Megan G. Hofmeister, MD1; Philip R.
Spradling, MD1; Liesl M. Hagan, MPH1; Aaron M. Harris, MD1; Jessica S. Rogers-Brown,
PhD1; Carolyn Wester, MD1; Noele P. Nelson, MD, PhD1 (View author affiliations) Views
equals page views plus PDF downloads Box 1 Box 2 Box 3 Box 4 Box 5 Figure 1 Figure 2
Table  1  Table  2    Chronic  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  infection  can  lead  to  substantial
morbidity  and  mortality.  Although  treatment  is  not  considered  curative,  antiviral
treatment,  monitoring,  and  liver  cancer  surveillance  can  reduce  morbidity  and
mortality.  Effective  vaccines  to  prevent  hepatitis  B  are  available.  This  report  updates
and expands CDC’s previously published Recommendations for Identification and Public
Health  Management  of  Persons  with  Chronic  Hepatitis  B  Virus  Infection  (MMWR
Recomm  Rep  2008;57[No.  RR-8])  regarding  screening  for  HBV  infection  in  the  United
States.  New  recommendations  include  hepatitis  B  screening  using  three  laboratory
tests at least once during a lifetime for adults aged ≥18 years. The report also expands
risk-based  testing  recommendations  to  include  the  following  populations,  activities,
exposures,  or  conditions  associated  with  increased  risk  for  HBV  infection:  persons
incarcerated  or  formerly  incarcerated  in  a  jail,  prison,  or  other  detention  setting;
persons with a history of sexually transmitted infections or multiple sex partners; and
persons  with  a  history  of  hepatitis  C  virus  infection.  In  addition,  to  provide  increased
access  to  testing,  anyone  who  requests  HBV  testing  should  receive  it,  regardless  of
disclosure  of  risk,  because  many  persons  might  be  reluctant  to  disclose  stigmatizing
risks. Top Persons with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection are at increased risk for
liver  cancer  and  cirrhosis  and  are  70%–85%  more  likely  to  die  prematurely  than  the
general population (1–4). An estimated 580,000 to 2.4 million persons are living with
HBV infection in the United States (5,6), two thirds of whom might be unaware of their
infection (5). Chronic HBV infection disproportionately affects persons born outside the
United  States;  non-U.S.–born  persons  account  for  14%  of  the  general  population,  but
account for 69% of the U.S. population living with chronic HBV infection (5–7). HBV is
transmitted  through  contact  with  infected  blood  or  body  fluids,  such  as  during
pregnancy or delivery, through sex, or by injection drug use (IDU), with the greatest risk
for  chronic  infection  occurring  during  perinatal  infection  (8).  Hepatitis  B  (HepB)
vaccination is highly effective in preventing HBV infection and subsequent liver disease;
however, 70% of adults in the United States self-reported they were unvaccinated as of
2018  (9).  Although  treatment  is  not  considered  curative,  antiviral  treatment,
monitoring, and liver cancer surveillance can reduce morbidity and mortality (10,11). To
provide  a  framework  for  reaching  the  World  Health  Organization’s  viral  hepatitis
elimination goals, the Viral Hepatitis National Strategic Plan for the United States calls
for an increase in the proportion of persons with HBV infection who are aware of their
infection from 32% (2013–2016) to 90% by 2030 (12,13). In support of this goal, this
report updates the 2008 CDC recommendations for risk-based testing and management
of persons with chronic HBV infection in the United States (14). This report is a resource
to advise health care professionals, public health officials, and organizations supporting
awareness, prevention, and linkage to care about who to screen for HBV infection and
which groups at risk for infection to test periodically (Box 1). The three main serologic
markers  used  to  determine  HBV  infection  status  are  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen
(HBsAg), antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs), and antibody to hepatitis B
core  antigen  (anti-HBc)  (Table  1).  Serologic  markers  change  over  typical  courses  of
resolved  acute  infection  and  progression  to  chronic  infection  (Figure  1)  (15).
Background  information  on  HBV,  including  virus  description,  transmission,  clinical
features,  natural  history,  and  HepB  vaccination  seroprotection  and  coverage,  is
available  (Supplementary  Appendix  1,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  Of
3,192  acute  HBV  infection  cases  reported  to  CDC  in  2019,  an  estimated  20,700  new
infections
 (95%
 CI
 =
 11,800–50,800)
 were
 identified
 after
 adjusting
 for
underascertainment  and  underreporting.  During  2012–2019,  the  number  of  reported
acute  HBV  infection  cases  in  the  United  States  remained  relatively  stable  (22,23).
Geographic differences exist, with the highest rate of cases (≥2.5 per 100,000 persons)
in  2019  reported  by  Florida,  Indiana,  Kentucky,  Maine,  Ohio,  Tennessee,  and  West
Virginia  (23).  From  2011  to  2017,  the  percentage  of  acute  HBV  infections  among
women of childbearing age was stable nationally but increased in Alabama (from 0% to
0.3%), Indiana (from 0% to 0.1%), and Kentucky (from 0.1% to 0.2%) (24). Geographic
differences in new infections might be because of the opioid crisis; during 2006–2013,
increases  in  incident  cases  of  acute  HBV  infection  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  and  West
Virginia were among persons who reported IDU as a risk factor (25). During 2019, the
overall  rate  of  reported  acute  infections  in  the  United  States  was  1.0  per  100,000
population. The rate of reported acute HBV infections among persons aged 0–19 years
has  remained  at  ≤0.1  case  per  100,000  population  since  2006,  in  part  because  of
routine  childhood  vaccination  (23).  However,  transmission  of  HBV  infection  persists
among adults, especially among older adults for whom vaccine uptake is suboptimal.
Rates  of  acute  HBV  infection  were  higher  among  males  (1.3  per  100,000  population)
than females (0.7) and were highest among not Hispanic or Latino (non-Hispanic) White
(1.0) persons and non-Hispanic Black persons (0.9). Among the 1,780 case reports that
included risk information for IDU, 35% reported IDU (23). Among the 1,042 case reports
that included sex partner data, 23% reported multiple sex partners. Of the 2,009 case
reports  that  included  any  risk  information,  47%  had  no  risk  identified.  Data  from  the
National  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey  (NHANES)  indicated  an  estimated
880,000  persons  were  living  with  chronic  HBV  infection  during  2013–2018  (95%  CI
= 580,000–1,170,000) (5). The prevalence of resolved HBV infection or HBV infection
was  11.7  million  persons  (95%  CI  =  10.2–13.5  million).  NHANES  does  not  include
institutionalized  populations  and  might  underestimate  the  prevalence  among  ethnic
minority groups that are not well represented in the survey. In a 2018 meta-analysis of
prevalence,  of  the  estimated  1.89  million  persons  (range  =  1.49–2.40  million)
chronically  infected  with  HBV  living  in  the  United  States,  0.42  million  (range
=  0.28–0.67  million)  were  U.S.  born  and  1.47  million  (95%  CI  =  1.21–1.73)  were
non-U.S.  born  (6,26).  By  region,  the  highest  proportions  of  persons  with  chronic  HBV
infection  in  the  United  States  were  born  in  East  Asia,  Southeast  Asia,  the  Caribbean,
South Central Asia, and West Africa (6). From 2011 to 2017, the percentage of chronic
HBV  infection  among  women  of  childbearing  age  who  were  tested  for  HBV  infection
increased in Kentucky (from 0.2% to 0.4%), Mississippi (from 0.2% to 0.4%), and West
Virginia (from 0.3% to 0.4%) (24). In 2019, the rate of newly reported cases of chronic
HBV  infection  among  adults  varied  by  age,  with  the  highest  rate  (11.3  per  100,000
persons) reported among persons aged 30–39 years and the lowest rate (0.5) reported
among persons aged 0–19 years (23). During 2015–2017, an estimated 20,678–21,314
infants were born to pregnant women who were HBsAg positive (27). National Perinatal
Hepatitis B Prevention Program data indicated that only half (52.6%) of these infants
were  identified  through  prenatal  screening  in  2017.  During  2019,  a  total  of  1,662
deaths  attributable  to  HBV  infection  in  the  United  States  were  reported  on  death
certificates,  resulting  in  an  age-adjusted  rate  of  0.42  per  100,000  persons  (95%  CI
=  0.40–0.44)  (23).  The  highest  death  rates  occurred  among  Asian  and  other  Pacific
Islander persons (2.10), males (0.66), and persons aged 65–74 years (1.54). However,
deaths  attributable  to  HBV  infection  have  been  found  to  be  underreported  on  death
certificates  (1).  Top  This  report  updates  and  expands  CDC  recommendations  for
hepatitis B screening of adults published in 2008 (14). CDC evaluated the addition of a
universal screening recommendation among adults as well as testing persons expected
to  be  at  increased  risk  for  HBV  infection  that  were  not  included  in  the  2008  testing
recommendations. Members of the CDC Guidelines Work Group (hereafter referred to
as the work group) followed CDC guideline development and reporting standards (28)
to  develop  research  questions  needed  to  assess  the  proposed  updates;  conduct
systematic reviews; assess the quality of the evidence; and review existing systematic
reviews,
 meta-analyses,
 and
 cost-effectiveness
 analyses,
 when
 available
(Supplementary
 Appendix
 2;
 Supplementary
 Tables
 1,
 4,
 and
 7,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  Comprehensive  systematic  literature  reviews
were  conducted  for  recommendations  on  1)  expanding  screening  to  all  adults  (i.e.,
universal screening), 2) periodic testing for HBV infection among persons with hepatitis
C virus (HCV) infection, and 3) testing for HBV infection among persons with a history of
incarceration. For all three systematic reviews, literature searches were conducted by
CDC librarians with direction from subject matter experts. Searches were conducted for
English-language  literature  published  worldwide  in  Medline  (OVID),  Embase  (OVID),
CINAHL (Ebsco), and Cochrane Library. Duplicates were identified and removed using
Endnote  (version  20;  Clarivate  Analytics)  and  DistillerSR  systematic  review  software
(version  2.35;  Evidence  Partners)  automated  “find  duplicates”  functions.  CDC’s  Viral
Hepatitis  Steering  Committee  considered  multiple  methods  to  assess  quality  of
evidence.  The  Mixed  Methods  Appraisal  Tool  (MMAT)  was  selected  because  it  is  a
validated  tool  for  assessing  nonrandomized  analytic  and  descriptive  studies,  which
comprise most of the HBV infection prevalence literature (29). MMAT users rate each
study  on  methodological  quality  criteria,  indicating  whether  criteria  were  met  with
“Yes,” “No,” or “Can’t Tell.” Calculating a summary score is not recommended for the
tool because presenting a single number is not informative about which aspects of the
studies are problematic. Economic analyses were evaluated by assessing whether the
study met the Consolidated Health Economic Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS)
(30). CDC determined that the new recommendations constituted influential scientific
information that will have a clear and substantial impact on important public policies
and  private  sector  decisions.  Therefore,  the  Information  Quality  Act  required  peer
review  by  specialists  in  the  field  who  were  not  involved  in  the  development  of  these
recommendations. CDC solicited nominations for reviewers from AASLD, the Infectious
Disease  Society  of  America,  and  the  American  College  of  Physicians  (ACP).  Five
clinicians  with  expertise  in  hepatology,  gastroenterology,  internal  medicine,  or
infectious diseases provided structured peer reviews and any edits made in response
were
 documented
 (Supplementary
 Appendices
 2
 and
 3,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  No  CDC  staff  or  external  peer  reviewers
reported  a  conflict  of  interest.  In  addition,  feedback  from  the  public  was  solicited
through  a  Federal  Register  notice  announcing  the  availability  of  the  draft
recommendations for public comment from April 4 through June 3, 2022. CDC received
28 public comments on the draft document from nonprofit/advocacy groups, providers,
industry  groups,  medical  professional  organizations,  the  public,  academia,  and  a
consulting group. Public comments were considered by the work group and any edits
made
 in
 response
 were
 documented
 (Supplementary
 Appendix
 4,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).
 The
 work
 group
 also
 presented
 these
guidelines  to  the  CDC/Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration  (HRSA)  Advisory
Committee on HIV, Viral Hepatitis and STD Prevention and Treatment, but did not seek
consensus  decision-making  from  this  advisory  committee.  The  steering  committee
considered  results  of  the  systematic  reviews  in  conjunction  with  cost-effectiveness
analyses, supplemental literature, practicality of implementing guidelines, public health
benefits, subject matter expertise, and reviewer and public feedback. The search period
was January 1, 2008 (the year of the last CDC screening guidelines) through February 8,
2021 (Supplementary Table 2, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432). Search results
were  supplemented  by  relevant  studies  identified  through  reference  lists  in  review
articles  and  by  newly  published  studies.  DistillerSR  was  used  to  organize  the  review
process.  Each  article  was  reviewed  for  inclusion  by  two  of  the  authors  (EC  and  LP).
Differences in decisions to include were discussed until consensus was reached. Articles
were  included  if  they  contained  the  prevalence  or  incidence  of  HBV  infection  among
adults  aged  ≥18  years  or  linkage-to-care  data.  Articles  were  excluded  if  they  were
conducted  outside  the  United  States  and  U.S.  territories;  only  reported  data  from  a
study  not  conducted  in  humans,  environmental  studies,  or  technology  assessments;
lacked original data (e.g., editorials, reviews, and modeled data); were case reports; or
only included self-reported (i.e., unconfirmed) HBV infection prevalence (Supplementary
Table 3, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432). When a reviewer identified an article
as  meeting  any  exclusion  criterion,  additional  exclusion  criteria  were  not  assessed  or
recorded. When multiple articles reported data on the same cohort, only the article with
the  most  complete  data  was  included.  Data  were  independently  abstracted  by  two
reviewers (EC and LP) and discrepancies were discussed until consensus was reached
or they were resolved by a third reviewer (NN). Finally, two independent assessors (LP,
JB, or NN) used MMAT to assess the quality of articles used to calculate the prevalence
of  HBV  infection  in  the  general  population.  The  search  period  was  January  1,  2005
through
 September
 22,
 2020
 (Supplementary
 Table
 5,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432). DistillerSR and Endnote were used to organize
the  review  process.  Titles  were  reviewed  by  one  reviewer  (PS  or  EC),  and  those  that
were  clearly  irrelevant  to  the  research  question  were  excluded.  Each  potentially
relevant  article  was  reviewed  for  inclusion  by  two  of  the  authors  (MH  and  PS).
Differences  in  decisions  to  include  were  discussed  until  consensus  was  reached
(Supplementary  Table  6,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  Data  from  the
included full text articles were independently abstracted by two reviewers (MH, PS, or
EC).  The  quality  of  the  articles  was  assessed  using  MMAT.  The  population  was
considered at “increased risk” if the prevalence of HBV infection was ≥1%. The work
group  used  an  existing  literature  search  of  articles  on  HBV  and  HCV  infections  in
correctional  and  detention  facilities.  The  search  period  was  January  1,  2000  through
March  3,  2021  (Supplementary  Table  8,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).
Abstracts  were  reviewed  by  two  reviewers  (AH,  LH,  JB,  OR,  or  EC)  for  relevance,  and
discrepancies  in  inclusion  were  resolved  by  the  first  author  (EC)  or  by  consensus
discussion.  Only  articles  containing  incidence  or  prevalence  of  HBV  infection  among
persons with a history of incarceration or incarceration as a risk factor for HBV infection
were
 included
 in
 this
 review
 (Supplementary
 Table
 9,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  Data  from  the  included  full  text  articles  or
abstracts were independently abstracted by two reviewers (LP and EC) and differences
were  resolved  by  consensus  discussion.  Because  of  the  limited  amount  of  literature
available  about  HBV  infection  in  correctional  settings,  the  work  group  included
conference  abstracts,  which  are  labeled  as  such  because  of  their  presumed  lower
quality.  The  quality  of  the  articles  was  assessed  using  MMAT.  The  population  was
considered at “increased risk” if the prevalence of HBV infection was ≥1%. Top After
deduplication, 2,580 records were available for initial title screen; 1,374 articles were
excluded during title screen. An additional 1,028 articles were excluded during abstract
review. Among the 178 full text articles, 136 did not meet inclusion criteria after review;
42
 articles
 were
 included
 in
 the
 final
 review
 (Supplementary
 Table
 11,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432). An additional article met inclusion criteria, but
was  published  after  the  search  period,  and  was  abstracted  to  supplement  evidence
from  the  systematic  search.  Eighteen  articles  had  any  HBV  testing  data  from  the
general population (i.e., screening persons not known to be at increased risk for HBV
infection)  (Supplementary  Table  11,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  Testing
recommendations  are  risk  based;  therefore,  studies  with  convenience  samples  of
persons already tested for HBV infection were considered biased toward overestimating
the prevalence of HBV infection even if the study did not explicitly state that there was
risk-based testing. The remainder of the articles (n = 25) included persons at increased
risk for HBV infection who were not considered to be representative of the general U.S.
population. The individual MMAT quality ratings are available (Supplementary Tables 14
and 15, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432). The work group defined patients who
have chronic HBV infection as those who were HBsAg positive, except for one study in
which  authors  classified  patients  as  having  chronic  HBV  infection  without  providing  a
definition.  Studies  among  first-time  blood  donors,  organ  donors,  pregnant  women
(among  whom  universal  screening  is  already  recommended),  NHANES  enrollees,  and
patients  seeking  care  for  a  condition  other  than  HBV  infection  were  included.  On  the
basis of 17 studies conducted both in the United States and U.S. territories, the median
prevalence  of  chronic  HBV  infection  in  the  general  population  was  0.4%  (range
=  0.0%–2.0%)  (Supplementary  Table  11,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  On
the basis of studies conducted in the United States alone, the prevalence was 0.38%
(range
 =
 0%–0.74%)
 (Supplementary
 Table
 11,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  Eight  studies  reported  the  prevalence  of  a
history  of  infection  (i.e.,  anti-HBc  positive,  HBsAg  negative);  the  median  was  6.2%
(range = 4.8%–14.0%) (31–38). The ages of patients with chronic HBV infection (when
available)
 are
 included
 in
 the
 summary
 table
 (Supplementary
 Table
 11,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  No  clear  trends  were  identified  in  the
prevalence of chronic HBV infection by age across studies. Therefore, the work group
considered the economic analysis, vaccination rates and efficacy, the epidemiology of
acute and chronic infections from surveillance data, ease of implementation, and harms
of  missed  identification  of  chronic  infections  in  determining  the  age  thresholds  for
universal adult screening. As part of their HBV screening recommendations systematic
review, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) assessed the yield (number of
new  diagnoses  per  tests  completed)  and  sensitivity  of  alternative  HBV  infection
screening strategies (39). USPSTF identified three fair quality, non-U.S.–based studies,
which  might  limit  applicability  (40–42).  On  the  basis  of  these  studies,  the  number  of
persons  who  need  to  be  screened  to  identify  one  HBV  infection  using  risk-based
strategies  ranged  from  32  to  148.  In  comparison,  fewer  than  20  persons  need  to  be
screened to identify a case of HCV infection using risk-based screening (43). Only one
of  the  studies,  conducted  in  France,  assessed  CDC’s  risk-based  testing  criteria  (41).
Using  risk-based  testing  had  100%  sensitivity  (i.e.,  100%  of  infected  persons  were
identified),  and  self-report  identified  70%  of  persons  with  at  least  one  risk  factor;
however, the study population specifically overrepresented persons at increased risk for
infection. The work group also considered a prospective cohort study of patients with
cancer at one U.S. health center, where applying CDC risk criteria to screening had 97%
sensitivity (44). The proportion of patients who met at least one risk criterion was 91%.
Therefore, in terms of provider time, universal screening might be more efficient than
risk-based testing. Because no studies directly assessed universal screening, the work
group  could  not  provide  the  yield  of  universal  screening  versus  risk-based  screening.
The  diagnostic  accuracy  of  HBV  tests  has  been  evaluated  by  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration (FDA) and was not included as part of the systematic review. Any assay
that  receives  FDA  approval  for  clinical  use  must  meet  high  standards  of  diagnostic
accuracy.  A  list  of  FDA-approved  HBV  serologic  assays,  including  links  to  detailed
information on their performance characteristics, is available (Supplementary Table 21,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432). Data on harms in the systematic review were
limited.  In  one  study,  women  with  public  insurance  and  who  self-paid  for  health  care
services  were  less  likely  to  be  screened,  even  though  HBsAg  screening  costs  should
have been covered; the authors hypothesized that out-of-pocket payments might be a
barrier to screening (45). In another study assessing acceptability of hepatitis screening
among  patients  during  colonoscopies,  acceptance  was  78%  (46).  Harms  of  screening
for HBV would be expected to be similar to those for HCV. In a previous review, possible
harms  of  screening  for  hepatitis  C  were  physical  pain,  anxiety,  cost,  interpersonal
problems  related  to  learning  infection  status,  stigma,  time,  fear,  and  reluctance  to
disclose illegal risk behaviors (47). Other plausible harms included concern caused by
false-positive  results,  distress  resulting  from  lack  of  education  or  understanding  of
resolved infection, insurability and employment issues, and treatment adverse effects.
The  work  group  concluded  that  potential  harms  of  screening  did  not  outweigh  the
benefits. In addition, universal screening might reduce harms compared with risk-based
screening  by  not  requiring  persons  to  disclose  potentially  stigmatizing  risk  conditions
(e.g.,  immigration  status  and  IDU)  to  get  tested.  Only  two  studies  from  the  universal
screening review reported on linkage to care. In a study among persons attending free
clinics, 69% of patients with a diagnosis of chronic HBV infection enrolled in follow-up
care  (48).  In  a  free  screening  clinic,  78%  of  patients  with  HBV  infection  elected  to
undergo follow-up monitoring (i.e., alanine aminotransferase [ALT]) and HBV DNA), and
24%  (11  of  45)  of  those  monitored  were  eligible  for  treatment  (i.e.,  viral  load  of
>20,000 copies per mL) (49). Data on treatment were only available in two studies of
antiviral  treatment  during  chemotherapy.  In  one  study,  23%  of  patients  at  risk  for
reactivation  were  prescribed  a  preventive  nucleoside  analog  (50).  In  the  other  study,
12% (18 of 152) of patients with a previous HBV infection received antiviral drugs, and
73% (11 of 15) of patients with chronic HBV infection received antiviral drugs (36). To
answer these key questions, the work group also assessed evidence from two additional
studies that were not part of the systematic review but included the general population.
In a 2008–2016 study of adults with chronic HBV infection and commercial insurance,
36% (6,004 of 16,644) of patients were linked to care (defined as having had an ALT
test and HBV DNA or HBeAg test) (51). Of the patients with chronic HBV infection with
prescription  claims,  18%  (2,926  of  16,572)  were  treated.  Among  2,338  patients  with
chronic HBV infection followed in a prospective cohort study, 78% had one or more ALT
tests annually, 37% had one or more HBV DNA tests annually, and 32% were treated
(52). Not all patients with chronic HBV infection require treatment; estimates of patients
with  HBV  infection  meeting  AASLD  criteria  for  treatment  range  from  24%  to  48%
(53,54).  These  two  studies  did  not  assess  the  proportion  of  persons  treated  among
those  who  were  eligible.  Overall,  the  work  group  found  that  linkage-to-care  rates
ranged from 36% to 78%, and from 18% to 32% of patients with chronic HBV infection
were prescribed treatment. The work group did not identify evidence directly assessing
the proportion of close contacts (excluding perinatal transmission) who are at risk for
infection  and  thus  could  not  estimate  the  proportion  of  new  infections  that  would  be
prevented by universal adult screening. However, the work group found evidence of the
proportion of close contacts of persons with HBV infection who themselves have HBV
infection.  From  the  systematic  review,  a  cohort  study  of  patients  with  cancer  and
previous HBV infection found that 8.1% reported having a household contact with HBV
infection (who was not a sex partner), and 15.2% reported sexual contact with a person
with  HBV  infection.  Of  the  patients  with  chronic  HBV  infection,  0.5%  reported  a
nonsexual household contact with HBV infection, and 1.5% reported sexual contact with
a  person  with  HBV  infection  (36).  In  a  study  of  programs  testing  and  linking  patients
with hepatitis B to care in the United States, 14% of household contacts of persons who
were  HBsAg  positive  were  themselves  HBsAg  positive,  and  30%  had  a  history  of
infection (anti-HBc positive) (55). In 2019, surveillance data indicated that 10% (92 of
899)  of  persons  with  acute  cases  had  a  sexual  contact  and  2%  (17  of  899)  had  a
nonsexual  household  contact  (23).  However,  relying  on  self-reports  of  close  contacts
with  HBV  infection  likely  underestimates  the  risk.  Global  studies  conducted  during
1974–2007  found  that  14%–60%  of  persons  living  in  households  with  persons  with
chronic HBV infection have serologic evidence of resolved HBV infection, and 3%–30%
have  chronic  infection  (14).  Although  screening  can  prevent  further  spread  of  HBV
infection, the work group was unable to estimate the size of that impact. Key Q4 was
not assessed by the systematic review because it has been reported elsewhere. USPSTF
reviewed  effectiveness  of  treatment  on  reducing  viral  load,  HBeAg,  HBsAg,  cirrhosis,
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and death (39). Antiviral therapy was associated with
viral  suppression,  HBsAg  loss,  normalization  of  ALT  levels,  and  HBeAg  loss.  Antiviral
therapy was associated with decreased risk for HCC and death compared with placebo
or no therapy; however, data were sparse and estimates imprecise. Therapy was not
associated with an increased risk for serious adverse events. The conclusion of AASLD’s
systematic  review  used  in  the  development  of  its  treatment  guidelines  was  that
recommended  treatment  reduces  cirrhosis,  decompensated  cirrhosis,  HCC,  and  death
in  adults  with  active  chronic  HBV  infection  and  is  strongly  recommended  (10).  Top  A
2021 economic analysis on the cost-effectiveness of one-time universal HBV screening
of  adults  aged  18–69  years  provided  information  for  these  guidelines  (56).  With  an
estimated prevalence of undiagnosed chronic HBV infection of 0.24%, universal HBsAg
screening  among  adults  aged  18–69  years  was  cost-saving  compared  with  current
practice, assuming antiviral treatment drug costs remain at <$894 per year. Antiviral
treatment drug costs would need to rise to $9,692 a year (approximately 19 times the
cost  at  the  time  of  the  study)  for  universal  screening  to  be  no  longer  cost-effective.
Undiagnosed prevalence was based on the NHANES estimate of 0.36% and the finding
that 67% of persons with HBV infection were unaware of their infection (57). Current
practice  was  based  on  the  literature  and  assumed  that  33%  of  persons  with  HBV
infection were currently diagnosed, 36% were linked to care, and 18% were receiving
treatment (56). Compared with current practice, universal screening would be expected
to avert an additional 7.4 cases of compensated cirrhosis, 3.3 cases of decompensated
cirrhosis,  5.5  cases  of  HCC,  1.9  liver  transplants,  and  10.3  HBV-related  deaths  per
100,000 persons screened (56). Universal HBsAg screening of adults aged 18–69 years
would save $262,857 per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) and would result in a gain of
135 QALYs per 100,000 adults screened. A probabilistic sensitivity analysis that varied
all parameters in the model simultaneously indicated a >99% likelihood that universal
screening  would  be  cost-effective  compared  with  current  practice  at  a  maximum
willingness-to-pay  threshold  of  $50,000  per  QALY.  Study  authors  conducted  an
unpublished  analysis  using  the  same  methods  as  those  in  the  economic  analysis
described  in  this  report,  but  with  an  upper  age  limit  of  80  years  instead  of  69.  They
found  one-time  universal  screening  of  adults  aged  18–80  years  with  an  HBsAg  test
would save $200,334 and result in a gain of 128 QALYs per 100,000 adults screened. A
sensitivity  analysis  found  that  using  the  triple  panel  (HBsAg,  anti-HBc,  anti-HBs)  and
assuming Medicare reimbursement of $28.27, universal screening with the triple panel
would  be  cost-effective,  with  an  incremental  cost-effectiveness  ratio  of  $11,207  per
QALY  (56).  Using  a  cost-effectiveness  threshold  of  $50,000  per  QALY,  universal
screening with the triple panel remained cost-effective if the HBV infection prevalence
was >0.15%. A summary of the CHEERS checklist is available (Supplementary Table 20,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  Minor  deviations  from  the  recommended
standards were not considered a substantial risk to quality. A 2022 cost-effectiveness
analysis evaluated whether screening in STI clinics (i.e., a high-prevalence setting) with
universal  vaccination  can  reduce  costs  and  improve  care  (58).  The  researchers
assumed  the  study  population  was  aged  18–69  years,  had  an  estimated  HBsAg
prevalence  of  4.2%,  and  had  no  previous  HepB  vaccination  or  known  HBV  infection.
One-time screening with the triple panel was cost-saving and prevented an additional
138 cases of cirrhosis, 47 cases of decompensated cirrhosis, 90 cases of HCC, 33 liver
transplants, and 163 HBV-related deaths per 100,000 adults screened. Even if chronic
HBV infection prevalence in the STI clinic population was assumed to be zero, screening
plus  vaccination  was  less  costly  than  vaccination  alone  because  it  identified  persons
with  previous  vaccination  and  averted  the  cost  of  additional  vaccine  doses.  Top  The
steering  committee  considered  results  of  the  systematic  review  in  conjunction  with
cost-effectiveness  analyses,  supplemental  literature,  practicality  of  implementing
guidelines,  public  health  benefits,  subject  matter  expertise,  and  reviewer  and  public
feedback. Because of limited data, the steering committee was only indirectly able to
assess the key question “How would adult universal screening for hepatitis B affect the
number  [and  composition]  of  persons  who  screen  positive  for  HBV  infection?”  A
summary of the evidence considered, rationale for screening (Box 2), conclusions of the
steering
 committee,
 and
 limitations
 is
 available
 (Supplementary
 Table
 10,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  The  steering  committee  concluded  that
simplifying the implementation of screening from a risk-based to a universal approach
might  increase  the  number  of  persons  aware  of  their  infection.  Overall,  risk-based
testing has been insufficient to identify persons with HBV infection in the United States
and has been a barrier to appropriately screening populations with a disproportionate
prevalence  of  disease.  Assessment  of  risk  is  difficult  for  providers  and  might  be
stigmatizing  to  the  patient.  A  one-time  HBV  screening  of  adults  would  be
complementary  to  the  2022  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)
recommendation  to  vaccinate  all  adults  aged  19–59  years  for  HBV  infection  because
screening  establishes  any  history  of  infection,  and  vaccination  protects  from  future
infection and need for additional testing (59). The recommendations were supported by
peer reviewers who are experts in the field as well as the majority of public comments.
Patients with HBV infection have increased morbidity and mortality, and monitoring and
treatment can improve health outcomes. If more efficacious treatments are approved in
the future, this benefit will increase further. Although increasing awareness of infection
is  expected  to  reduce  transmission  to  close  contacts,  this  assumption  is  hypothetical
because  of  the  lack  of  direct  evidence.  No  studies  directly  compared  universal
screening  with  risk-based  screening;  therefore,  the  steering  committee  relied  on  the
cost-effectiveness  study  finding  that  a  one-time  universal  screen  of  adults  is
cost-effective  and  results  in  improved  health  outcomes  as  compared  with  risk-based
screening (56). The systematic review found 8,295 articles for review; after title review,
1,233 potentially relevant articles remained. After review of articles meeting inclusion
and  exclusion  criteria,  17  articles  were  included  (Supplementary  Table  12,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  In  10  U.S.  studies,  the  prevalence  of  current
HBV  infection  (on  the  basis  of  HBsAg  positivity,  HBV  DNA  positivity,  or  International
Classification  of  Diseases,  Tenth  Revision  codes)  among  persons  with  HCV  infection
ranged  from  0.2%  to  5.8%  (median  =  1.2%)  (60–69).  Among  persons  with  HCV
infection, the prevalence of ever being exposed to HBV ranged from 24.7% to 62.6%
(median  =  43.0%);  this  finding  was  based  on  anti-HBc  positivity,  regardless  of  other
HBV test results (62–65,69,70). Isolated anti-HBc positivity ranged from 36.9% to 53.8%
(median = 39.5%) among patients with HCV infection (62,65,69). FDA requires a boxed
warning about the risk for HBV reactivation to be added to drug labels of direct-acting
antiviral  (DAA)  medication  for  HCV  infection.  The  boxed  warning  directs  health  care
professionals  to  screen  and  monitor  for  HBV  infection  in  all  patients  receiving  DAA
treatment  (71).  In  a  published  systematic  review  of  HBV  reactivation  during  DAA
therapy  among  patients  with  HCV  infection,  the  overall  risk  for  HBV  reactivation  was
24% (95% CI = 19%–30%) in patients with untreated chronic HBV infection and 1.4%
(95%  CI  =  0.8%–2.4%)  in  patients  with  resolved  HBV  infection  (72).  The  risk  for  HBV
reactivation–related  hepatitis  (i.e.,  symptomatic)  was  9%  (95%  CI  =  5%–16%)  in
patients with chronic HBV infection; HBV reactivation–related hepatitis did not occur in
patients with resolved infection. Three of 1,621 patients with chronic HBV infection had
a major clinical event related to the reactivation (liver decompensation or failure), but
there  were  no  deaths.  Four  studies  (62,69,73,74)  were  published  after  the  2018
systematic review (72). In two national cohort studies of U.S. veterans with chronic HCV
infection  prescribed  DAA  therapy,  HBV  reactivation  was  rare  (<0.1%)  and  more
frequent  among  patients  who  were  HBsAg  positive  (62,73).  Similarly,  two  other
U.S.-based cohort studies of patients with HCV coinfected with HBV did not detect any
cases of DAA-associated HBV reactivation (69,74). In a study comparing patients with
HCV  infection  achieving  sustained  virologic  response  to  HCV  treatment,  anti-HBc
positivity  was  identified  as  an  independent  risk  factor  for  the  development  of  HCC
(hazard  ratio  [HR]  =  5.57;  95%  CI  =  1.45–21.39)  (75).  Conversely,  a  nested,
case-control study of patients who were HBsAg negative with HCV infection indicated
that neither previous nor occult HBV infection was associated with the development of
HCC  (76).  Clinically  significant  hepatic  events,  including  HBV  reactivation,  were  more
common  among  patients  who  were  cirrhotic  than  patients  who  were  noncirrhotic
anti-HBc  positive  with  chronic  HCV  infection  undergoing  DAA  therapy  (73).  Among  a
cohort  of  51,781  veterans  who  were  HCV  infected  and  who  initiated  DAA  treatment,
those who were HBV/HCV coinfected (odds ratio [OR] = 2.25; 95% CI = 1.17–4.31) and
those with resolved HBV infection (OR = 1.09; 95% CI = 1.03–1.15) were more likely to
achieve  sustained  virologic  response  compared  with  patients  who  were  HCV
monoinfected  (64).  In  a  national  cohort  of  99,548  U.S.  veterans,  patients  with  HCV
infection and documented HBV viremia (HBV DNA detected) were at significantly higher
risk for cirrhosis (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR] = 1.89; 95% CI = 1.46–2.45), HCC (aHR
=  2.12;  95%  CI  =  1.26–3.60),  and  death  (aHR  =  1.62;  95%  CI  =  1.33–1.99)  than
patients  who  were  HCV  monoinfected,  after  controlling  for  demographic,  clinical,  and
antiviral treatment–related factors (68). In this cohort, absence of HBV replication was
associated with a clinical course similar to that of patients who were HCV monoinfected.
Compared  with  patients  who  were  HCV  monoinfected,  patients  with  HBV/HCV
coinfection  had  more  advanced  fibrosis,  a  faster  fibrosis  progression  rate,  and  more
severe  steatosis  (63).  In  a  matched  case-control  study,  patients  with  HBsAg-negative
HCV infection with HCC were more likely to have had previous HBV infection (anti-HBc
positive),  regardless  of  anti-HBs  status  (anti-HBs  negative  [OR  =  2.98;  95%  CI
=  2.12–5.08];  anti-HBs  positive  [OR  =  1.84;  95%  CI  =  1.22–3.08]),  compared  with
HCV-infected  controls  without  HCC  (77).  Many  studies  had  incomplete  test  data  and
used  descriptive  tests  of  significance  rather  than  models  that  controlled  for  other
variables. The results from the MMAT quality assessment are available (Supplementary
Tables 18 and 19, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432). The work group concluded
that because the prevalence estimate was ≥1% for HBV infection and because of the
boxed warning for DAAs, persons with HCV infection or a past HCV infection should be
considered at increased risk for HBV infection. The systematic review of HBV infection
in correctional settings used for these testing guidelines was part of a larger review that
also contained articles on HCV infection in correctional settings (“review 1”). The initial
search of literature on HBV infection and HCV infection in correctional settings yielded
2,395 unique articles for review; of these, 1,961 were deemed irrelevant by title and
abstract screening, resulting in 434 potential articles for review 1. A secondary abstract
review  (“review  2”),  which  applied  the  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  for  these
guidelines,  resulted  in  57  articles  that  met  the  inclusion  criteria  for  full  text  review;
three  of  these  articles  also  were  included  in  the  HBV  universal  screening  systematic
review.  After  full  text  review,  10  articles  were  included  (Supplementary  Table  13,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  The  individual  MMAT  quality  ratings  are
available  (Supplementary  Tables  16  and  17,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).
Among eight studies, the prevalence of chronic HBV infection in persons with a history
of  incarceration  ranged  from  0.6%  to  8.7%  (median  =  1.0%)  (78–85).  Two  studies  of
men  who  were  incarcerated  assessed  incidence,  which  ranged  from  2,700  to  3,579
infections  per  100,000  persons  per  year  (78,81).  One  study  reported  41  acute  HBV
infections acquired in prison; however, the total number tested was not reported and
therefore  a  prevalence  or  incidence  rate  could  not  be  calculated  (85).  Another  study
reported an infection rate of 1.2% during an outbreak of HBV infection in a high-security
correctional  facility  (83).  Three  studies  found  an  increased  risk  for  HBV  infection
associated with incarceration. In a study of blood donors, persons detained ≥3 nights in
a jail or detention facility had three times higher odds of having serologic evidence of
HBV  infection;  however,  the  comparison  group  was  not  provided  (p≤0.001)  (86).  In
another study, persons incarcerated >14 years had 1.68 (95% CI = 1.08–2.59) higher
odds of ever acquiring HBV infection compared with those incarcerated ≤7 years (81).
Finally,  a  third  study  indicated  that  persons  with  any  self-reported  history  of
incarceration had increased odds (OR = 1.84; 95% CI = 1.02–3.31) of ever having HBV
infection compared with persons with no history of incarceration (87). The work group
determined that persons incarcerated or formerly incarcerated in a jail, prison, or other
detention setting should be considered at increased risk. This conclusion was based on
the  HBV  infection  prevalence  estimate  of  ≥1%  and  the  studies  directly  indicating  an
association between HBV infection and incarceration. The reasons for increased risk for
HBV infection among persons who have been incarcerated might include behaviors that
occur before or during incarceration, including drug use, higher-risk sex, percutaneous
exposures (e.g., tattooing), and structural factors that affect the level of risk for these
behaviors  (e.g.,  availability  of  condoms,  clean  syringes,  and  engagement  in  health
care).  To  ensure  all  incarcerated  persons  receive  recommended  HBV  testing,
correctional  and  detention  facilities  should  consider  offering  HBV  screening  at  intake,
periodic  testing  for  susceptible  persons  serving  long-term  sentences,  and  HepB
vaccination for susceptible persons (16). The work group used a published systematic
review  and  meta-analysis  to  assess  risk  among  persons  with  a  history  of  a  non-HIV
sexually  transmitted  infection  (STI)  (88).  This  analysis  of  studies  worldwide  found
positive  and  statistically  significant  associations  between  the  prevalence  of  HBV
infection and other STIs. Three U.S. studies, published during 2008–2009, included four
estimates  of  HBsAg  prevalence  among  persons  with  syphilis  or  any  STI;  the  median
prevalence  was  1.6%  (range  =  0.9%–33.2%).  Among  the  four  estimates,  two  were
among groups with other risk factors for HBV infection (e.g., persons being processed
into jail and men who have sex with men [MSM]). Seven U.S. studies, published during
1998–2000, included nine estimates of prevalence of HBV infection or a history of HBV
infection (HBsAg or anti-HBc positive) among persons with STIs or a history of STIs; the
median  prevalence  was  22.4%  (range  =  8.6%–83.5%).  Among  the  nine  estimates  of
past infection, four were among groups with other risk factors for HBV infection (e.g.,
persons  who  use  drugs,  persons  with  HIV  infection,  and  MSM).  A  study  of  national
surveillance reports and survey data during 2013–2018 found 1,324 (38.2%) cases of
sexually  transmitted  acute  HBV  infection  after  excluding  cases  with  a  report  of  IDU;
5.3%  of  persons  reported  sexual  contact  with  a  person  with  HBV  infection,  3.1%
reported being male and having sex with another male partner, 27.8% reported having
multiple sex partners, and 2% reported a history of STI treatment 6 weeks to 6 months
before their HBV infection diagnosis (89). Cases were classified into mutually exclusive
categories in the order listed. The work group considered the HBsAg prevalence of >1%
among  persons  with  an  STI  to  be  sufficient  evidence  of  increased  risk.  Although  the
recommendation  for  multiple  partners  is  not  directly  supported  by  the  literature,  it
aligns  with  AASLD  recommendations  to  screen  persons  who  are  not  in  a  long-term,
mutually monogamous relationship (i.e., more than one sex partner during the previous
6  months)  (11).  Without  preventive  steps,  90%  of  infants  born  to  women  who  are
HBsAg  and  HBeAg  positive  and  5%–20%  of  infants  born  to  women  who  are  HBsAg
positive,  HBeAg  negative  will  become  infected  (90–92).  Additional  information  is
available  in  Prevention  of  Hepatitis  B  Virus  Infection  in  the  United  States:
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (15) and from
AASLD (11). A 2021 systematic review and meta-analysis estimated the prevalence of
non-U.S.–born persons with chronic HBV infection in the United States to be 3.1% (95%
CI = 2.5%–3.6%). Africa had the highest regional prevalence (8.6%), followed by Asia
(5.9%) and Oceania (4.5%) (6) (Box 3). The population of persons born in the United
States  who  were  not  vaccinated  as  infants  whose  parents  were  born  in  regions  with
HBV  infection  prevalence  of  ≥8%  is  at  increased  risk  for  infection.  The  higher
underlying  prevalence  in  this  population  increases  the  likelihood  of  perinatal  or  close
contact  exposures  (Box  3).  A  systematic  review  estimated  the  prevalence  of  HBV
infection among persons who use injection drugs to be 11.8% (range = 3.5%–20%) and
ever  having  had  an  infection  to  be  22.6%  (93).  Transmission  of  HBV  among  persons
who  use  injection  drugs  might  be  increasing.  A  study  of  prevalence  of  anti-HBc  in
national  survey  data  found  an  increase  among  persons  who  use  injection  drugs  from
35.3% during 2001–2006 to 58.4% during 2013–2018 (94). Multiple studies with varying
inclusion criteria and periods during 1986–2012 used prospective cohort data from the
U.S.  Military  HIV  Natural  History  Study  (NHS)  to  calculate  the  prevalence  of  HBV
infection among persons with HIV infection. Among patients in NHS, coinfection ranged
from  3.0%  to  6.0%  (95–97).  In  a  large  prospective  cohort  study  of  adults  with  HIV
infection, annual chronic HBV infection prevalence during 1996–2007 ranged from 7.8%
to  8.6%  (98).  Among  a  sample  of  Los  Angeles  County,  California,  residents  from  the
National  HIV  Behavioral  Surveillance  system,  19%  (95%  CI  =  15%–24%)  of  MSM  had
HBV infection or a history of HBV infection, and 35% of the sample were coinfected with
HIV (99). In a survey of MSM from six U.S. metropolitan areas during 1998–2000, the
prevalence  of  ever  infection  was  20.6%,  and  2.3%  of  participants  had  active  HBV
infection;  HBV  infection  was  independently  associated  with  a  history  of  another  STI,
having  more  lifetime  partners,  ever  engaging  in  anal  intercourse,  and  ever  using
injection drugs (100). HBV is highly infectious and can survive in the environment for
prolonged periods. Close (i.e., household, needle-sharing, or sexual) contacts of persons
with  known  HBV  infection  are  at  greater  risk  (see  Universal  Screening  Systematic
Review  and  Review  of  Evidence  Summary).  A  study  during  1997–2001  of  adult
hemodialysis patients found an adjusted prevalence of HBV infection of 2.4% (95% CI
=  2.1–2.7)  (101).  Dialysis  was  reported  only  in  3%  (34  of  1,292)  of  2,019  acute  HBV
infection  cases;  however,  the  risk  for  developing  chronic  infection  was  higher  among
persons  who  are  immunosuppressed  and  undergoing  dialysis  than  persons  who  are
immunocompetent  (23,102,103).  Recommendations  for  Preventing  Transmission  of
Infections Among Chronic Hemodialysis Patients includes testing recommendations for
patients  on  hemodialysis  (104).  Persons  with  known  chronic  liver  disease  (e.g.,
cirrhosis, fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver disease, or autoimmune hepatitis) are not at
increased risk for HBV infection unless they have additional exposures or risk factors.
However, persons with persistently elevated ALT or aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
levels without a known cause should be tested for HBV infection as part of a medical
evaluation of these abnormal laboratory values. Top Chronic HBV infection can lead to
substantial morbidity and mortality but is detectable before the development of severe
liver  disease  using  reliable  and  inexpensive  screening  tests.  Routine  monitoring  and
treatment for chronic HBV infection can reduce morbidity and mortality, supporting the
importance of early detection of HBV infection. In addition, although not quantifiable,
management  of  chronic  infection  through  prevention  efforts  can  prevent  further
transmission  to  others.  These  recommendations  consider  a  simpler  and  less
stigmatizing  implementation  strategy  than  previous  risk-based  HBV  screening
recommendations. The recommendations also provide guidance that is complementary
to  the  2022  ACIP  recommendations  to  vaccinate  all  adults  aged  19–59  years  against
HBV  infection  (59)  by  providing  a  means  to  establish  immunity  or  any  history  of
infection or the need for vaccination to protect from future infection. Specific rationales
for  recommendations  are  as  follows:  Top  In  these  guidelines,  “screening”  refers  to
conducting serologic testing of asymptomatic persons not known to be at increased risk
for  exposure  to  HBV.  “Testing”  refers  to  conducting  serologic  testing  of  persons  with
symptoms  or  who  are  identified  to  be  at  increased  risk  for  exposure  to  HBV.  The
following  evidence-based  recommendations  for  HBV  screening  update  and  expand
those issued by CDC in 2008 (14). Screening is recommended for the following persons
(Box  1):  Testing  is  recommended  for  the  following  persons  (Box  1):  Providers  should
follow  these  recommendations  when  offering  screening  and  testing:  Additional
screening  might  be  recommended  for  certain  populations,  including  blood  donors,
newly arrived refugees, and persons initiating cytotoxic or immunosuppressive therapy,
and additional testing might be recommended for patients on hemodialysis, health care
personnel,  perinatally  exposed  infants,  and  persons  involved  in  exposure  events  that
might  warrant  postexposure  prophylaxis  and  postvaccination  serologic  testing.
Recommendations for these groups are described elsewhere (14,15,104,106–110). The
new  recommendation  described  in  this  report  to  include  a  total  anti-HBc  test  during
universal adult screening will support identification of persons with past HBV infection
who should be aware of their risk for reactivation in the context of immunosuppression.
Frequency  of  periodic  testing  should  be  a  shared  decision  between  the  patient  and
provider  and  based  on  individual  risk  factors,  including  age  and  immune  status.  For
periodic testing, providers should consider using the triple panel test or AASLD’s testing
strategies (e.g., anti-HBc followed by HBsAg and anti-HBs, if positive). Having multiple
sex  partners  can  increase  the  risk  for  exposure  to  HBV  and  other  STIs;  however,
evidence  is  insufficient  to  specify  the  number  of  sex  partners  and  the  optimal  time
frame for screening to identify cases of chronic infection. Thus, clinical judgment should
be used to determine risk for exposure with consideration of the number of partners,
type of sex, frequency of sex, and timing of the last serologic test when recommending
testing for persons with multiple sex partners. In the interest of completing adult HBV
screening,  prenatal  visits  are  an  opportunity  to  offer  the  triple  panel  to  a  pregnant
person  and  link  the  patient  to  care  or  vaccinate  as  needed.  Pregnant  persons  with  a
history  of  appropriately  timed  triple  panel  screening  and  without  subsequent  risk  for
exposure to HBV (i.e., no new HBV exposures since triple panel screening) only need
HBsAg screening. Testing pregnant persons known to be chronically infected or immune
enables documentation of the HBsAg test result during that pregnancy to ensure timely
prophylaxis  for  exposed  infants.  Universal  screening  complements  a  robust  HepB
vaccination  program.  Documentation  of  HepB  vaccine  administration  in  the  medical
record provides verification of vaccination. Per ACIP recommendations, providers should
only accept dated records as evidence of HepB vaccination (15). For persons who are
unvaccinated or partially vaccinated (e.g., did not complete a full series), HepB vaccine
should be administered immediately after collection of the blood for serologic testing.
Persons  with  evidence  of  active  HBV  infection  (i.e.,  HBsAg  positive)  or  a  past  HBV
infection  (i.e.,  total  anti-HBc  positive)  do  not  need  additional  vaccine  doses  (15).
Patients with acute infection should be counseled about their risk for developing chronic
HBV  infection,  the  risk  for  reactivation,  and  the  risk  for  transmission  to  others.
Treatment for acute HBV infection is not typically indicated except among patients with
severe  disease  (11).  Persons  who  receive  a  diagnosis  of  chronic  HBV  infection  can
benefit  from  monitoring  and  counseling,  including  mental  health  support  (111).  CDC
treatment  guidelines  have  not  been  developed  and  are  beyond  the  scope  of  these
screening guidelines. However, AASLD has guidance for the monitoring and treatment
of chronic HBV infection (11). Simplified guidance for primary care medical providers or
other nonspecialists is available from the Hepatitis B Primary Care Workgroup (Table 2)
(112).  All  patients  who  test  positive  for  active  HBV  infection  should  be  provided
information on how to prevent transmission to others (Box 5). Notification, testing, and
vaccination of their household contacts or former household contacts, sex partners, and
needle-sharing  contacts  are  recommended,  as  appropriate.  As  resources  allow,  viral
hepatitis or STI programs within local or state health departments might be available to
support  providers  with  contact  tracing  and  notification.  Persons  living  with  HBV
infection have rights protected under the Americans with Disabilities Act (113). Persons
should  not  be  excluded  from  practicing  in  the  health  care  field  or  from  school,  play,
child  care,  work,  or  other  settings  because  of  their  HBV  infection  (114,115).  Patients
should  be  counseled  about  their  history  of  HBV  infection  and  risk  for  reactivation.
Therapies  with  the  highest  risk  for  reactivation  include  B-cell  depleting  agents  (e.g.,
rituximab  and  ofatumumab).  American  Society  of  Clinical  Oncology  and  AASLD
guidelines  have  more  information  on  therapies  and  conditions  associated  with
increased
 risk
 for
 reactivation,
 as
 well
 as
 recommendations
 for
 treatment
(11,109,116,117).
 Antiviral
 therapy
 for
 HBV
 infection,
 when
 initiated
 before
immunosuppressive or cytotoxic therapy, can prevent reactivation of disease (118). The
systematic  review  indicated  the  prevalence  of  resolved  HBV  infection  (i.e.,  HBsAg
negative and anti-HBc positive) in the general population ranges from 4.8% to 14.0%
(median = 6.2%). Notification, testing, and vaccination of household, sex partners, and
needle-sharing contacts of patients with HBV infection or a history of HBV infection are
recommended, as appropriate. Persons who are susceptible to HBV infection should be
told  that  they  have  never  been  infected  with  HBV  and  are  not  protected  from  future
infection. All persons who are susceptible to infection should be offered HepB vaccine
per  ACIP  recommendations  (59).  Anti-HBs  concentrations  can  wane  over  time  among
vaccine responders. For persons with a clearly documented vaccination series who test
negative  for  anti-HBs,  refer  to  Prevention  of  Hepatitis  B  Virus  Infection  in  the  United
States: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (15).
Vaccine should be offered to persons who have initiated, but not completed, the HepB
vaccine  series,  regardless  of  anti-HBs  status.  HepB  vaccine  series  completion  is
important  for  long-term  immunogenicity.  Persons  who  are  susceptible,  refuse
vaccination, and are at increased risk for HBV infection should be periodically tested.
Frequency  of  periodic  testing  should  be  a  shared  decision  between  the  patient  and
provider  and  be  based  on  individual  risk  factors  and  immune  status.  Persons  are
considered fully vaccinated if they have completed a HepB vaccine series and can be
reassured about protection against future illness. Vaccination status should be clearly
documented in the medical record. Anti-HBs concentrations can wane over time among
vaccine responders (20). For persons with a clearly documented vaccination series who
test negative for anti-HBs, refer to Prevention of Hepatitis B Virus Infection in the United
States:  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  for
specific populations for whom revaccination might be recommended (e.g., patients on
hemodialysis) (15). Revaccination or booster doses are not routinely recommended for
persons  who  are  immunocompetent  (15).  Persons  with  isolated  anti-HBc  should  have
their  immune  status  and  risk  history  considered  before  deciding  next  steps.  Links  to
performance  characteristics  on  all  FDA-approved  total  anti-HBc  assays  are  available
(Supplementary  Table  21,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/124432).  The  specificity  of
total anti-HBc tests is 99.8% (119,120). However, if a person does not have risk factors,
the result might be a false positive; repeat testing with the same assay is warranted to
confirm  the  results  (121).  A  false-positive  isolated  core  antibody  result  means  the
person  is  susceptible  and  should  be  offered  HepB  vaccine  per  current  ACIP
recommendations (105). A 2001–2018 national survey found the prevalence of isolated
positive anti-HBc to be 0.8% (approximately 2.1 million persons) (122). Among patients
exposed  to  HBV,  an  isolated  positive  anti-HBc  result  might  be  the  result  of  loss  of
anti-HBs after past resolved infection, occult infection (i.e., HBsAg is negative, but HBV
DNA  is  positive),  being  in  the  window  period  before  appearance  of  anti-HBs,  or  an
HBsAg mutant infection (i.e., an infection that is not picked up by an HBsAg test unable
to detect mutants). Patients who are immunosuppressed should be considered at risk
for  HBV  reactivation,  and  HBV  DNA  testing  is  recommended  to  assess  for  occult
infection  (11).  Among  infants,  an  isolated  anti-HBc  result  might  be  a  consequence  of
passive  placental  transfer  from  an  HBsAg-positive  mother,  which  is  why  testing  for
anti-HBc  is  not  indicated  before  age  24  months  (15).  Patient  education  should  be
conducted  in  a  culturally  sensitive,  nonstigmatizing  manner  in  the  patient’s  primary
language (both written and oral whenever possible). Bilingual, bicultural, and medically
trained  interpreters  should  be  used  when  indicated.  Acute  and  chronic  cases  of  HBV
infection  should  be  reported  to  the  appropriate  state  or  local  health  jurisdiction  in
accordance  with  requirements.  The  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists
publishes  case  definitions  for  the  classification  of  reportable  cases  of  HBV  infection
(123,124).  CDC  has  updated  guidance  for  health  departments  on  viral  hepatitis
surveillance  and  case  management  (125).  Top  USPSTF,  AASLD,  and  ACP  also  have
published HBV screening recommendations. The 2021 USPSTF systematic review found
that  no  study  directly  evaluated  the  effects  of  screening  for  HBV  infection  on  clinical
outcomes and that risk-based screening strategies identify nearly all patients with HBV
infection (126). USPSTF recommends screening adolescents and adults at increased risk
for HBV infection with HBsAg tests. Although the work group did not identify any studies
directly comparing the effects of universal screening versus risk-based screening, the
cost-effectiveness analysis, indirect evidence on the effects of screening, practicality of
implementing  guidelines,  public  health  benefits,  and  subject  matter  expertise  were
considered.  The  work  group  concluded  that  the  benefits  of  universal  screening
outweighed the costs. AASLD also recommends screening persons at increased risk for
infection; however, this guidance primarily is based on previous CDC recommendations.
AASLD  guidance  differs  from  CDC  guidance  by  recommending  screening  of
unvaccinated  persons  with  diabetes  aged  19–49  years,  travelers  to  countries  with
intermediate or high prevalence of HBV infection, and residents and staff of facilities for
developmentally  disabled  persons  (11).  CDC  recommends  universal  adult  screening,
but  not  periodic  testing,  for  these  groups.  AASLD  also  only  recommends  anti-HBc
testing for certain groups (11). In their best practice advice, ACP and CDC recommend
testing persons at increased risk for HBV infection with tests for HBsAg, total anti-HBc,
and  anti-HBs  (121).  The  ACP  best  practice  risk  groups  align  with  current  testing
recommendations except that ACP omits persons with a history of STIs or multiple sex
partners  (Box  4).  CDC  screening  guidelines  were  developed  independently  from  the
ACIP  recommendations  for  HepB  vaccination.  The  2018  ACIP  recommendations  also
include  recommendations  for  serologic  testing  (15).  CDC’s  screening  and  testing
guidelines  cover  all  persons  recommended  for  serologic  testing  per  ACIP  and  expand
beyond  that  list  (Box  1).  When  considering  prevaccination  testing  or  testing  for  HBV
infection, CDC recommends testing that follows a universal testing approach (Figure 2).
The work group did not evaluate clinical guidance for patients after screening. The most
recent  expert  guidance  to  reduce  the  risk  for  liver  damage  is  that  patients  with  HBV
infection should be vaccinated against hepatitis A virus (if not already immune) (112);
screened for HIV, HCV, and hepatitis D virus (HDV) (112); and assessed for alcohol risk
factors, such as with the alcohol screening and brief intervention (127). Depending on
the  likely  route  of  transmission,  the  patient  might  benefit  from  STI  screening,  drug
treatment,  or  harm-reduction  counseling.  A  full  list  of  recommended  steps  for
examination,  education,  laboratory,  serology,  and  imaging  is  provided  (Table  2).
Additional screening might be recommended for blood donors, newly arrived refugees,
and persons initiating cytotoxic or immunosuppressive and additional testing might be
recommended for patients on hemodialysis, health care personnel, perinatally exposed
infants,  and  persons  involved  in  exposure  events  who  might  warrant  postexposure
prophylaxis  and  postvaccination  serologic  testing.  These  recommendations  are
described
 elsewhere
 (14,15,104,106–110).
 Providers
 should
 follow
 the
 most
conservative  approach  when  recommendations  differ.  Top  CDC  will  review  these
recommendations as new treatments, tests, epidemiology, HepB vaccination rates, and
experience gained from implementation of these recommendations become available;
recommendations  will  be  revised  as  needed.  The  work  group  did  not  conduct  a
systematic review to reassess any of the groups at increased risk for HBV infection from
the 2008 guidelines; future recommendations might modify the groups recommended
for periodic testing. Additional data on the ideal frequency of periodic testing is needed.
Continued  collaboration  with  laboratories  to  bundle  the  three  HBV  tests  (HBsAg,
anti-HBs, and anti-HBc) would facilitate ordering the tests together as a triple panel. In
addition,  reporting  a  triple  panel  summary  result  will  aid  providers  in  correctly
interpreting  results.  Finally,  a  better  understanding  of  the  prevalence  of  HDV  in  the
United States is needed to inform recommendations for HDV screening among persons
with HBV infection. Top Universal screening of adults for HBV infection is cost-effective
compared with risk-based screening and averts liver disease and death (56). Although a
curative treatment is not yet available, early diagnosis and treatment of chronic HBV
infections  reduces  the  risk  for  cirrhosis,  liver  cancer,  and  death  (10,11).  Risk-based
testing alone has not identified most persons living with chronic HBV infection and is
inefficient  for  providers  to  implement.  Along  with  vaccination  strategies,  universal
screening  of  adults  and  appropriate  testing  of  persons  at  increased  risk  for  HBV
infection will improve health outcomes, reduce the prevalence of HBV infection in the
United States, and advance viral hepatitis elimination goals. Top Saleem Kamili, Susan
Ingber, Olivia Russell, Greta Tessman, National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and
TB  Prevention,  Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,  CDC.  Karina  Rapposelli,  Division  of  Viral
Hepatitis, National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; Amy L.
Sandul, Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB
Prevention,  CDC;  start  highlightElisa  Choi,  Harvard  Vanguard  Medical  Associates
Somerville  and  American  College  of  Physicians;end  highlight  Carla  Coffin,  Calvin,
Phoebe and Joan Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Cumming School of Medicine,
University of Calgary and Calgary Liver Unit, Calgary Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Alberta Health Services; Kristen Marks, Division of Infectious Disease, Weill
Cornell  Medical  College;  David  L.  Thomas,  Johns  Hopkins  School  of  Medicine  and
Bloomberg School of Public Health; Su H. Wang, Cooperman Barnabas Medical Center
and RWJ Barnabas-Rutgers Medical Group. Top Corresponding author: Erin E. Conners,
Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis,  National  Center  for  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB
Prevention, CDC. Telephone: 404-718-7086; Email: econners@cdc.gov. Top 1Division of
Viral  Hepatitis,  National  Center  for  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC
Top All authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts
of interest were reported. Top * Pregnant person refers to anyone who can give birth,
regardless of gender, because these recommendations are inclusive of persons of any
gender
(https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/about-uspstf/methods-and-processes).
Top  Top  Universal  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  screening  Screening  pregnant  persons
Risk-based  testing  *  Source:  Schillie  S,  Vellozzi  C,  Reingold  A,  et  al.  Prevention  of
hepatitis  B  virus  infection  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2018;67(No. RR-1):1–31. †
Susceptible persons include those who have never been infected with HBV (i.e., total
anti-HBc  negative)  and  either  did  not  complete  a  HepB  vaccine  series  per  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  recommendations  or  who  are  known  to  be
vaccine
 nonresponders.
 Top
 Abbreviations:
 ACIP
 =
 Advisory
 Committee
 on
Immunization  Practices;  anti-HBs  =  antibody  to  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen;  HBcAg  =
hepatitis B core antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV = hepatitis B virus;
HepB  =  hepatitis  B;  IgG  =  immunoglobulin  G;  IgM  anti-HBc  =  immunoglobulin  M
antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen; total anti-HBc = total antibody to hepatitis B core
antigen.
* Total anti-HBc is a measure of both IgM and IgG antibodies to HBcAg.
† Source: Abara WE, Qaseem A, Schillie S, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination, screening, and
linkage to care: best practice advice from the American College of Physicians and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ann Intern Med 2017;167:794–804.
§  IgM  anti-HBc  also  might  be  positive  in  persons  with  chronic  infection  during  severe
HBV infection flares or reactivation.
¶ Immune if anti-HBs concentration is >10 mIU/mL after vaccine series completion.
** Anti-HBs concentrations might wane over time among vaccine responders (Source:
Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the
United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.
MMWR Recomm Rep 2018;67[No. RR-1]:1–31).
††  Can  be  the  result  of  a  past  infection  when  anti-HBs  levels  have  waned,  occult
infection, passive transfer of anti-HBc to an infant born to an HBsAg-positive gestational
parent,  a  false  positive,  or  mutant  HBsAg  strain  that  is  not  detectable  by  laboratory
assay.  Top  Source:  Adapted  from  Weinbaum  CM,  Williams  I,  Mast  EE,  et  al.;  CDC.
Recommendations  for  identification  and  public  health  management  of  persons  with
chronic  hepatitis  B  virus  infection.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2008;57(No.  RR-8):1–20.
Abbreviations: anti-HBc = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBe = antibody to
hepatitis  B  e  antigen;  anti-HBs  =  antibody  to  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen;  HBeAg  =
hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV = hepatitis B virus; IgM
=  immunoglobulin  M.  Top  Top  Source:  Polaris  Observatory  [Internet].  Lafayette,  CO:
Center  for  Disease  Analysis  Foundation;  2021.  https://cdafound.org/polaris  Top
Abbreviations:  ACIP  =  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices;  anti-HBc  =
antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen;
HBV = hepatitis B virus; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HepB = hepatitis B. Top
Top  Source:  Table  adapted  from  Tang  AS,  Thornton  K;  Hepatitis  B  Primary  Care
Workgroup. Hepatitis B management: guidance for the primary care provider. Seattle,
WA: University of Washington National Hepatitis Training Center; 2020.
Abbreviations:  AFP  =  alpha  fetoprotein;  anti-HAV  =  antibody  to  hepatitis  A  virus;
anti-HBe = antibody to hepatitis B e antigen; anti-HCV = antibody to hepatitis C virus;
anti-HDV = antibody to hepatitis D virus; APRI = AST to platelet ratio index; AST/ALT =
aspartate  aminotransferase/alanine  aminotransferase;  CBC  =  complete  blood  count;
HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV = hepatitis B
virus; INR = international normalized ratio; STI = sexually transmitted infection.
* More than seven alcoholic drinks/week for women and more than 14 drinks/week for
men is associated with increased risk for liver disease (Source: Terrault NA, Lok ASF,
McMahon BJ, et al. Update on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of chronic hepatitis
B: AASLD 2018 hepatitis B guidance. Hepatology 2018;67:1560–99).
† Source: AASLD Practice Guidelines (https://www.aasld.org/practice-guidelines).
§ Ultrasound for hepatocellular carcinoma surveillance has higher diagnostic accuracy
than  AFP;  therefore,  AFP  alone  is  not  recommended  except  when  ultrasound  is
unavailable or unaffordable (Source: Terrault NA, Lok ASF, McMahon BJ, et al. Update on
prevention,  diagnosis,  and  treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  B:  AASLD  2018  hepatitis  B
guidance.  Hepatology  2018;67:1560–99).  Top  *  Source:  Rutala  WA,  Weber  DJ;
Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee.  Guideline  for  disinfection
and sterilization in healthcare facilities, 2008. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and
Human Services, CDC; 2008. https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/47378 † Source: Schillie S,
Vellozzi  C,  Reingold  A,  et  al.  Prevention  of  hepatitis  B  virus  infection  in  the  United
States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR
Recomm Rep 2018;67:(No. RR-1):1–31. Top Suggested citation for this article: Conners
EE,  Panagiotakopoulos  L,  Hofmeister  MG,  et  al.  Screening  and  Testing  for  Hepatitis  B
Virus  Infection:  CDC  Recommendations  —  United  States,  2023.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep
2023;72(No. RR-1):1–25. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7201a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/rr/rr7201a1.htm
