A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Rubella-virus  specific  IgM  antibodies  (rubella  IgM)  develop  shortly  after  primary
infection  or  vaccination.  Rubella-virus  specific  IgG  antibodies  (rubella  IgG)  become
detectable by day four after rash onset in rubella infections and reach peak levels in the
following one to two weeks. While rubella IgM persists for up to three months, rubella
IgG can last a lifetime. Although rubella was officially declared to be eliminated from
the United States in 2004, ongoing rubella activity in many other countries can result in
imported  sporadic  U.S.  cases  or  outbreaks.   Detection  of  specific  IgM  antibodies  in  a
serum  sample  collected  within  the  first  few  days  after  rash  onset  can  provide
presumptive  evidence  of  a  recent  rubella  virus  infection.  The  optimum  time-point  for
collection  of  serum  is  five  days  after  the  onset  of  symptoms  (fever  and  rash)  when
>90% of cases will be IgM positive. On the day of rash onset only about 50% of cases
are  IgM  positive.  Therefore,  if  serum  that  collected  less  than  five  days  after  onset  is
negative,  a  second  sample  would  be  necessary  to  confirm  or  rule  out  rubella.  When
CDC  receives  serum  samples  to  test  for  clinically  suspected  rubella,  CDC  also
determines  the  anti-rubella  IgM  or  IgG  status  for  each  sample  to  aid  in  case
classification.  The  interpretation  of  rubella  laboratory  results  must  always  take  into
account  relevant  clinical  and  epidemiological  data.  Since  no  assay  is  100%  specific,
serology testing of non-rubella cases occasionally produces false positive IgM results. In
the  United  States  where  endemic  circulation  of  wild-type  rubella  virus  has  been
eliminated  and  the  chance  of  contracting  the  disease  domestically  is  low,  most
suspected  cases  are  not  rubella.   Rash  and  fever  illnesses  are  more  likely  due  to  a
number of other rash–causing illnesses such as parvovirus B19, enteroviruses such as
coxsackieviruses and echoviruses, or human herpesvirus–6 (roseola). The presence of
rheumatoid factor can also result in a false positive IgM. Due to the possibility of false
positive results, IgM should not be included in routine testing to determine evidence of
prior rubella immunity. It is important to distinguish IgM reactivity caused by primary
infection  from  that  caused  by  IgM  persistence  or  cross-reactivity  with  other  antigens,
especially in pregnant people. The measurement of rubella IgG antibody avidity can be
used  to  distinguish  between  recent  exposure  to  rubella  and  more  distant  rubella
exposure.  Antibody  avidity  (the  overall  strength  of  binding  between  the  antigen  and
antibody) increases with time; this is known as maturation of the immune response. As
the  immune  response  matures,  low  avidity  antibodies  are  replaced  with  high  avidity
antibodies.  Avidity differences can be detected by using protein denaturants such as
diethylamine  (DEA)  in  the  washing  step  of  an  enzyme-linked  immunoassay  (EIA)  for
rubella IgG.  The cut-off between low and high avidities has to be established by using
standardized  sera  and  a  particular  EIA  kit.  Detection  of  rubella  IgM  by  enzyme
immunoassay  (EIA)  is  used  to  confirm  suspected  cases  of  acute  rubella  infection  and
congenital rubella syndrome (CRS). IgM is typically detectable between 4 and 30 days
after rash onset in acute rubella infection and for up to six months after birth in CRS
cases. A person may also be rubella IgM positive after recent vaccination. Detection of
rubella IgG by EIA is used to assess immunity to rubella. EIA can reliably detect rubella
IgG  concentrations  greater  than  10  IU/ml,  which  is  the  cutoff  for  defining  rubella
immunity  used  in  the  United  States.  Rubella  IgG  serology  testing  should  be  used  for
assessing rubella immunity before, during, and after pregnancy. Routine IgM screening
of  pregnant  people  is  not  recommended.  Rubella  IgM  testing  in  asymptomatic,
unexposed pregnant people is inappropriate because false positive results can occur,
which can be misleading. Rubella IgM testing in pregnant people should be limited to
suspected rubella cases. However, providers sometimes inappropriately order IgM tests
to  assess  rubella  immunity.  CRS  was  eliminated  from  the  United  States  in  2004,  but
cases  can  still  be  imported  by  pregnant  people  who  contract  rubella  in  an  endemic
country. In rare cases, CRS can occur in the United States when susceptible pregnant
people  are  exposed  to  confirmed  rubella  cases.  CRS  cases  can  be  diagnosed  in
newborns and young infants using detection of rubella IgM. Suspected cases should be
tested as close to birth as possible and again at 1 month of age if the initial IgM test is
negative. If paired sera are to be collected, the second sample should be collected 14 to
21  days  after  the  acute  specimen  was  collected.  At  3  months  of  age,  approximately
50% of cases would still have detectable rubella IgM in their serum. Additionally, the
presence of rubella IgG in an infant after the decline of maternal antibodies (9 months
of age) and the absence of vaccination or exposure to rubella will confirm CRS. If IgM
testing  is  inappropriately  performed  and  an  IgM  positive  result  is  obtained  for  an
asymptomatic  pregnant  patient  with  no  history  of  rubella  exposure,  the  IgM  positive
result should be confirmed by retesting in a different laboratory with a different EIA test
format.  Preferably,  testing  should  be  performed  by  an  IgM  capture  EIA  because  IgM
capture assays are more specific than indirect IgM EIA assays. Testing for rubella IgG
avidity  can  be  used  to  distinguish  between  recent  exposure  to  rubella  and  a  more
distant  exposure.  Avidity  testing  is  most  useful  in  early  pregnancy  to  help  rule  out  a
rubella infection in the first trimester, when the risk of congenital defects due to rubella
is highest. It is not as useful in late pregnancy because avidity will be high by the third
trimester  if  infection  occurred  in  the  first  trimester.  Rubella  reverse  transcription
polymerase  chain  reaction  (RT-PCR)  assay  can  also  be  used  to  confirm  acute  rubella
infection, but its utility is limited because of the narrow window when the virus can be
detected  in  clinical  samples  in  acquired  rubella  cases.  In  respiratory  samples,  rubella
RNA  is  typically  detectable  from  two  days  before  rash  onset  to  four  days  after  rash
onset.  In  elimination  settings,  the  positive  predictive  value  of  rubella  RT-PCR  in  a
respiratory  sample  from  an  asymptomatic,  IgM-positive  pregnant  patient  is  low.
Currently used rubella RT-PCR assays have not been validated for testing amniotic fluid
or  other  fetal  specimens  and  should  not  be  used  for  confirmation  of  suspected  CRS.
Although  amniotic  fluid  has  been  considered  for  detection  of  rubella  RNA  by  RT-PCR
when  fetal  infection  is  suspected,  the  sensitivity  of  this  method  is  less  than  86%,
particularly  before  the  21st  week  of  gestation.  RT-PCR  assays  on  throat  swabs,
nasopharyngeal swabs, and urine specimens from a neonate are used for confirmation
of suspected CRS cases. Rubella is contagious. Most children and adults usually have
mild  illness  with  a  rash  starting  on  the  face.  Protect  yourself  with  the  MMR  vaccine.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/rubella/php/laboratories/serology-testing.html
