Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Recommendations and Reports / July 23, 2021 / 70(4);1–187
Please note: This report has been corrected. An erratum has been published. Kimberly
A.  Workowski,  MD1,2;  Laura  H.  Bachmann,  MD1;  Philip  A.  Chan,  MD1,3;  Christine  M.
Johnston,  MD1,4;  Christina  A.  Muzny,  MD1,5;  Ina  Park,  MD1,6;  Hilary  Reno,  MD1,7;
Jonathan M. Zenilman, MD1,8; Gail A. Bolan, MD1 (View author affiliations) Views equals
page views plus PDF downloads Box 1 Box 2 Box 3 Box 4 Box 5 Table 1 Table 2 Table 3
Table 4 Table 5 Table 6 Table 7 Table 8   These guidelines for the treatment of persons
who have or are at risk for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) were updated by CDC
after  consultation  with  professionals  knowledgeable  in  the  field  of  STIs  who  met  in
Atlanta,  Georgia,  June  11–14,  2019.  The  information  in  this  report  updates  the  2015
guidelines.  These  guidelines  discuss  1)  updated  recommendations  for  treatment  of  
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, and  Trichomonas vaginalis; 2) addition
of  metronidazole  to  the  recommended  treatment  regimen  for  pelvic  inflammatory
disease;  3)  alternative  treatment  options  for  bacterial  vaginosis;  4)  management  of
Mycoplasma  genitalium;  5)  human  papillomavirus  vaccine  recommendations  and
counseling  messages;  6)  expanded  risk  factors  for  syphilis  testing  among  pregnant
women; 7) one-time testing for hepatitis C infection; 8) evaluation of men who have sex
with men after sexual assault; and 9) two-step testing for serologic diagnosis of genital
herpes  simplex  virus.  Physicians  and  other  health  care  providers  can  use  these
guidelines  to  assist  in  prevention  and  treatment  of  STIs.  Top  The  term  “sexually
transmitted infection” (STI) refers to a pathogen that causes infection through sexual
contact, whereas the term “sexually transmitted disease” (STD) refers to a recognizable
disease  state  that  has  developed  from  an  infection.  Physicians  and  other  health  care
providers  have  a  crucial  role  in  preventing  and  treating  STIs.  These  guidelines  are
intended  to  assist  with  that  effort.  Although  the  guidelines  emphasize  treatment,
prevention strategies and diagnostic recommendations also are discussed. This report
updates Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines, 2015 (1) and should be
regarded  as  a  source  of  clinical  guidance  rather  than  prescriptive  standards.  Health
care providers should always consider the clinical circumstances of each person in the
context of local disease prevalence. These guidelines are applicable to any patient care
setting that serves persons at risk for STIs, including family planning clinics, HIV care
clinics, correctional health care settings, private physicians’ offices, Federally Qualified
Health  Centers,  clinics  for  adolescent  care,  and  other  primary  care  facilities.  These
guidelines  are  focused  on  treatment  and  counseling  and  do  not  address  other
community  services  and  interventions  that  are  essential  to  STI  and  HIV  prevention
efforts.  These  STI  treatment  guidelines  complement  Recommendations  for  Providing
Quality  Sexually  Transmitted  Diseases  Clinical  Services,  2020  (2)  regarding  quality
clinical services for STIs in primary care and STD specialty care settings. This guidance
specifies  operational  determinants  of  quality  services  in  various  clinical  settings,
describes  on-site  treatment  and  partner  services,  and  indicates  when  STI-related
conditions should be managed through consultation with or referral to a specialist. Top
These guidelines were developed by CDC staff who worked with subject matter experts
with
 expertise
 in
 STI
 clinical
 management
 from
 other
 federal
 agencies,
nongovernmental  academic  and  research  institutions,  and  professional  medical
organizations. CDC staff identified governmental and nongovernmental subject matter
experts  on  the  basis  of  their  expertise  and  assisted  them  in  developing  questions  to
guide individual literature reviews. CDC staff informed the subject matter experts that
they  were  being  consulted  to  exchange  information  and  observations  and  to  obtain
their individual input. All subject matter experts disclosed potential conflicts of interest.
STI  Treatment  Guidelines,  2021,  Work  Group  members  are  listed  at  the  end  of  this
report.  In  2018,  CDC  staff  identified  key  questions  about  treatment  and  clinical
management to guide an update of the 2015 STD treatment guidelines (1). To answer
these questions and synthesize new information available since publication of the 2015
guidelines,  subject  matter  experts  and  CDC  staff  collaborated  to  conduct  systematic
literature reviews by using an extensive MEDLINE database evidence-based approach
for  each  section  of  the  2015  guidelines  (e.g.,  using  English-language  published
abstracts and peer reviewed journal articles). These systematic reviews were focused
on four principal outcomes of STI therapy for each disease or infection: 1) treatment of
infection  on  the  basis  of  microbiologic  eradication;  2)  alleviation  of  signs  and
symptoms;  3)  prevention  of  sequelae;  and  4)  prevention  of  transmission,  including
advantages  (e.g.,  cost-effectiveness,  single-dose  formulations,  and  directly  observed
therapy) and disadvantages (e.g., adverse effects) of specific regimens. The outcome of
the literature reviews guided development of background materials, including tables of
evidence  from  peer-reviewed  publications  summarizing  the  type  of  study  (e.g.,
randomized controlled trial or case series), study population and setting, treatments or
other  interventions,  outcome  measures  assessed,  reported  findings,  and  weaknesses
and  biases  in  study  design  and  analysis.  In  June  2019,  the  subject  matter  experts
presented  their  assessments  of  the  literature  reviews  at  an  in-person  meeting  of
governmental and nongovernmental participants. Each key question was discussed and
pertinent publications were reviewed in terms of strengths, weaknesses, and relevance.
Participants  evaluated  the  quality  of  evidence,  provided  their  input,  and  discussed
findings  in  the  context  of  the  modified  rating  system  used  by  the  U.S.  Preventive
Services  Task  Force  (USPSTF).  The  discussions  were  informal  and  not  structured  to
reach  consensus.  CDC  staff  also  reviewed  the  publications  from  other  professional
organizations,  including  the  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists
(ACOG),  USPSTF,  the  American  Cancer  Society  (ACS),  the  American  Society  for
Colposcopy  and  Cervical  Pathology  (ASCCP),  and  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  The  discussion  culminated  in  a  list  of  participants’
opinions  on  all  the  key  STI  topic  areas  for  consideration  by  CDC.  (More  detailed
descriptions  of  the  key  questions,  search  terms,  systematic  search,  evidence  tables,
and
 review
 process
 are
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/default.htm).
 CDC
 staff
 then
independently reviewed the tables of evidence prepared by the subject matter experts,
individual comments from the participants and professional organizations, and existing
guidelines  from  other  organizations  to  determine  whether  revisions  to  the  2015  STD
treatment guidelines were warranted. CDC staff ranked evidence as high, medium, and
low  on  the  basis  of  each  study’s  strengths  and  weaknesses  according  to  the  USPSTF
ratings
(https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/us-preventive-services-task-forc
e-ratings). CDC staff then developed draft recommendations that were peer reviewed
by  public  health  and  clinical  experts  as  defined  by  the  Office  of  Management  and
Budget  for  influential  scientific  information.  A  public  webinar  was  held  to  provide  an
overview of the draft recommendations and invite questions and comments on the draft
recommendations. The peer review comments, webinar, questions, and responses were
considered by CDC staff in developing the final recommendations for the updated STI
treatment guidelines. Recommendations for HIV, hepatitis C, cervical cancer screening,
STI screening in pregnancy, human papillomavirus (HPV) testing, and hepatitis A virus
(HAV) and hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccination were developed after CDC staff reviewed
existing  published  recommendations.  The  English-language  literature  was  searched
periodically  by  CDC  staff  to  identify  subsequently  published  articles  warranting
consideration.  Throughout  this  report,  the  evidence  used  as  the  basis  for  specific
recommendations  is  discussed  briefly.  Publication  of  comprehensive,  annotated
discussions of such evidence is planned in a supplemental issue of the journal Clinical
Infectious Diseases after publication of the treatment guidelines. When more than one
therapeutic regimen is recommended and the listed regimens have similar efficacy and
similar rates of intolerance or toxicity, the recommendations are listed alphabetically. If
differences  are  specified,  regimens  are  prioritized  on  the  basis  of  these  differences.
Recommended  regimens  should  be  used  primarily;  alternative  regimens  can  be
considered in instances of notable drug allergy or other medical contraindications to the
recommended regimens. Alternative regimens are considered inferior to recommended
regimens  on  the  basis  of  available  evidence  regarding  the  principal  outcomes  and
disadvantages  of  the  regimens.  Top  Prevention  and  control  of  STIs  are  based  on  the
following five major strategies (3): Primary prevention of STIs includes assessment of
behavioral risk (i.e., assessing the sexual behaviors that can place persons at risk for
infection) and biologic risk (i.e., testing for risk markers for STI and HIV acquisition or
transmission). As part of the clinical encounter, health care providers should routinely
obtain  sexual  histories  from  their  patients  and  address  risk  reduction  as  indicated  in
this report. Guidance for obtaining a sexual history is available at the Division of STD
Prevention  resource  page  (https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/resources.htm)  and  in
the  curriculum  provided  by  the  National  Network  of  STD  Clinical  Prevention  Training
Centers
 (https://www.nnptc.org).
 Effective
 interviewing
 and
 counseling
 skills,
characterized  by  respect,  compassion,  and  a  nonjudgmental  attitude  toward  all
patients, are essential to obtaining a thorough sexual history and delivering effective
prevention messages. Effective techniques for facilitating rapport with patients include
using  open-ended  questions  (e.g.,  “Tell  me  about  any  new  sex  partners  you’ve  had
since your last visit” and “What has your experience with using condoms been like?”);
understandable, nonjudgmental language (e.g., “What gender are your sex partners?”
and  “Have  you  ever  had  a  sore  or  scab  on  your  penis?”);  and  normalizing  language
(e.g., “Some of my patients have difficulty using a condom with every sex act. How is it
for  you?”).  The  “Five  P’s”  approach  to  obtaining  a  sexual  history  is  one  strategy  for
eliciting  information  about  the  key  areas  of  interest  (Box  1).  In  addition,  health  care
professionals can consider assessing sexual history by asking patients such questions
as,  “Do  you  have  any  questions  or  concerns  about  your  sexual  health?”  Additional
information about gaining cultural competency when working with certain populations
(e.g., gay, bisexual, or other men who have sex with men [MSM]; women who have sex
with women [WSW] or with women and men [WSWM]; or transgender men and women
or adolescents) is available in sections of these guidelines related to these populations.
In addition to obtaining a behavioral risk assessment, a comprehensive STI and HIV risk
assessment should include STI screening as recommended in these guidelines because
STIs  are  biologic  markers  of  risk,  particularly  for  HIV  acquisition  and  transmission
among  certain  MSM.  In  most  clinical  settings,  STI  screening  is  an  essential  and
underused component of an STI and HIV risk assessment. Persons seeking treatment or
evaluation for a particular STI should be screened for HIV and other STIs as indicated by
community  prevalence  and  individual  risk  factors  (see  Chlamydial  Infections;
Gonococcal Infections; Syphilis). Persons should be informed about all the tests for STIs
they  are  receiving  and  notified  about  tests  for  common  STIs  (e.g.,  genital  herpes,
trichomoniasis,  Mycoplasma  genitalium,  and  HPV)  that  are  available  but  not  being
performed and reasons why they are not always indicated. Persons should be informed
of their test results and recommendations for future testing. Efforts should be made to
ensure  that  all  persons  receive  STI  care  regardless  of  personal  circumstances  (e.g.,
ability to pay, citizenship or immigration status, gender identity, language spoken, or
specific sex practices). After obtaining a sexual history from their patients, all providers
should  encourage  risk  reduction  by  offering  prevention  counseling.  Prevention
counseling  is  most  effective  if  provided  in  a  nonjudgmental  and  empathetic  manner
appropriate  to  the  patient’s  culture,  language,  sex  and  gender  identity,  sexual
orientation,  age,  and  developmental  level.  Prevention  counseling  for  STIs  and  HIV
should be offered to all sexually active adolescents and to all adults who have received
an STI diagnosis, have had an STI during the previous year, or have had multiple sex
partners.  USPSTF  recommends  intensive  behavioral  counseling  for  all  sexually  active
adolescents  and  for  adults  at  increased  risk  for  STIs  and  HIV  (4).  Such  interactive
counseling,  which  can  be  resource  intensive,  is  directed  at  a  person’s  risk,  the
situations in which risk occurs, and the use of personalized goal-setting strategies. One
such approach, known as client-centered STI and HIV prevention counseling, involves
tailoring  a  discussion  of  risk  reduction  to  the  person’s  situation.  Although  one  large
study in STI clinics (Project RESPECT) demonstrated that this approach was associated
with lower acquisition of curable STIs (e.g., trichomoniasis, chlamydia, gonorrhea, and
syphilis) (5), another study conducted 10 years later in the same settings but different
contexts  (Project  AWARE)  did  not  replicate  this  result  (6).  With  the  challenges  that
intensive  behavioral  counseling  poses,  health  care  professionals  might  find  brief
prevention  messages  and  those  delivered  through  video  or  in  a  group  session  to  be
more  accessible  for  the  client.  A  review  of  11  studies  evaluated  brief  prevention
messages  delivered  by  providers  and  health  counselors  and  reported  them  to  be
feasible and to decrease subsequent STIs in STD clinic settings (7) and HIV care settings
(8). Other approaches use motivational interviewing to move clients toward achievable
risk-reduction  goals.  Client-centered  counseling  and  motivational  interviewing  can  be
used  effectively  by  clinicians  and  staff  trained  in  these  approaches.  CDC  provides
additional  information  on  these  and  other  effective  behavioral  interventions  at
https://www.cdc.gov/std/program/interventions.htm.
 Training
 in
 client-centered
counseling and motivational interviewing is available through the STD National Network
of  Prevention  Training  Centers  (https://www.nnptc.org).  In  addition  to  one-on-one  STI
and  HIV  prevention  counseling,  videos  and  large  group  presentations  can  provide
explicit  information  concerning  STIs  and  reducing  disease  transmission  (e.g.,  how  to
use  condoms  consistently  and  correctly  and  the  importance  of  routine  screening).
Group-based strategies have been effective in reducing the occurrence of STIs among
persons
 at
 risk,
 including
 those
 attending
 STD
 clinics
 (9).
 Brief,
 online,
electronic-learning  modules  for  young  MSM  have  been  reported  to  be  effective  in
reducing incident STIs and offer a convenient client platform for effective interventions
(10).  Because  the  incidence  of  certain  STIs,  most  notably  syphilis,  is  higher  among
persons with HIV infection, use of client-centered STI counseling for persons with HIV
continues to be encouraged by public health agencies and other health organizations
(https://www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/2019/default.htm).  A  2014  guideline  from  CDC,  the
Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration,  and  the  National  Institutes  of  Health
recommends  that  clinical  and  nonclinical  providers  assess  a  person’s  behavioral  and
biologic risks for acquiring or transmitting STIs and HIV, including having sex without
condoms,  having  recent  STIs,  and  having  partners  recently  treated  for  STIs
(https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/44064).  That  federal  guideline  is  for  clinical  and
nonclinical  providers  to  offer  or  make  referral  for  regular  screening  for  multiple  STIs,
on-site  STI  treatment  when  indicated,  and  risk-reduction  interventions  tailored  to  the
person’s risks. Brief risk-reduction counseling delivered by medical providers during HIV
primary care visits, coupled with routine STI screening, has been reported to reduce STI
incidence  among  persons  with  HIV  infection  (8).  Other  specific  methods  have  been
designed
 for
 the
 HIV
 care
 setting
(https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/effective-interventions/index.html).  Pre-exposure  vaccination
is one of the most effective methods for preventing transmission of HPV, HAV, and HBV,
all of which can be sexually transmitted. HPV vaccination is recommended routinely for
males and females aged 11 or 12 years and can be administered beginning at age 9
years. HPV vaccination is recommended through age 26 years for those not previously
vaccinated
 (11).
 Sharing
 clinical
 decision-making
 about
 HPV
 vaccination
 is
recommended for certain adults aged 27–45 years who are not adequately vaccinated
in
 accordance
 with
 existing
 guidance
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/hpv.html).
 Hepatitis
 B
vaccination is recommended for all unvaccinated, uninfected persons who are sexually
active with more than one partner or are being evaluated or treated for an STI (12). In
addition,  hepatitis  A  and  B  vaccines  are  recommended  for  MSM,  persons  who  inject
drugs, persons with chronic liver disease, and persons with HIV or hepatitis C infections
who have not had hepatitis A or hepatitis B (12). HAV vaccine is also recommended for
persons who are homeless (13). Details regarding HAV and HBV vaccination, including
routine childhood vaccination, are available at https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis and at the
ACIP
 website
 (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/index.html).
When  used  consistently  and  correctly,  external  latex  condoms,  also  known  as  male
condoms,  are  effective  in  preventing  the  sexual  transmission  of  HIV  infection
(http://www.ashasexualhealth.org/pdfs/Male_and_Female_Condoms.pdf).
 In
heterosexual HIV mixed-status relationships (i.e., those involving one infected and one
uninfected  partner)  in  which  condoms  were  used  consistently,  HIV-negative  partners
were  71%–80%  less  likely  to  become  infected  with  HIV,  compared  with  persons  in
similar  relationships  in  which  condoms  were  not  used  (14,15).  Two  analyses  of  MSM
mixed-status couple studies estimated the protective effect of condom use to be 70%
and 91%, respectively (16,17). Moreover, studies demonstrate that consistent condom
use  reduces  the  risk  for  other  STIs,  including  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  hepatitis  B,  and
trichomoniasis  (18–21).  By  limiting  lower  genital  tract  infections,  condoms  also  might
reduce the risk for pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) among women (22). In addition,
consistent  and  correct  use  of  latex  condoms  reduces  the  risk  for  HPV  infection  and
HPV-associated diseases, genital herpes, syphilis, and chancroid when the infected area
or site of potential exposure is covered (start highlight23end highlight–27). Additional
information  is  available  at  https://www.cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness/index.html  and
www.factsaboutcondoms.com/professional.php.  Condoms  are  regulated  as  medical
devices  and  are  subject  to  random  sampling  and  testing  by  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration (FDA). Each latex condom manufactured in the United States is tested
electronically for holes before packaging. The rate of condom breakage during sexual
intercourse and withdrawal in the United States is approximately two broken condoms
per 100 condoms. Rates of breakage and slippage might be slightly higher during anal
intercourse  (28,29).  The  failure  of  condoms  to  protect  against  STIs  or  unintended
pregnancy  usually  results  from  inconsistent  or  incorrect  use  rather  than  condom
breakage  (30).  Users  should  check  the  expiration  or  manufacture  date  on  the  box  or
individual package. Latex condoms should not be used beyond their expiration date or
>5  years  after  the  manufacturing  date.  Condoms  made  of  materials  other  than  latex
are available in the United States and can be classified into two general categories: 1)
polyurethane,  polyisoprene,  or  other  synthetic  condoms  and  2)  natural  membrane
condoms. Polyurethane external condoms provide protection against STIs and HIV and
pregnancy comparable to that of latex condoms (20,31). These can be substituted for
latex  condoms  by  persons  with  latex  sensitivity,  are  typically  more  resistant  to
deterioration,  and  are  compatible  with  use  of  both  oil-based  and  water-based
lubricants. The effectiveness of other synthetic external condoms to prevent STIs has
not  been  extensively  studied,  and  FDA  labeling  restricts  their  recommended  use  to
persons  who  are  sensitive  to  or  allergic  to  latex.  Natural  membrane  condoms
(frequently  called  natural  skin  condoms  or  [incorrectly]  lambskin  condoms)  are  made
from  lamb  cecum  and  can  have  pores  up  to  1,500  nm  in  diameter.  Although  these
pores do not allow the passage of sperm, they are more than 10 times the diameter of
HIV and more than 25 times that of HBV. Moreover, laboratory studies demonstrate that
sexual transmission of viruses, including HBV, herpes simplex virus (HSV), and HIV, can
occur  with  natural  membrane  condoms  (31).  Therefore,  natural  membrane  condoms
are  not  recommended  for  prevention  of  STIs  and  HIV.  Providers  should  advise  that
condoms must be used consistently and correctly to be effective in preventing STIs and
HIV  while  noting  that  any  condom  use  is  better  than  no  condom  use.  Providing
instructions  about  the  correct  use  of  condoms  can  be  useful.  Communicating  the
following  recommendations  can  help  ensure  that  patients  use  external  condoms
correctly:
 Additional
 information
 about
 external
 condoms
 is
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness.  Condoms  for  internal  vaginal  use,  also
known  as  female  condoms,  are  available  worldwide  (e.g.,  the  FC2  Female  Condom,
Reddy condom, Cupid female condom, and Woman’s condom) (31,32). Use of internal
condoms  can  provide  protection  from  acquisition  and  transmission  of  STIs,  although
data are limited. Internal condoms are more costly compared with external condoms;
however, they offer the advantage of being controlled by the receptive partner as an
STI  and  HIV  prevention  method,  and  the  newer  versions  might  be  acceptable  to  all
persons.  Although  the  internal  condom  also  has  been  used  during  receptive  anal
intercourse,  efficacy  associated  with  this  practice  remains  unknown  (33).  Additional
information
 about
 the
 internal
 condom
 is
 available
 at
http://www.ashasexualhealth.org/pdfs/Male_and_Female_Condoms.pdf. In observational
studies, diaphragm use has been demonstrated to protect against cervical gonorrhea,
chlamydia,  and  trichomoniasis  (34).  However,  a  trial  examining  the  effect  of  a
diaphragm  plus  lubricant  on  HIV  acquisition  among  women  in  Africa  reported  no
additional  protective  effect  when  compared  with  the  use  of  male  condoms  alone.
Likewise, no difference by study arm in the rate of acquisition of chlamydia, gonorrhea,
or herpes occurred (35,36). Diaphragms should not be relied on as the sole source of
protection  against  HIV  and  other  STIs.  Methods  that  combine  STI  and  HIV  prevention
with pregnancy prevention are known as multipurpose prevention technologies (MPTs)
(37)  (https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/linkages/mpts/en).  Internal  and
external  condoms  are  both  examples  of  MPTs  because  they  are  effective  prevention
measures when used correctly for STI and HIV transmission or pregnancy prevention.
The  multicenter  Evidence  for  Contraception  Options  and  HIV  Outcomes  (ECHO)  trial
observed  no  statistically  significant  differences  in  HIV  incidence  rates  among  women
randomly assigned to one of three contraceptive methods (depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate  [DMPA],  levonorgestrel  implant,  and  copper-containing  intrauterine  device
[IUD]);  however,  rates  of  HIV  infection  were  high  in  all  groups,  indicating  a  need  for
MPTs (38). Development of MPTs is complex and ongoing; products under study include
microbicides  with  contraceptive  devices  (e.g.,  tenofovir  with  a  vaginal  ring
contraceptive delivery package) and other innovative methods (39). Nonspecific topical
microbicides are ineffective for preventing HIV infection (40–45). Tenofovir gel has been
studied  for  prevention  of  herpes  simplex  virus  2  (HSV-2)  and  HIV  infections  (46,47).
Adherence can be low (48), and prevention of HIV infection, especially among women,
has not been demonstrated (47,49).Vaginal rings containing dapivirine have provided
some  reduction  in  HIV  infection  (50,51).  For  men  and  transgender  women  who  have
anal  intercourse,  tenofovir  gel  appears  safe  when  applied  before  and  after  anal  sex
(52).  Spermicides  containing  nonoxynol-9  (N-9)  might  disrupt  genital  or  rectal
epithelium and have been associated with an increased risk for HIV infection. Condoms
with N-9 are no more effective than condoms without N-9; therefore, N-9 alone or in a
condom  is  not  recommended  for  STI  and  HIV  prevention  (40).  N-9  use  also  has  been
associated  with  an  increased  risk  for  bacterial  urinary  tract  infections  among  women
(53,54).  Contraceptive  methods  that  are  not  mechanical  barriers  offer  no  protection
against  HIV  or  other  STIs.  The  ECHO  study  observed  no  differences  in  HIV  incidence
rates  among  women  randomly  assigned  to  DMPA,  levonorgestrel  implant,  or
copper-containing
 IUD
 contraceptive
 methods
 (38).
 A
 systematic
 review
 of
epidemiologic  evidence  reported  that  the  majority  of  studies  demonstrated  no
association between use of oral contraceptives and HIV acquisition among women (55).
Whether  hormonal  contraception  alters  a  woman’s  risk  for  other  STIs  is  uncertain
(56,57).  Sexually  active  women  who  use  contraceptive  methods  other  than  condoms
should be counseled about STI and HIV infection prevention measures. These include
pre-exposure  prophylaxis  (PrEP)  and  postexposure  prophylaxis  (PEP),  limiting  the
number  of  sex  partners,  and  correct  and  consistent  use  of  condoms.  Unprotected
intercourse  exposes  women  to  risks  for  STIs  and  unplanned  pregnancy.  Providers
should  offer  counseling  about  the  option  of  emergency  contraception  if  pregnancy  is
not  desired.  Options  for  emergency  contraception  in  the  United  States  include
copper-containing  IUDs  and  emergency  contraceptive  pills  (ECPs)  (58,59).  More
information
 is
 available
 at
https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-bulletin/articles/2015/09/emerg
ency-contraception?utm_source=redirect&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=otn.
ECPs are available in the following formulations: ulipristal acetate in a single dose (30
mg) available by prescription, levonorgestrel in a single dose (1.5 mg) available over
the  counter  or  by  prescription,  or  a  combined  estrogen  and  progestin  pill  regimen.
Insertion  of  a  copper-containing  IUD  ≤5  days  after  unprotected  sex  can  reduce
pregnancy risk from a sex act by approximately 99% (60). ECPs are most efficacious
when initiated as soon as possible after unprotected sex. Ulipristal acetate is effective
≤5  days  after  unprotected  sex,  and  levonorgestrel  is  most  effective  ≤3  days  after
unprotected  sex  but  has  some  efficacy  at  ≤5  days.  ECPs  are  ineffective  (but  not
harmful) if the woman is already pregnant (61). A 2019 Cochrane review summarized
the  efficacy,  safety,  and  convenience  of  different  emergency  contraception  methods
(61).  More  information  about  emergency  contraception  is  available  in  Contraceptive
Technology,  21st  Edition  (31),  in  the  2016  U.S.  Selected  Practice  Recommendations
(U.S.
 SPR)
 for
 Contraceptive
 Use
 (emergency
 contraception)
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/contraception/mmwr/spr/emergency.html,  and
in  the  2016  U.S.  Medical  Eligibility  Criteria  (U.S.  MEC)  for  Contraceptive  Use  (copper
IUDs
 for
 emergency
 contraception)
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/contraception/mmwr/mec/appendixj.html.
Providers  should  educate  males  and  females  about  emergency  contraception,
especially  if  other  methods  of  contraception  were  used  incorrectly  or  not  at  all  and
pregnancy is not desired (62). An advance supply of ECPs can be provided or prescribed
so that ECPs will be available when needed (59). Male circumcision reduces the risk for
HIV infection and certain STIs among heterosexual men. Three randomized, controlled
trials  performed  in  regions  of  sub-Saharan  Africa,  where  generalized  HIV  epidemics
involving predominantly heterosexual transmission were occurring, demonstrated that
male  circumcision  reduces  the  risk  for  HIV  acquisition  among  men  by  50%–60%
(63–65). In those trials, circumcision also was protective against other STIs, including
high-risk  genital  HPV  infection  and  genital  herpes  (66–68).  Follow-up  studies  have
demonstrated  sustained  benefit  of  circumcision  for  HIV  prevention  (69)  and  that  the
effect  is  not  mediated  solely  through  a  reduction  in  HSV-2  infection  or  genital  ulcer
disease (GUD) (70). The World Health Organization (WHO) and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) recommend that male circumcision efforts be scaled
up as an effective intervention for preventing heterosexually acquired HIV infection (71)
in  countries  with  hyperendemic  and  generalized  HIV  epidemics  within  the  context  of
ensuring  universal  access  to  comprehensive  HIV  prevention,  treatment,  care,  and
support
(https://www.afro.who.int/publications/voluntary-medical-male-circumcision-hiv-preventi
on). In the United States, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that
newborn male circumcision be available to families that desire it because the benefits
of the procedure, including prevention of penile cancers, urinary tract infections, GUD,
and HIV infection, outweigh the risks. ACOG has also endorsed AAP’s policy statement.
In  light  of  these  benefits,  the  American  Urological  Association  states  that  male
circumcision should be considered an option for risk reduction, among other strategies
(72).  Additional  information  for  providers  counseling  male  patients  and  parents
regarding  male  circumcision  for  preventing  HIV,  STIs,  and  other  adverse  health
outcomes  is  available  at  https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/male-circumcision.html.  No
definitive  data  exist  to  determine  whether  male  circumcision  reduces  HIV  acquisition
among  MSM,  although  one  meta-analysis  of  62  observational  studies  reported  that
circumcision was protective against HIV acquisition in low- to middle-income countries
but  not  in  high-income  countries  (73).  Further  studies  are  needed  to  confirm  any
potential benefit of male circumcision for this population. Daily oral antiretroviral PrEP
with  a  fixed-dose  combination  of  emtricitabine  (FTC)  and  either  tenofovir  disoproxil
fumarate  (TDF)  or  tenofovir  alafenamide  (TAF)  have  demonstrated  safety  (74)  and  a
substantial  reduction  in  the  rate  of  HIV  acquisition  for  MSM  (75).  TDF/FTC  has
demonstrated  safety  and  efficacy  for  mixed-status  heterosexual  couples  (76)  and
heterosexual men and women recruited individually (77); however, no evidence is yet
available  regarding  TAF/FTC  among  heterosexually  active  women.  In  addition,  one
clinical  trial  involving  persons  who  inject  drugs  (78)  and  one  involving  heterosexual
mixed-status  couples  (76)  demonstrated  substantial  efficacy  and  safety  of  daily  oral
PrEP  with  TDF  alone.  High  adherence  to  oral  PrEP  was  strongly  associated  with
protection  from  HIV  infection.  Studies  conducted  with  MSM  have  demonstrated  that
taking  PrEP  at  specific  times  before  and  after  sexual  intercourse  was  effective  in
preventing HIV; however, less experience exits with this regimen, it is not FDA cleared,
and  it  has  not  been  studied  among  other  populations  (79).  Comprehensive  clinical
practice guidelines are available for providers in prescribing PrEP to reduce the risk for
HIV infection (80). Among HIV-negative sexually active men and women, bacterial STIs
are key indicators of risk for HIV acquisition. Studies have documented the risk for HIV
acquisition among MSM within 1 year after infection with rectal gonorrhea or chlamydia
(one  in  15  men),  primary  or  secondary  syphilis  (one  in  18),  and  among  men  with  no
rectal  STI  or  syphilis  infection  (one  in  53)  (81–83).  Sexually  active  adults  and
adolescents  should  be  screened  for  STIs  (e.g.,  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  and  syphilis)  in
accordance with recommendations, and persons with infection should be offered PrEP.
The USPSTF recommends that persons at risk for HIV acquisition be offered PrEP (84).
Persons at risk for HIV acquisition include HIV-negative persons whose sexual partner or
partners have HIV infection (especially if viral load is detectable or unknown), persons
who have had gonorrhea or syphilis during the previous 6 months, and injecting drug
users who share injection equipment (84). Clinical practice guidelines recommend STI
screening for persons taking PrEP (80) because increased rates of STI acquisition have
been described (85–87). Providing HSV treatment to persons with HIV and HSV infection
has not demonstrated benefit in reducing HIV acquisition among uninfected partners. A
large randomized controlled trial evaluated mixed-status heterosexual couples among
the  partners  with  HIV  infection  who  also  were  seropositive  for  HSV-2  (88).  Use  of
acyclovir  had  no  effect  on  HIV  transmission.  These  findings  are  consistent  with  a
previous trial that reported no benefit of acyclovir in preventing HIV acquisition among
persons  seropositive  for  HSV-2  (89).  Doxycycline  prophylaxis  has  been  examined  for
preventing bacterial STIs. In a pilot study, 30 MSM living with HIV with previous syphilis
(two or more episodes since HIV diagnosis) were randomly assigned to doxycycline 100
mg for 48 weeks versus a financial incentive–based behavioral intervention (90). That
study  demonstrated  a  73%  reduction  in  any  bacterial  STI  at  any  site,  without
substantial  differences  in  sexual  behavior.  Additional  studies  examining  doxycycline
prophylaxis are under way or in development (91). Guidelines for using PEP aimed at
preventing  HIV  and  other  STIs  as  a  result  of  sexual  exposure  are  available  at
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/programresources/cdc-hiv-npep-guidelines.pdf.
 Sexually
active persons seeking HIV PEP should be evaluated for PrEP after completing their PEP
course and testing negative for HIV. HIV PEP is also discussed elsewhere in this report
(see  Sexual  Assault  and  Abuse  and  STIs).  Genital  hygiene  methods  (e.g.,  vaginal
washing and douching) after sexual exposure are ineffective in protecting against HIV
and STIs and might increase the risk for bacterial vaginosis (BV), certain STIs, and HIV
infection (92). STI PEP in the form of doxycycline 200 mg taken after unprotected anal
sex  has  been  studied  among  MSM  and  transgender  women;  results  demonstrated
reduction  in  incident  chlamydia  and  syphilis  by  70%  and  73%,  respectively,  but  no
effect  on  gonorrhea  (93).  Other  studies  are  under  way  or  in  development  regarding
doxycycline  prophylaxis  for  bacterial  STIs  (91).  No  long-term  data  are  available
regarding  the  impact  of  STI  PEP  on  antimicrobial  resistance  and  the  microbiome.
Further studies are needed to determine whether STI PEP is an effective and beneficial
strategy  for  STI  prevention.  In  2011,  the  randomized  controlled  trial  HPTN  052
demonstrated  that,  among  HIV  mixed-status  heterosexual  couples,  HIV  antiretroviral
therapy  (ART)  for  the  infected  partner  decreased  the  risk  for  transmission  to  the
uninfected partner by 96% (94). Therefore, ART not only is beneficial to the health of
persons with HIV infection, it also reduces the risk for transmission. Additional studies of
HIV mixed-status couples, heterosexual and MSM couples (PARTNER study), and MSM
couples  (Opposites  Attract  and  PARTNERS2  studies)  reported  that  patients  with  HIV
taking  ART  who  maintain  an  undetectable  viral  load  demonstrate  no  risk  for
transmitting  HIV  to  their  HIV-negative  sex  partners  (95–97).  For  those  reasons,  ART
should be offered to all persons with HIV infection to obtain viral suppression. Detailed
guidance  regarding  ART  regimens  is  available  in  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and
Human  Services’  HIV  treatment  guidelines  (98).  Seroadaptive  strategies  for  HIV
prevention have largely originated within communities of MSM. They are predicated on
knowledge  of  self  and  partner  HIV  status.  One  specific  seroadaptive  practice  is
serosorting,  which  includes  limiting  anal  sex  without  a  condom  to  partners  with  the
same  HIV  status  as  their  own  or  choosing  to  selectively  use  condoms  with  HIV
mixed-status partners. Another practice among mixed-status couples is seropositioning,
in  which  the  person  with  HIV  infection  is  the  receptive  partner  for  anal  intercourse.
Observational studies have consistently reported that serosorting confers greater risk
for  HIV  infection  than  consistent  condom  use  but  has  lower  risk  compared  with  anal
intercourse without a condom and without serosorting (99–101). Serosorting practices
have been associated with increased risk for STIs, including chlamydia and gonorrhea
(102,103). Serosorting is not recommended for the following reasons: many MSM who
have  HIV  infection  do  not  know  they  have  HIV  because  they  have  not  been  tested
recently, men’s assumptions about the HIV status of their partners might be wrong, and
some men with HIV infection might not disclose or might misrepresent their HIV status.
All  of  these  factors  increase  the  risk  that  serosorting  can  lead  to  HIV  infection.
Serosorting  has  not  been  studied  among  heterosexually  active  persons.  Abstinence
from oral, vaginal, and anal sex and participating in a long-term, mutually monogamous
relationship with a partner known to be uninfected are prevention approaches to avoid
transmission of STIs. For persons who are being treated for an STI (or whose partners
are  undergoing  treatment),  counseling  that  encourages  abstinence  from  sexual
intercourse  until  completion  of  the  entire  course  of  medication  is  vital  for  preventing
reinfection. A trial conducted among women regarding the effectiveness of counseling
messages when patients have cervicitis or vaginal discharge demonstrated that women
whose sex partners have used condoms might benefit from a hierarchical message that
includes  condoms  but  women  without  such  experience  might  benefit  more  from  an
abstinence-only  message  (104).  A  more  comprehensive  discussion  of  abstinence  and
other  sexual  practices  that  can  help  persons  reduce  their  risk  for  STIs  is  available  in
Contraceptive  Technology,  21st  Edition  (31).  The  term  “partner  services”  refers  to  a
continuum of clinical evaluation, counseling, diagnostic testing, and treatment designed
to  increase  the  number  of  infected  persons  brought  to  treatment  and  to  reduce
transmission  among  sexual  networks.  This  continuum  includes  efforts  of  health
departments,  medical  providers,  and  patients  themselves.  The  term  “public  health
partner services” refers to efforts by public health departments to identify the sex and
needle-sharing  partners  of  infected  persons  to  ensure  their  medical  evaluation  and
treatment.  Health  departments  are  increasingly  incorporating  referral  to  additional
services,  as  indicated,  into  the  partner  services  continuum.  Aside  from  the  general
benefit  to  patients  and  partners,  service  referrals  and  linkage  can  mitigate  the
circumstances  that  increase  risk  for  future  STI  and  HIV  acquisition.  The  types  and
comprehensiveness  of  public  health  partner  services  and  the  specific  STIs  for  which
they  are  offered  vary  by  public  health  agency,  their  resources,  and  the  geographic
prevalence  of  STIs.  In  most  areas  of  the  United  States,  health  departments  routinely
attempt  to  provide  partner  services  to  all  persons  with  infectious  syphilis  (primary  or
secondary)  and  persons  with  a  new  diagnosis  of  HIV  infection.  Health  departments
should  provide  partner  services  for  persons  who  might  have  cephalosporin-resistant
gonorrhea.  In  contrast,  relatively  few  U.S.  health  departments  routinely  provide  STI
partner  services  to  persons  with  gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  trichomoniasis,  or  other  STIs
(105). Because STI diagnoses often can serve as risk markers for HIV acquisition (83),
public  health  services  might  include  follow-up  of  MSM  with  an  STI  to  offer  HIV  PrEP.
Public health services can also include HIV and STI prevention interventions including
HIV  and  STI  testing,  linkage  and  relinkage  of  persons  with  HIV  infection  to  HIV  care
clinics,  and  referral  of  partners  of  persons  with  STIs  or  HIV  infection  to  HIV  PrEP,  as
indicated  (106–109).  Clinicians  should  familiarize  themselves  with  public  health
practices in their area; however, in most instances, providers should understand that
responsibility for discussing the treatment of partners of persons with STIs rests with
the diagnosing provider and the patient. State laws require a good faith effort by the
provider  to  inform  partners,  and  providers  should  familiarize  themselves  with  public
health laws. Clinicians who do not notify partners of patients directly can still provide
partner  services  by  counseling  infected  persons  and  providing  them  with  written
information and medication to give to their partners (if recommended and allowable by
state law), directly evaluating and treating sex partners, and cooperating with state and
local  health  departments.  Clinicians’  efforts  to  ensure  treatment  of  patients’  sex
partners can reduce the risk for reinfection and potentially diminish transmission of STIs
(110).  Therefore,  clinicians  should  encourage  all  persons  with  STIs  to  notify  their  sex
partners and urge them to seek medical evaluation and treatment. Exceptions to this
practice  include  circumstances  posing  a  risk  for  intimate  partner  violence  (111).
Available  data  are  limited  regarding  the  rate  of  intimate  partner  violence  directly
attributable  to  partner  notification  (112,113);  however,  because  of  the  reported
prevalence  of  intimate  partner  violence  in  the  general  population  (114),  providers
should consider the potential risk before notifying partners of persons or encouraging
partner notification. Time spent counseling patients about the importance of notifying
partners  is  associated  with  improved  notification  outcomes  (115).  When  possible,
clinicians  should  advise  persons  to  bring  their  primary  sex  partner  with  them  when
returning  for  treatment  and  should  concurrently  treat  both  persons.  Although  this
approach  can  be  effective  for  a  main  partner  (116,117),  it  might  not  be  a  feasible
approach  for  additional  sex  partners.  Evidence  indicates  that  providing  patients  with
written information to share with sex partners can increase rates of partner treatment
(110).  Certain  health  departments  now  use  technology  (e.g.,  email,  texting,  mobile
applications,  and  social  media  outlets)  to  facilitate  partner  services  for  locating  and
notifying the sex partners of persons with STIs, including HIV (118,119). Patients now
have  the  option  to  use  Internet  sites  to  send  anonymous  email  or  text  messages
advising  partners  of  their  exposure  to  an  STI  (120);  anonymous  notification  via  the
Internet is considered better than no notification at all. However, because the extent to
which these sites affect partner notification and treatment is uncertain, patients should
be  encouraged  to  notify  their  partners  in  person  or  by  telephone,  email,  or  text
message;  alternatively,  patients  can  authorize  a  medical  provider  or  public  health
professional  to  notify  their  sex  partners.  Expedited  partner  therapy  (EPT)  is  a
harm-reduction strategy and the clinical practice of treating the sex partners of persons
with  diagnosed  chlamydia  or  gonorrhea,  who  are  unable  or  unlikely  to  seek  timely
treatment, by providing medications or prescriptions to the patient as allowable by law.
Patients  then  provide  partners  with  these  therapies  without  the  health  care  provider
having examined the partner (https://www.cdc.gov/std/ept). Unless prohibited by law or
other  regulations,  medical  providers  should  routinely  offer  EPT  to  patients  with
chlamydia when the provider cannot ensure that all of a patient’s sex partners from the
previous 60 days will seek timely treatment. If the patient has not had sex during the
60 days before diagnosis, providers should offer EPT for the patient’s most recent sex
partner.  Because  EPT  must  be  an  oral  regimen  and  current  gonorrhea  treatment
involves an injection, EPT for gonorrhea should be offered to partners unlikely to access
timely  evaluation  after  linkage  is  explored.  EPT  is  legal  in  the  majority  of  states  but
varies
 by
 chlamydial
 or
 gonococcal
 infection.
 Providers
 should
 visit
https://www.cdc.gov/std/ept  to  obtain  updated  information  for  their  state.  Providing
patients with packaged oral medication is the preferred approach because the efficacy
of  EPT  using  prescriptions  has  not  been  evaluated,  obstacles  to  EPT  can  exist  at  the
pharmacy  level  (121,122),  and  many  persons  (especially  adolescents)  do  not  fill  the
prescriptions provided to them by a sex partner (123,124). Medication or prescriptions
provided  for  EPT  should  be  accompanied  by  educational  materials  for  the  partner,
including treatment instructions, warnings about taking medications (e.g., if the partner
is  pregnant  or  has  an  allergy  to  the  medication),  general  health  counseling,  and  a
statement advising that partners seek medical evaluation as soon as possible for HIV
infection and any symptoms of STIs, particularly PID. Evidence supporting EPT is based
on three U.S. clinical trials involving heterosexual men and women with chlamydia or
gonorrhea  (125–127).  All  three  trials  reported  that  more  partners  were  treated  when
patients were offered EPT. Two reported statistically significant decreases in the rate of
reinfection, and one observed a lower risk for persistent or recurrent infection that was
statistically nonsignificant. A fourth trial in the United Kingdom did not demonstrate a
difference  in  the  risk  for  reinfection  or  in  the  numbers  of  partners  treated  between
persons offered EPT and those advised to notify their sex partners (128). U.S. trials and
a meta-analysis of EPT revealed that the magnitude of reduction in reinfection of index
patients, compared with patient referral, differed according to the STI and the sex of
the  index  patient  (110,125–127).  However,  across  trials,  reductions  in  chlamydia
prevalence  at  follow-up  were  approximately  20%,  and  reductions  in  gonorrhea  were
approximately 50% at follow-up. Existing data indicate that EPT also might have a role
in  partner  management  for  trichomoniasis;  however,  no  partner  management
intervention  has  been  reported  to  be  more  effective  than  any  other  in  reducing
trichomoniasis  reinfection  rates  (129,130).  No  data  support  use  of  EPT  in  the  routine
management  of  patients  with  syphilis.  Data  are  limited  regarding  use  of  EPT  for
gonococcal  or  chlamydial  infections  among  MSM,  compared  with  heterosexuals
(131,132).  Published  studies,  including  recent  data  regarding  extragenital  testing,
indicated  that  male  partners  of  MSM  with  diagnosed  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia  might
have  other  bacterial  STIs  (gonorrhea  or  syphilis)  or  HIV  (133–135).  Studies  have
reported that 5% of MSM have a new diagnosis of HIV when evaluated as partners of
men  with  gonococcal  or  chlamydial  infections  (133,134);  however,  more  recent  data
indicate  that,  in  certain  settings,  the  frequency  of  HIV  infection  is  much  lower  (135).
Considering  limited  data  and  potential  for  other  bacterial  STIs  among  MSM  partners,
shared clinical decision-making regarding EPT is recommended. All persons who receive
bacterial STI diagnoses and their sex partners, particularly MSM, should be tested for
HIV,
 and
 those
 at
 risk
 for
 HIV
 infection
 should
 be
 offered
 HIV
 PrEP
(https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/risk/prep/cdc-hiv-prep-guidelines-2017.pdf).  Accurate  and
timely reporting of STIs is integral to public health efforts in assessing morbidity trends,
allocating  limited  resources,  and  assisting  local  health  authorities  with  partner
notification  and  treatment.  STI  and  HIV/AIDS  cases  should  be  reported  in  accordance
with  state  and  local  statutory  requirements.  Syphilis  (including  congenital  syphilis),
gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  chancroid,  and  HIV  are  reportable  diseases  in  every  state.
Because the requirements for reporting other STIs differ by state, clinicians should be
familiar with the reporting requirements applicable within their jurisdictions. Reporting
can  be  provider  based,  laboratory  based,  or  both.  Clinicians  who  are  unsure  of  state
and  local  reporting  requirements  should  seek  advice  from  state  or  local  health
department  STI  programs.  STI  and  HIV  reports  are  kept  confidential.  In  most
jurisdictions, such reports are protected by statute or regulation. Before conducting a
follow-up of a person with a positive STI test result, public health professionals should
consult the patient’s health care provider, if possible, to inform them of the purpose of
the  public  health  visit,  verify  the  diagnosis,  determine  the  treatments  received,  and
ascertain the best approaches to patient follow-up. Retesting 3 months after diagnosis
of chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis can detect repeat infection and potentially
can be used to enhance population-based prevention (136,137). Any person who has a
positive test for chlamydia or gonorrhea, along with women who have a positive test for
trichomonas, should be rescreened 3 months after treatment. Any person who receives
a  syphilis  diagnosis  should  undergo  follow-up  serologic  syphilis  testing  per  current
recommendations  and  follow-up  testing  for  HIV  (see  Syphilis).  Additional  information
regarding  retesting  is  available  elsewhere  in  this  report  (see  Chlamydial  Infections;
Gonococcal  Infections;  Syphilis;  Trichomoniasis).  Top  Intrauterine  or  perinatally
transmitted  STIs  can  have  debilitating  effects  on  pregnant  women,  their  fetuses,  and
their partners. All pregnant women and their sex partners should be asked about STIs,
counseled  about  the  possibility  of  perinatal  infections,  and  provided  access  to
recommended  screening  and  treatment,  if  needed.  Recommendations  for  screening
pregnant  women  for  STIs  to  detect  asymptomatic  infections  are  based  on  disease
severity  and  sequelae,  prevalence  among  the  population,  costs,  medicolegal
considerations  (e.g.,  state  laws),  and  other  factors.  The  following  screening
recommendations  for  pregnant  women  summarize  clinical  guidelines  from  federal
agencies  and  medical  professional  organizations.  All  pregnant  women  in  the  United
States  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  the  first  prenatal  visit,  even  if  they  have  been
previously tested (138). Testing pregnant women for HIV and prompt linkage to care of
women  with  HIV  infection  are  vital  for  women’s  health  and  reducing  perinatal
transmission  of  HIV  through  ART  and  obstetrical  interventions.  HIV  testing  should  be
offered as part of the routine panel of prenatal tests (i.e., opt-out testing). For women
who  decline  HIV  testing,  providers  should  address  their  concerns  and,  when
appropriate,  continue  to  encourage  testing.  Partners  of  pregnant  patients  should  be
offered  HIV  testing  if  their  status  is  unknown  (139).  Retesting  in  the  third  trimester
(preferably  before  36  weeks’  gestation)  is  recommended  for  women  at  high  risk  for
acquiring HIV infection. Examples of women at high risk include those who inject drugs,
have STIs during pregnancy, have multiple sex partners during pregnancy, have a new
sex  partner  during  pregnancy,  or  have  partners  with  HIV  infection;  those  who  are
receiving  care  in  health  care  facilities  in  settings  with  HIV  incidence  ≥1  per  1,000
women per year; those who are incarcerated; those who live in areas with high rates of
HIV infection; or those who have signs or symptoms of acute HIV infection (e.g., fever,
lymphadenopathy,  skin  rash,  myalgia,  arthralgia,  headache,  oral  ulcers,  leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia,  or  transaminase  elevation)  (140).  Rapid  HIV  testing  should  be
performed for any woman in labor who has not been tested for HIV during pregnancy or
whose HIV status is unknown, unless she declines. If a rapid HIV test result is positive,
ART  should  be  administered  without  waiting  for  the  results  of  confirmatory  testing
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/PerinatalGL.pdf).
 During
2012–2019,  congenital  syphilis  rates  in  the  United  States  increased  from  8.4  to  48.5
cases per 100,000 births, a 477.4% increase (141). At least 45 states have a prenatal
syphilis testing requirement, with high variability among those requirements (142). In
the  United  States,  all  pregnant  women  should  be  screened  for  syphilis  at  the  first
prenatal  visit,  even  if  they  have  been  tested  previously  (143).  Prenatal  screening  for
syphilis has been reported to be suboptimal in the United States (144,145). Testing in
the  third  trimester  and  at  delivery  can  prevent  congenital  syphilis  cases  (146,147).
Partners  of  pregnant  women  with  syphilis  should  be  evaluated,  tested,  and  treated.
When access to prenatal care is not optimal, a stat rapid plasma reagin (RPR) card test
and  treatment,  if  that  test  is  reactive,  should  be  administered  at  the  time  that  a
pregnancy  is  confirmed  or  when  the  pregnancy  test  is  performed,  if  follow-up  is
uncertain. Pregnant women should be retested for syphilis at 28 weeks’ gestation and
at delivery if the mother lives in a community with high syphilis rates or is at risk for
syphilis  acquisition  during  pregnancy  (e.g.,  misuses  drugs  or  has  an  STI  during
pregnancy,  having  multiple  sex  partners,  having  a  new  sex  partner,  or  having  a  sex
partner with an STI). Neonates should not be discharged from the hospital unless the
syphilis  serologic  status  of  the  mother  has  been  determined  at  least  once  during
pregnancy. Any woman who delivers a stillborn infant should be tested for syphilis. All
pregnant women should be routinely tested for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) at
the  first  prenatal  visit  even  if  they  have  been  previously  vaccinated  or  tested  (148).
Women who are HBsAg positive should be provided with, or referred for, counseling and
medical  management.  Women  who  are  HBsAg  negative  but  at  risk  for  HBV  infection
should be vaccinated. Women who were not screened prenatally, those who engage in
behaviors that put them at high risk for infection (e.g., having had more than one sex
partner  during  the  previous  6  months,  having  been  evaluated  or  treated  for  an  STI,
having  had  recent  or  current  injection  drug  use,  or  having  an  HBsAg-positive  sex
partner), and those with clinical hepatitis should be tested at the time of admission to
the  hospital  for  delivery.  To  avoid  misinterpreting  a  transient  positive  HBsAg  result
during the 21 days after vaccination, HBsAg testing should be performed before vaccine
administration.  All  laboratories  that  conduct  HBsAg  tests  should  test  initially  reactive
specimens  with  a  licensed  neutralizing  confirmatory  test.  When  pregnant  women  are
tested for HBsAg at the time of admission for delivery, shortened testing protocols can
be  used,  and  initially  reactive  results  should  prompt  expedited  administration  of
immunoprophylaxis to neonates (148). Pregnant women who are HBsAg positive should
be reported to the local or state health department to ensure that they are entered into
a  case-management  system  and  that  timely  and  age-appropriate  prophylaxis  is
provided to their infants. Information concerning the pregnant woman’s HBsAg status
should  be  provided  to  the  hospital  where  delivery  is  planned  and  to  the  health  care
provider who will care for the newborn. In addition, household and sexual contacts of
women who are HBsAg positive should be vaccinated. All pregnant women aged <25
years  as  well  as  older  women  at  increased  risk  for  chlamydia  (e.g.,  those  aged  ≥25
years  who  have  a  new  sex  partner,  more  than  one  sex  partner,  a  sex  partner  with
concurrent partners, or a sex partner who has an STI) should be routinely screened for
Chlamydia trachomatis at the first prenatal visit (149). Pregnant women who remain at
increased risk for chlamydial infection also should be retested during the third trimester
to  prevent  maternal  postnatal  complications  and  chlamydial  infection  in  the  neonate.
Pregnant  women  identified  as  having  chlamydia  should  be  treated  immediately  and
have a test of cure to document chlamydial eradication by a nucleic acid amplification
test (NAAT) 4 weeks after treatment. All persons diagnosed with a chlamydial infection
should be rescreened 3 months after treatment. All pregnant women aged <25 years
as  well  as  women  aged  ≥25  years  at  increased  risk  for  gonorrhea  (e.g.,  those  with
other  STIs  during  pregnancy  or  those  with  a  new  sex  partner,  more  than  one  sex
partner, a sex partner with concurrent partners, or a sex partner who has an STI or is
exchanging sex for money or drugs) should be screened for Neisseria gonorrhoeae at
the first prenatal visit (149). Pregnant women who remain at high risk for gonococcal
infection  also  should  be  retested  during  the  third  trimester  to  prevent  maternal
postnatal  complications  and  gonococcal  infection  in  the  neonate.  Clinicians  should
consider the communities they serve and might choose to consult local public health
authorities  for  guidance  on  identifying  groups  that  are  more  vulnerable  to  gonorrhea
acquisition on the basis of local disease prevalence. Gonococcal infection, in particular,
is
 concentrated
 among
 specific
 geographic
 locations
 and
 communities
(https://www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/2019/default.htm).  Pregnant  women  identified  as
having gonorrhea should be treated immediately. All persons diagnosed with gonorrhea
should  be  rescreened  3  months  after  treatment.  The  rate  of  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)
infection  has  increased  among  pregnant  women  in  recent  years  (150–153).  HCV
screening should be performed for all pregnant women during each pregnancy, except
in settings where the HCV infection (HCV positivity) rate is <0.1% (154–156). The most
important  risk  factor  for  HCV  infection  is  past  or  current  injecting  drug  use  (157).
Additional risk factors include having had a blood transfusion or organ transplantation
before  July  1992,  having  received  clotting  factor  concentrates  produced  before  1987,
having received an unregulated tattoo, having been on long-term hemodialysis, having
other percutaneous exposures, or having HIV infection. All women with HCV infection
should
 receive
 counseling,
 supportive
 care,
 and
 linkage
 to
 care
(https://www.hcvguidelines.org).
 No
 vaccine
 is
 available
 for
 preventing
 HCV
transmission.  Pregnant  women  should  undergo  cervical  cancer  screening  and  at  the
same frequency as nonpregnant women; however, management differs slightly during
pregnancy  (158).  Colposcopy  is  recommended  for  the  same  indications  during
pregnancy  as  for  nonpregnant  women.  However,  biopsies  may  be  deferred,  and
endocervical  sampling  should  not  be  performed.  Treatment  should  not  be  performed
during  pregnancy  unless  cancer  is  detected.  Evidence  does  not  support  routine
screening  for  BV  among  asymptomatic  pregnant  women  at  high  risk  for  preterm
delivery  (159).  Symptomatic  women  should  be  evaluated  and  treated  (see  Bacterial
Vaginosis).  Evidence  does  not  support  routine  screening  for  Trichomonas  vaginalis
among  asymptomatic  pregnant  women.  Women  who  report  symptoms  should  be
evaluated  and  treated  (see  Trichomoniasis).  In  addition,  evidence  does  not  support
routine  HSV-2  serologic  screening  among  asymptomatic  pregnant  women.  However,
type-specific serologic tests might be useful for identifying pregnant women at risk for
HSV-2  infection  and  for  guiding  counseling  regarding  the  risk  for  acquiring  genital
herpes during pregnancy. Routine serial cultures for HSV are not indicated for women in
the  third  trimester  who  have  a  history  of  recurrent  genital  herpes.  For  more  detailed
discussions  of  STI  screening  and  treatment  among  pregnant  women,  refer  to  the
following  references:  Screening  for  HIV  Infection:  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force
Recommendation  Statement  (138);  Recommendations  for  the  Use  of  Antiretroviral
Drugs in Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and Interventions to Reduce Perinatal HIV
Transmission
 in
 the
 United
 States
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/PerinatalGL.pdf);  Guidelines  for
Perinatal  Care  (160);  Prevention  of  Hepatitis  B  Virus  Infection  in  the  United  States:
Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (12);
Screening  for  Chlamydia  and  Gonorrhea:  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force
Recommendation  Statement  (149);  Screening  for  Bacterial  Vaginosis  in  Pregnant
Persons
 to
 Prevent
 Preterm
 Delivery:
 U.S.
 Preventive
 Services
 Task
 Force
Recommendation Statement (159); Screening for Syphilis Infection in Pregnant Women:
U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force  Recommendation  Statement  (161);  Serologic
Screening  for  Genital  Herpes  Infection:  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force
Recommendation Statement (162); Screening for HIV Infection in Pregnant Women: A
Systematic  Review  for  the  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force  (163);  Screening  for
Hepatitis B in Pregnant Women: Updated Evidence Report and Systematic Review for
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (164); and CDC Recommendations for Hepatitis
C  Screening  Among  Adults  —  United  States,  2020  (156).  In  the  United  States,
prevalence rates of certain STIs are highest among adolescents and young adults (141).
For  example,  reported  rates  of  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  are  highest  among  females
during their adolescent and young adult years, and many persons acquire HPV infection
during  that  time.  Persons  who  initiate  sex  early  in  adolescence  are  at  higher  risk  for
STIs,  as  are  adolescents  living  in  detention  facilities;  those  receiving  services  at  STD
clinics; those who are involved in commercial sex exploitation or survival sex and are
exchanging  sex  for  drugs,  money,  food,  or  housing;  young  males  who  have  sex  with
males (YMSM); transgender youths; and youths with disabilities, substance misuse, or
mental health disorders. Factors contributing to increased vulnerability to STIs during
adolescence include having multiple sex partners, having sequential sex partnerships of
limited duration or concurrent partnerships, failing to use barrier protection consistently
and  correctly,  having  lower  socioeconomic  status,  and  facing  multiple  obstacles  to
accessing  health  care  (141,165).  All  50  states  and  the  District  of  Columbia  explicitly
allow minors to consent for their own STI services. No state requires parental consent
for STI care, although the age at which a minor can provide consent for specified health
care services (i.e., HPV vaccination and HIV testing and treatment) varies among states.
In 2019, a total of 18 states allowed but did not require physicians to notify parents of a
minor’s receipt of STI services, including states where minors can legally provide their
own  consent  to  the  service  (https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/policies/law/states/minors.html).
Protecting  confidentiality  for  STI  care,  particularly  for  adolescents  enrolled  in  private
health insurance plans, presents multiple problems. After a claim has been submitted,
many states mandate that health plans provide a written statement to the beneficiary
indicating the service performed, the charges covered, what the insurer allows, and the
amount  for  which  the  patient  is  responsible  (i.e.,  explanation  of  benefits  [EOB])
(166–169).  In  addition,  federal  laws  obligate  notices  to  beneficiaries  when  claims  are
denied,  including  alerting  beneficiaries  who  need  to  pay  for  care  until  the  allowable
deductible is reached. For STI testing and treatment-related care, an EOB or medical bill
that  is  received  by  a  parent  might  disclose  services  provided  and  list  STI  laboratory
tests  performed  or  treatment  administered.  Some  states  have  instituted  mechanisms
for  protecting  adolescents’  confidentiality  and  limiting  EOBs.  Additional  risks  to
confidentiality  breaches  can  inadvertently  occur  through  electronic  health  records,
although technology continues to evolve to assist with ensuring confidential care. AAP
and the Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine (SAHM) have published guidance
on  strategies  to  address  emerging  risks  for  confidentiality  breaches  associated  with
health  information  technology  (169).  AAP  and  the  SAHM  recommend  that  providers
have  time  alone  with  their  adolescent  patients  that  includes  assessment  for  sexual
behavior.
 The
 AAP
 recommendations
 are
 available
 at
https://services.aap.org/en/news-room/campaigns-and-toolkits/adolescent-health-care
and
 the
 SAHM
 recommendations
 are
 available
 at
https://www.adolescenthealth.org/My-SAHM/Login-or-Create-an-Account.aspx?returnurl
=%2fResources%2fClinical-Care-Resources%2fConfidentiality.aspx.
 Discussions
concerning sexual behavior should be tailored for the patient’s developmental level and
be aimed at identifying risk behaviors (e.g., multiple partners; oral, anal, or vaginal sex;
or  drug  misuse  behaviors).  Careful,  nonjudgmental,  and  thorough  counseling  is
particularly  vital  for  adolescents  who  might  not  feel  comfortable  acknowledging  their
engagement  in  behaviors  that  make  them  more  vulnerable  to  acquiring  STIs.
Recommendations for screening adolescents for STIs to detect asymptomatic infections
are based on disease severity and sequelae, prevalence among the population, costs,
medicolegal  considerations  (e.g.,  state  laws),  and  other  factors.  Routine  laboratory
screening for common STIs is indicated for all sexually active adolescents. The following
screening  recommendations  summarize  published  clinical  prevention  guidelines  for
sexually
 active
 adolescents
 from
 federal
 agencies
 and
 medical
 professional
organizations.  Routine  screening  for  C.  trachomatis  infection  on  an  annual  basis  is
recommended for all sexually active females aged <25 years (149). Rectal chlamydial
testing  can  be  considered  for  females  on  the  basis  of  reported  sexual  behaviors  and
exposure, through shared clinical decision-making between the patient and the provider
(170,171). Evidence is insufficient to recommend routine screening for C. trachomatis
among  sexually  active  young  males,  on  the  basis  of  efficacy  and  cost-effectiveness.
However,  screening  of  sexually  active  young  males  should  be  considered  in  clinical
settings  serving  populations  of  young  men  with  a  high  prevalence  of  chlamydial
infections  (e.g.,  adolescent  service  clinics,  correctional  facilities,  and  STD  clinics).
Chlamydia  screening,  including  pharyngeal  or  rectal  testing,  should  be  offered  to  all
YMSM at least annually on the basis of sexual behavior and anatomic site of exposure
(see Men Who Have Sex with Men). Routine screening for N. gonorrhoeae on an annual
basis  is  recommended  for  all  sexually  active  females  aged  <25  years  (149).
Extragenital gonorrhea screening (pharyngeal or rectal) can be considered for females
on
 the
 basis
 of
 reported
 sexual
 behaviors
 and
 exposure,
 through
 shared
clinical-decision between the patient and the provider (170,171). Gonococcal infection
is  more  prevalent  among  certain  geographic  locations  and  communities  (141).
Clinicians should consider the communities they serve and consult local public health
authorities  for  guidance  regarding  identifying  groups  that  are  more  vulnerable  to
gonorrhea acquisition on the basis of local disease prevalence. Evidence is insufficient
to recommend routine screening, on the basis of efficacy and cost-effectiveness, for N.
gonorrhoeae  among  asymptomatic  sexually  active  young  males  who  have  sex  with
females only. Screening for gonorrhea, including pharyngeal or rectal testing, should be
offered to YMSM at least annually (see Men Who Have Sex with Men). Providers might
consider  opt-out  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  screening  (i.e.,  the  patient  is  notified  that
testing  will  be  performed  unless  the  patient  declines,  regardless  of  reported  sexual
activity)  for  adolescent  and  young  adult  females  during  clinical  encounters.
Cost-effectiveness  analyses  indicate  that  opt-out  chlamydia  screening  among
adolescent  and  young  adult  females  might  substantially  increase  screening,  be
cost-saving  (172),  and  identify  infections  among  patients  who  do  not  disclose  sexual
behavior  (173).  HIV  screening  should  be  discussed  and  offered  to  all  adolescents.
Frequency of repeat screenings should be based on the patient’s sexual behaviors and
the local disease prevalence (138). Persons with HIV infection should receive prevention
counseling and linkage to care before leaving the testing site. Guidelines from USPSTF
and ACOG recommend that cervical cancer screening begin at age 21 years (174,175).
This  recommendation  is  based  on  the  low  incidence  of  cervical  cancer  and  limited
usefulness of screening for cervical cancer among adolescents (176). In contrast, the
2020 ACS guidelines recommend that cervical cancer screening begin at age 25 years
with  HPV  testing.  This  change  is  recommended  because  the  incidence  of  invasive
cervical cancer in women aged <25 years is decreasing because of vaccination (177).
Adolescents  with  HIV  infection  who  have  initiated  sexual  intercourse  should  have
cervical
 screening
 cytology
 in
 accordance
 with
 HIV/AIDS
 guidelines
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/adult-and-adolescent-opportunistic-infection/h
uman-papillomavirus-disease?view=full).  YMSM  and  pregnant  females  should  be
routinely  screened  for  syphilis  (see  Pregnant  Women;  Men  Who  Have  Sex  with  Men).
Local  disease  prevalence  can  help  guide  decision-making  regarding  screening  for  T.
vaginalis, especially among adolescent females in certain areas. Routine screening of
adolescents  and  young  adults  who  are  asymptomatic  for  certain  STIs  (e.g.,  syphilis,
trichomoniasis,  BV,  HSV,  HAV,  and  HBV)  is  not  typically  recommended.  Primary
prevention  and  anticipatory  guidance  for  recognizing  symptoms  and  behaviors
associated with STIs are strategies that should be incorporated into all types of health
care  visits  for  adolescents  and  young  adults.  The  following  recommendations  for
primary  prevention  of  STIs  (i.e.,  vaccination  and  counseling)  are  based  on  published
clinical  guidelines  for  sexually  active  adolescents  and  young  adults  from  federal
agencies  and  medical  professional  organizations.  Management  of  children  who  have
STIs  requires  close  cooperation  among  clinicians,  laboratorians,  and  child-protection
authorities. Official investigations, when indicated, should be initiated promptly. Certain
diseases  (e.g.,  gonorrhea,  syphilis,  HIV,  chlamydia,  and  trichomoniasis),  if  acquired
after  the  neonatal  period,  strongly  indicate  sexual  contact.  For  other  diseases  (e.g.,
HSV,  HPV  and  anogenital  warts,  and  vaginitis),  the  association  with  sexual  contact  is
not as clear (see Sexual Assault and Abuse and STIs). MSM comprise a diverse group in
terms of behaviors, identities, and health care needs (179). The term “MSM” often is
used clinically to refer to sexual behavior alone, regardless of sexual orientation (e.g., a
person might identify as heterosexual but still be classified as MSM). Sexual orientation
is  independent  of  gender  identity.  Classification  of  MSM  can  vary  in  the  inclusion  of
transgender men and women on the basis of whether men are defined by sex at birth
(i.e.,  transgender  women  included)  or  current  gender  identity  (i.e.,  transgender  men
included). Therefore, sexual orientation as well as gender identity of individual persons
and their sex partners should be obtained during health care visits. MSM might be at
increased risk for HIV and other STIs because of their sexual network or behavioral or
biologic factors, including number of concurrent partners, condomless sex, anal sex, or
substance  use  (180–182).  These  factors,  along  with  sexual  network  or  higher
community  disease  prevalence,  can  increase  the  risk  for  STIs  among  MSM  compared
with other groups (183,184). Performing a detailed and comprehensive sexual history is
the first step in identifying vulnerability and providing tailored counseling and care (3).
Factors  associated  with  increased  vulnerability  to  STI  acquisition  among  MSM  include
having  multiple  partners,  anonymous  partners,  and  concurrent  partners  (185,186).
Repeat  syphilis  infections  are  common  and  might  be  associated  with  HIV  infection,
substance use (e.g., methamphetamines), Black race, and multiple sex partners (187).
Similarly, gonorrhea incidence has increased among MSM and might be more likely to
display  antimicrobial  resistance  compared  with  other  groups  (188,189).  Gonococcal
infection among MSM has been associated with similar risk factors to syphilis, including
having multiple anonymous partners and substance use, especially methamphetamines
(190).  Disparities  in  gonococcal  infection  are  also  more  pronounced  among  certain
racial  and  ethnic  groups  of  MSM  (141).  MSM  are  disproportionately  at  risk  for  HIV
infection. In the United States, the estimated lifetime risk for HIV infection among MSM
is one in six, compared with heterosexual men at one in 524 and heterosexual women
at  one  in  253  (191).  These  disparities  are  further  exacerbated  by  race  and  ethnicity,
with African American/Black and Hispanic/Latino MSM having a one in two and a one in
four lifetime risk for HIV infection, respectively. For HIV, transmission occurs much more
readily through receptive anal sex, compared with penile-vaginal sex (192). Similar to
other STIs, multiple partners, anonymous partners, condomless sex, and substance use
are  all  associated  with  HIV  infection  (193–196).  Importantly,  other  STIs  also  might
significantly increase the risk for HIV infection (197–199). An estimated 10% of new HIV
infections  were  attributable  to  chlamydial  or  gonococcal  infection  (81).  A  substantial
number  of  MSM  remain  unaware  of  their  HIV  diagnosis  (200).  Clinical  care  involving
MSM, including those who have HIV infection, should involve asking about STI-related
risk  factors  and  routine  STI  testing.  Clinicians  should  routinely  ask  MSM  about  their
sexual  behaviors  and  symptoms  consistent  with  common  STIs,  including  urethral
discharge, dysuria, ulcers, rash, lymphadenopathy, and anorectal symptoms that might
be consistent with proctitis (e.g., discharge, rectal bleeding, pain on defecation, or pain
during  anal  sex).  However,  certain  STIs  are  asymptomatic,  especially  at  rectal  and
pharyngeal  sites,  and  routine  testing  is  recommended.  In  addition,  clinicians  should
provide education and counseling regarding evidence-based safer-sex approaches that
have  demonstrated  effectiveness  in  reducing  STI  incidence  (see  HIV  Infection,
Detection, Counseling, and Referral). PrEP is the use of medications for preventing an
infection  before  exposure.  Studies  have  demonstrated  that  a  daily  oral  medication
TDF/FTC  is  effective  in  preventing  HIV  acquisition,  and  specifically  among  MSM
(74,75,201). PrEP guidelines provide information regarding sexually active persons who
are at substantial risk for acquiring HIV infection (having had anal or vaginal sex during
the  previous  6  months  with  either  a  partner  with  HIV  infection,  a  bacterial  STI  in  the
past 6 months, or inconsistent or no condom use with a sex partner) or persons who
inject drugs (injecting partner with HIV infection or sharing injection equipment) (80).
Those guidelines provide information regarding daily PrEP use for either TDF/FTC (men
or women) or tenofovir alafenamide and emtricitabine for MSM. Screening for bacterial
STIs should occur at least every 6 months for all sexually active patients and every 3
months among MSM or among patients with ongoing risk behaviors. MSM taking PrEP
might compensate for decreased HIV acquisition risk by using condoms less frequently
or  modifying  their  behavior  in  other  ways  (202,203),  although  data  regarding  this
behavior are inconsistent. Studies have reported that MSM taking PrEP have high rates
of STIs, and frequent screening is warranted (204–206). Rectal and pharyngeal testing
by  NAAT  for  gonorrhea  and  chlamydia  is  recognized  as  an  important  sexual  health
consideration  for  MSM.  Rectal  gonorrhea  and  chlamydia  are  associated  with  HIV
infection (82,207), and men with repeat rectal infections can be at substantially higher
risk for HIV acquisition (208). Pharyngeal infections with gonorrhea or chlamydia might
be a principal source of urethral infections (209–211). Studies have demonstrated that
among MSM, prevalence of rectal gonorrhea and chlamydia ranges from 0.2% to 24%
and 2.1% to 23%, respectively, and prevalence of pharyngeal gonorrhea and chlamydia
ranges from 0.5% to 16.5% and 0% to 3.6%, respectively (171). Approximately 70% of
gonococcal  and  chlamydial  infections  might  be  missed  if  urogenital-only  testing  is
performed among MSM (212–216) because most pharyngeal and rectal infections are
asymptomatic. Self-collected swabs have been reported to be an acceptable means of
collection for pharyngeal and rectal specimens (217–219), which can enhance patient
comfort and reduce clinical workloads. A detailed sexual history should be taken for all
MSM  to  identify  anatomic  locations  exposed  to  infection  for  screening.  Clinics  that
provide services for MSM at high risk should consider implementing routine extragenital
screening for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis infections, and screening is likely to be
cost-effective (220). STI screening among MSM has been reported to be suboptimal. In
a cross-sectional sample of MSM in the United States, approximately one third reported
not  having  had  an  STI  test  during  the  previous  3  years,  and  MSM  with  multiple  sex
partners  reported  less  frequent  screening  (221).  MSM  living  with  HIV  infection  and
engaged in care also experience suboptimal rates of STI testing (222,223). Limited data
exist  regarding  the  optimal  frequency  of  screening  for  gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  and
syphilis  among  MSM,  with  the  majority  of  evidence  derived  from  mathematical
modeling. Models from Australia have demonstrated that increasing syphilis screening
frequency from two times a year to four times a year resulted in a relative decrease of
84%  from  peak  prevalence  (224).  In  a  compartmental  model  applied  to  different
populations  in  Canada,  quarterly  syphilis  screening  averted  more  than  twice  the
number  of  syphilis  cases,  compared  with  semiannual  screening  (225).  Furthermore,
MSM  screening  coverage  needed  for  eliminating  syphilis  among  a  population  is
substantially reduced from 62% with annual screening to 23% with quarterly screening
(226,227). In an MSM transmission model that explored the impact of HIV PrEP use on
STI prevalence, quarterly chlamydia and gonorrhea screening was associated with an
83% reduction in incidence (205). The only empiric data available that examined the
impact  of  screening  frequency  come  from  an  observational  cohort  of  MSM  using  HIV
PrEP  in  which  quarterly  screening  identified  more  bacterial  STIs,  and  semiannual
screening  would  have  resulted  in  delayed  treatment  of  35%  of  total  identified  STI
infections  (206).  In  addition,  quarterly  screening  was  reported  to  have  prevented  STI
exposure  in  a  median  of  three  sex  partners  per  STI  infection  (206).  On  the  basis  of
available  evidence,  quarterly  screening  for  gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  and  syphilis  for
certain sexually active MSM can improve case finding, which can reduce the duration of
infection  at  the  population  level,  reduce  ongoing  transmission  and,  ultimately,
prevalence  among  this  population  (228).  Preventive  screening  for  common  STIs  is
indicated for all MSM. The following screening recommendations summarize published
federal  agency  and  USPSTF  clinical  prevention  guidelines  for  MSM  and  should  be
performed at least annually. HIV serologic testing is indicated if HIV status is unknown
or  if  HIV  negative  and  the  patient  or  their  sex  partner  has  had  more  than  one  sex
partner  since  the  most  recent  HIV  test.  Syphilis  serologic  testing  is  indicated  to
establish  whether  persons  with  reactive  tests  have  untreated  syphilis,  have  partially
treated  syphilis,  or  are  manifesting  a  slow  or  inadequate  serologic  response  to
recommended previous therapy. The following testing is recommended for MSM: Basing
screening practices solely on history might be suboptimal because providers might feel
uncomfortable  taking  a  detailed  sexual  history  (229),  men  might  also  feel
uncomfortable sharing personal sexual information with their provider, and rectal and
pharyngeal infections can be identified even in the absence of reported risk behaviors
(171). Furthermore, the role of saliva, kissing, and rimming (i.e., oral-rectal contact) in
the  transmission  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  has  not  been  well  studied
(230–232).  Rectal  and  pharyngeal  testing  (provider-collected  or  self-collected
specimens)  should  be  performed  for  all  MSM  who  report  exposure  at  these  sites.
Testing  can  be  offered  to  MSM  who  do  not  report  exposure  at  these  sites  after  a
detailed explanation, due to known underreporting of risk behaviors. All MSM with HIV
infection entering care should be screened for gonorrhea and chlamydia at appropriate
anatomic sites of exposure as well as for syphilis. More frequent STI screening (i.e., for
syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydia)  at  3-  to  6-month  intervals  is  indicated  for  MSM,
including those taking PrEP and those with HIV infection, if risk behaviors persist or if
they  or  their  sex  partners  have  multiple  partners.  In  addition,  providers  can  consider
the benefits of offering more frequent HIV screening (e.g., every 3–6 months) to MSM at
increased risk for acquiring HIV infection. All MSM should be screened with HBsAg, HBV
core  antibody,  and  HBV  surface  antibody  testing  to  detect  HBV  infection  (233).
Vaccination against both HAV and HBV is recommended for all MSM for whom previous
infection  or  vaccination  cannot  be  documented.  Serologic  testing  can  be  considered
before vaccinating if the patient’s vaccination history is unknown; however, vaccination
should  not  be  delayed.  Vaccinating  persons  who  have  had  previous  infection  or
vaccination does not increase the risk for vaccine-related adverse events (see Hepatitis
A Virus; Hepatitis B Virus). CDC recommends HCV screening at least once for all adults
aged ≥18 years, except in settings where the prevalence of HCV infection (HCV RNA
positivity)  is  <0.1%  (156).  The  American  Association  for  the  Study  of  Liver
Diseases/Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America  guidelines  recommend  all  MSM  with
HIV infection be screened for HCV during the initial HIV evaluation and at least annually
thereafter  (https://www.hcvguidelines.org).  More  frequent  screening  depends  on
ongoing  risk  behaviors,  high-risk  sexual  behavior,  and  concomitant  ulcerative  STIs  or
STI-related proctitis. Sexual transmission of HCV can occur and is most common among
MSM  with  HIV  infection  (234–237).  Screening  for  HCV  in  this  setting  is  cost-effective
(238,239). Screening should be performed by using HCV antibody assays followed by
HCV  RNA  testing  for  those  with  a  positive  antibody  test.  Suspicion  for  acute  HCV
infection  (e.g.,  clinical  evidence  of  hepatitis  and  risk  behaviors)  should  prompt
consideration for HCV RNA testing, despite a negative antibody test. HPV infection and
associated conditions (e.g., anogenital warts and anal squamous intraepithelial lesions)
are  highly  prevalent  among  MSM.  The  HPV  vaccination  is  recommended  for  all  men,
including MSM and transgender persons or immunocompromised males, including those
with  HIV  infection,  through  age  26  years  (11).  More  information  is  available  at
https://www.cdc.gov/hpv/downloads/9vhpv-guidance.pdf.
 A
 digital
 anorectal
examination  (DARE)  should  be performed  to  detect  early  anal  cancer  among  persons
with  HIV  and  MSM  without  HIV  but  who  have  a  history  of  receptive  anal  intercourse.
Data are insufficient to recommend routine anal cancer screening with anal cytology in
populations  at  risk  for  anal  cancer  (see  Anal  Cancer).  Health  centers  that  initiate  a
cytology-based  screening  program  should  only  do  so  if  referrals  to  high-resolution
anoscopy  (HRA)  and  biopsy  are  available.  Evaluation  for  HSV-2  infection  with
type-specific  serologic  tests  also  can  be  considered  if  infection  status  is  unknown
among  persons  with  previously  undiagnosed  genital  tract  infection  (see  Genital
Herpes). Studies have reported that a benefit might be derived from STI PEP and PrEP
for STI prevention. One study demonstrated that monthly oral administration of a 1-g
dose of azithromycin reduced infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis but did
not decrease the incidence of HIV transmission (240). Among MSM, doxycycline taken
as PEP in a single oral dose ≤24 hours after sex decreased infection with Treponema
pallidum and C. trachomatis; however, no substantial effect was observed for infection
with N. gonorrhoeae (93). Doxycycline taken as STI PrEP as 100 mg orally once daily
also demonstrated a substantial reduction in gonorrhea, chlamydia, and syphilis among
MSM (90). However, these studies had limitations because of small sample size, short
duration of therapy, and concerns about antibiotic resistance, specifically regarding N.
gonorrhoeae  (241).  Further  study  is  needed  to  determine  the  effectiveness  of  using
antimicrobials  for  STI  PrEP  or  PEP.  Different  counseling  and  STI  prevention  strategies
are needed to effectively engage different groups of MSM. Outreach efforts should be
guided by local surveillance efforts and community input. Engaging MSM at risk through
social  media,  specifically  online  hookup  sites,  is  an  important  outreach  effort  to
consider. Hookup sites are Internet sites and mobile telephone applications that men
might  use  for  meeting  other  men  for  sex.  Internet  use  might  facilitate  sexual
encounters and STI transmission among MSM, and many men report using hookup sites
to  meet  partners  (242–245).  The  ease  and  accessibility  of  meeting  partners  online
might reduce stigma and barriers of meeting partners through other settings. Moreover,
these sites offer an opportunity for effective STI prevention messaging (246), although
the cost might be limiting (247). Different groups of MSM might use different hookup
sites,  and  efforts  should  be  guided  by  local  community  input.  Studies  have
demonstrated the acceptability and feasibility of reaching MSM through these hookup
sites  to  promote  STI  prevention  efforts  (248,249).  The  importance  of  sexual
transmission of enteric pathogens among MSM has been recognized since the 1970s,
after  the  first  report  of  MSM-associated  shigellosis  was  reported  in  San  Francisco
(250,251). Global increases in the incidence of shigellosis among adult MSM have been
more recently observed (252–256). Sporadic outbreaks of Shigella sonnei and Shigella
flexneri  have  been  reported  among  MSM  (257–262).  Transmission  occurs  through
oral-anal  contact  or  sexual  contact,  and  transmission  efficiency  is  enhanced  by  both
biologic  or  host  and  behavioral  factors.  HIV  without  viral  suppression  can  be  an
independent risk factor that can contribute to transmission by increasing shedding of
the  enteric  pathogen,  increasing  susceptibility  of  the  host,  or  both  (255,263).
Surveillance  data  in  England  during  2004–2015  demonstrated  that  21%  of
nontravel-associated  Shigella  diagnoses  among  MSM  were  among  persons  with  HIV
infection (255). Other enteric organisms might also cause disease among MSM through
sexual activities leading to oral-anal contact, including bacteria such as Escherichia coli
(264) and Campylobacter jejuni or Campylobacter coli (265,266); viruses such as HAV
(267);  and  parasites  such  as  Giardia  lamblia  or  Entamoeba  histolytica  (268,269).
Behavioral characteristics associated with the sexual transmission of enteric infections
are  broadly  similar  to  those  associated  with  other  STIs  (e.g.,  gonorrhea,  syphilis,  and
lymphogranuloma  venereum  [LGV]).  This  includes  multiple  sex  partners  and  online
hookup sites that increase opportunities for sexual mixing, which might create dense
sexual networks that facilitate STI transmission among MSM (270). Specific behaviors
associated with sexually transmitted enteric infections among MSM involve attendance
at  sex  parties  and  recreational  drug  use  including  chem  sex  (i.e.,  using  crystal
methamphetamine, gamma-butyrolactone, or mephedrone before or during sex), which
might  facilitate  condomless  sex,  group  sex,  fisting,  use  of  sex  toys,  and  scat  play
(253,271).  The  growing  number  of  sexually  transmitted  enteric  infections  might  be
attributable in part to the emergence of antimicrobial resistance. This is well reported
regarding  Shigella  species,  for  which  rapid  intercontinental  dissemination  of  a  S.
flexneri  3a  lineage  with  high-level  resistance  to  azithromycin  through  sexual
transmission  among  MSM  (272)  and  clusters  of  multidrug  resistant  shigella  cases
among  MSM  have  recently  been  reported  (273).  Multidrug-resistant  Campylobacter
species  have  also  been  documented  (266,274).  For  MSM  patients  with  diarrhea,
clinicians  should  request  laboratory  examinations,  including  stool  culture;  provide
counseling  about  the  risk  for  infection  with  enteric  pathogens  during  sexual  activity
(oral-anal, oral-genital, anal-genital, and digital-anal contact) that could expose them to
enteric  pathogens;  and  choose  treatment,  when  needed,  according  to  antimicrobial
drug susceptibility. WSW and WSWM comprise diverse groups with variations in sexual
identity, practices, and risk behaviors. Studies indicate that certain WSW, particularly
adolescents, young women, and WSWM, might be at increased risk for STIs and HIV on
the basis of reported risk behaviors (275–280). Studies have highlighted the diversity of
sexual  practices  and  examined  use  of  protective  or  risk-reduction  strategies  among
WSW populations (281–283). Use of barrier protection with female partners (e.g., gloves
during digital-genital sex, external condoms with sex toys, and latex or plastic barriers
[also known as dental dams for oral-genital sex]) was infrequent in all studies. Although
health organizations have online materials directed to patients, few comprehensive and
reliable  resources  of  sexual  health  information  for  WSW  are  available  (284).  Recent
studies  regarding  STI  rates  among  WSW  and  WSWM  indicate  that  WSWM  experience
higher rates of STIs than WSW, with rates comparable with women who have sex with
men  (WSM)  in  all  studies  reviewed  (279,285,286).  These  studies  indicate  that  WSW
might experience STIs at lower rates than WSWM and WSM, although still at significant
rates (287). One study reported higher sexual-risk behaviors among adolescent WSWM
and WSW than among adolescent WSM (280). WSW report reduced knowledge of STI
risks  (288),  and  both  WSW  and  WSWM  experience  barriers  to  care,  especially  Black
WSW and WSWM (289,290). In addition, a continuum of sexual behaviors reported by
WSW and WSWM indicates the need for providers to not assume lower risk for WSW,
highlighting  the  importance  of  an  open  discussion  about  sexual  health.  Few  data  are
available  regarding  the  risk  for  STIs  conferred  by  sex  between  women;  however,
transmission  risk  probably  varies  by  the  specific  STI  and  sexual  practice  (e.g.,
oral-genital sex; vaginal or anal sex using hands, fingers, or penetrative sex items; and
oral-anal  sex)  (291,292).  Practices  involving  digital-vaginal  or  digital-anal  contact,
particularly  with  shared  penetrative  sex  items,  present  a  possible  means  for
transmission  of  infected  cervicovaginal  or  anal  secretions.  This  possibility  is  most
directly  supported  by  reports  of  shared  trichomonas  infections  (293,294)  and  by
concordant  drug-resistance  genotype  testing  and  phylogenetic  linkage  analysis
identifying HIV transmitted sexually between women (295,296). The majority of WSW
(53%–97%) have had sex with men in the past and continue to do so, with 5%–28% of
WSW  reporting  male  partners  during  the  previous  year  (292,297–300).  HPV  can  be
transmitted through skin-to-skin contact, and sexual transmission of HPV likely occurs
between  WSW  (301–303).  HPV  DNA  has  been  detected  through  polymerase  chain
reaction (PCR)–based methods from the cervix, vagina, and vulva among 13%–30% of
WSW (301,302) and can persist on fomites, including sex toys (304). Among WSW who
report no lifetime history of sex with men, 26% had antibodies to HPV-16, and 42% had
antibodies  to  HPV-6  (301).  High-grade  squamous  intraepithelial  lesions  (HSIL)  and
low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (LSIL) have been detected on Papanicolaou
smears  (Pap  tests)  among  WSW  who  reported  no  previous  sex  with  men  (301,302).
WSWM are at risk for acquiring HPV from both their female partners and male partners
and  thus  are  at  risk  for  cervical  cancer.  Therefore,  routine  cervical  cancer  screening
should be offered to all women, regardless of sexual orientation or practices, and young
adult  WSW  and  WSWM  should  be  offered  HPV  vaccination  in  accordance  with
recommendations
 (11)
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/hpv.html).
 Genital
transmission of HSV-2 between female sex partners is inefficient but can occur. A U.S.
population-based  survey  among  women  aged  18–59  years  demonstrated  an  HSV-2
seroprevalence of 30% among women reporting same-sex partners during the previous
year, 36% among women reporting same-sex partners in their lifetime, and 24% among
women  reporting  no  lifetime  same-sex  behavior  (299).  HSV-2  seroprevalence  among
women  self-identifying  as  homosexual  or  lesbian  was  8%,  similar  to  a  previous
clinic-based  study  of  WSW  (299,305)  but  was  26%  among  Black  WSW  in  one  study
(287). The relatively frequent practice of orogenital sex among WSW and WSWM might
place them at higher risk for genital infection with HSV-1, a hypothesis supported by
the  recognized  association  between  HSV-1  seropositivity  and  previous  number  of
female  partners.  Thus,  sexual  transmission  of  HSV-1  and  HSV-2  can  occur  between
female  sex  partners.  This  information  should  be  communicated  to  women  as  part  of
sexual  health  counseling.  Trichomonas  is  a  relatively  common  infection  among  WSW
and WSWM, with prevalence rates higher than for chlamydia or gonorrhea (306,307),
and  direct  transmission  of  trichomonas  between  female  partners  has  been
demonstrated  (293,294).  Limited  information  is  available  regarding  transmission  of
bacterial  STIs  between  female  partners.  Transmission  of  syphilis  between  female  sex
partners,  probably  through  oral  sex,  has  been  reported.  Although  the  rate  of
transmission of C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae between women is unknown, infection
also  might  be  acquired  from  past  or  current  male  partners.  Data  indicate  that  C.
trachomatis  infection  among  WSW  can  occur  (275,286,308,309).  Data  are  limited
regarding  gonorrhea  rates  among  WSW  and  WSWM  (170).  Reports  of  same-sex
behavior  among  women  should  not  deter  providers  from  offering  and  providing
screening for STIs, including chlamydia, according to guidelines. BV is common among
women,  and  even  more  so  among  women  with  female  partners  (310–312).
Epidemiologic data strongly demonstrate that BV is sexually transmitted among women
with  female  partners.  Evidence  continues  to  support  the  association  of  such  sexual
behaviors as having a new partner, having a partner with BV, having receptive oral sex,
and  having  digital-vaginal  and  digital-anal  sex  with  incident  BV  (313,314).  A  study
including  monogamous  couples  demonstrated  that  female  sex  partners  frequently
share identical genital Lactobacillus strains (315). Within a community-based cohort of
WSW, extravaginal (i.e., oral and rectal) reservoirs of BV-associated bacteria were a risk
factor  for  incident  BV  (316).  Studies  have  examined  the  impact  of  specific  sexual
practices  on  the  vaginal  microflora  (306,317–319)  and  on  recurrent  (320)  or  incident
(321,322) BV among WSW. A BV pathogenesis study in WSW reported that Prevotella
bivia,  Gardnerella  vaginalis,  and  Atopobium  vaginae  might  have  substantial  roles  in
development of incident BV (323). These studies have continued to support, although
have not proven, the hypothesis that sexual behaviors, specific BV-associated bacteria,
and  possibly  exchange  of  vaginal  or  extravaginal  microbiota  (e.g.,  oral  bacterial
communities)  between  partners  might  be  involved  in  the  pathogenesis  of  BV  among
WSW. Although BV is common among WSW, routine screening for asymptomatic BV is
not  recommended.  Results  of  one  randomized  trial  used  a  behavioral  intervention  to
reduce persistent BV among WSW through reduced sharing of vaginal fluid on hands or
sex toys. Women randomly assigned to the intervention were 50% less likely to report
receptive  digital-vaginal  contact  without  gloves  than  control  subjects,  and  they
reported  sharing  sex  toys  infrequently.  However,  these  women  had  no  reduction  in
persistent  BV  at  1  month  posttreatment  and  no  reduction  in  incident  episodes  of
recurrent  BV  (324).  Trials  have  not  been  reported  examining  the  benefits  of  treating
female partners of women with BV. Recurrent BV among WSW is associated with having
a same-sex partner and a lack of condom use (325). Increasing awareness of signs and
symptoms  of  BV  among  women  and  encouraging  healthy  sexual  practices  (e.g.,
avoiding shared sex toys, cleaning shared sex toys, and using barriers) might benefit
women  and  their  partners.  Sexually  active  women  are  at  risk  for  acquiring  bacterial,
viral,  and  protozoal  STIs  from  current  and  previous  partners,  both  male  and  female.
WSW should not be presumed to be at low or no risk for STIs on the basis of their sexual
orientation.  Report  of  same-sex  behavior  among  women  should  not  deter  providers
from  considering  and  performing  screening  for  STIs  and  cervical  cancer  according  to
guidelines.  Effective  screening  requires  that  care  providers  and  their  female  patients
engage  in  a  comprehensive  and  open  discussion  of  sexual  and  behavioral  risks  that
extends  beyond  sexual  identity.  Transgender  persons  often  experience  high  rates  of
stigma and socioeconomic and structural barriers to care that negatively affect health
care  usage  and  increase  susceptibility  to  HIV  and  STIs  (326–332).  Persons  who  are
transgender have a gender identity that differs from the sex that they were assigned at
birth  (333,334).  Transgender  women  (also  known  as  trans  women,  transfeminine
persons, or women of transgender experience) are women who were assigned male sex
at  birth  (born  with  male  anatomy).  Transgender  men  (also  known  as  trans  men,
transmasculine  persons,  or  men  of  transgender  experience)  are  men  who  were
assigned  female  sex  at  birth  (i.e.,  born  with  female  anatomy).  In  addition,  certain
persons might identify outside the gender binary of male or female or move back and
forth  between  different  gender  identities  and  use  such  terms  as  “gender  nonbinary,”
“genderqueer,” or “gender fluid” to describe themselves. Persons who use terms such
as  “agender”  or  “null  gender”  do  not  identify  with  having  any  gender.  The  term
“cisgender” is used to describe persons who identify with their assigned sex at birth.
Prevalence  studies  of  transgender  persons  among  the  overall  population  have  been
limited  and  often  are  based  on  small  convenience  samples.  Gender  identity  is
independent  of  sexual  orientation.  Sexual  orientation  identities  among  transgender
persons  are  diverse.  Persons  who  are  transgender  or  gender  diverse  might  have  sex
with  cisgender  men,  cisgender  women,  or  other  transgender  or  gender  nonbinary
persons.  Providers  should  create  welcoming  environments  that  facilitate  disclosure  of
gender identity and sexual orientation. Clinics should document gender identity and sex
assigned  at  birth  for  all  patients  to  improve  sexual  health  care  for  transgender  and
gender nonbinary persons. Assessment of gender identity and sex assigned at birth has
been  validated  among  diverse  populations,  has  been  reported  to  be  acceptable
(335,336), and might result in increased patients identifying as transgender (337). Lack
of medical provider knowledge and other barriers to care (e.g., discrimination in health
care  settings  or  denial  of  services)  often  result  in  transgender  and  gender  nonbinary
persons avoiding or delaying preventive care services (338–340) and incurring missed
opportunities for HIV and STI prevention services. Gender-inclusive and trauma-guided
health care might increase the number of transgender patients who seek sexual health
services, including STI testing (341), because transgender persons are at high risk for
sexual  violence  (342).  Primary  care  providers  should  take  a  comprehensive  sexual
history,  including  a  discussion  of  STI  screening,  HIV  PrEP  and  PEP,  behavioral  health,
and  social  determinants  of  sexual  health.  Clinicians  can  improve  the  experience  of
sexual  health  screening  and  counseling  for  transgender  persons  by  asking  for  their
choice  of  terminology  or  modifying  language  (e.g.,  asking  patients  their  gender
pronouns)  to  be  used  during  clinic  visits  and  history  taking  and  examination  (343).
Options for fertility preservation, pregnancy potential, and contraception options should
also  be  discussed,  if  indicated.  For  transgender  persons  who  retain  a  uterus  and
ovaries,  ovulation  might  continue  in  the  presence  of  testosterone  therapy,  and
pregnancy  potential  exists  (https://transcare.ucsf.edu).  A  systematic  review  and
meta-analysis  of  HIV  infection  among  transgender  women  estimated  that  HIV
prevalence  in  the  United  States  is  14%  among  transgender  women,  with  the  highest
prevalence  among  Black  (44%)  and  Hispanic  (26%)  transgender  women  (344).  Data
also  demonstrate  high  rates  of  HIV  infection  among  transgender  women  worldwide
(345). Bacterial STI prevalence varies among transgender women and is based largely
on  convenience  samples.  Despite  limited  data,  international  and  U.S.  studies  have
indicated  elevated  incidence  and  prevalence  of  gonorrhea  and  chlamydia  among
transgender women similar to rates among cisgender MSM (346–348). A recent study
using  data  from  the  STD  Surveillance  Network  revealed  that  the  proportions  of
transgender women with extragenital chlamydial or gonococcal infections were similar
to those of cisgender MSM (349). Providers caring for transgender women should have
knowledge  of  their  patients’  current  anatomy  and  patterns  of  sexual  behavior  before
counseling  them  about  STI  and  HIV  prevention.  The  majority  of  transgender  women
have not undergone genital-affirmation surgery and therefore might retain a functional
penis; in these instances, they might engage in insertive oral, vaginal, or anal sex as
well as receptive oral or anal sex. In the U.S. Transgender Survey, 12% of transgender
women  had  undergone  vaginoplasty  surgery,  and  approximately  50%  more  were
considering  surgical  intervention  (350).  Providers  should  have  knowledge  about  the
type  of  tissue  used  to  construct  the  neovagina,  which  can  affect  future  STI  and  HIV
preventive  care  and  screening  recommendations.  The  majority  of  vaginoplasty
surgeries  conducted  in  the  United  States  use  penile  and  scrotal  tissue  to  create  the
neovagina  (351).  Other  surgical  techniques  use  intestinal  tissue  (e.g.,  sigmoid  colon
graft)  or  split-skin  grafts  (352).  Although  these  surgeries  involve  penectomy  and
orchiectomy,  the  prostate  remains  intact.  Transgender  women  who  have  had  a
vaginoplasty might engage in receptive vaginal, oral, or anal sex. Neovaginal STIs have
infrequently been reported in the literature and include HSV and HPV/genital warts in
penile-inversion  vaginoplasty,  C.  trachomatis  in  procedures  that  involved  penile  skin
and  grafts  with  urethra  mucosa  or  abdominal  peritoneal  lining  (353),  and  N.
gonorrhoeae  in  both  penile-inversion  and  colovaginoplasty  (354–359).  If  the
vaginoplasty used an intestinal graft, a risk also exists for bowel-related disease (e.g.,
adenocarcinoma, inflammatory bowel disease, diversion colitis, and polyps) (360–362).
The few studies of HIV prevalence among transgender men indicated that they have a
lower  prevalence  of  HIV  infection  than  transgender  women.  A  recent  estimate  of  HIV
prevalence  among  transgender  men  was  2%  (344).  However,  transgender  men  who
have sex with cisgender men might be at elevated risk for HIV infection (332,363,364).
Data are limited regarding STI prevalence among transgender men, and the majority of
studies  have  used  clinic-based  data  or  convenience  sampling.  Recent  data  from  the
STD Surveillance Network demonstrated higher prevalence of gonorrhea and chlamydia
among  transgender  men,  similar  to  rates  reported  among  cisgender  MSM  (365).  The
U.S. Transgender Survey indicated that the proportion of transgender men and gender
diverse persons assigned female sex at birth who have undergone gender-affirmation
genital  surgery  is  low.  Providers  should  consider  the  anatomic  diversity  among
transgender  men  because  a  person  can  undergo  a  metoidioplasty  (a  procedure  to
increase the length of the clitoris), with or without urethral lengthening, and might not
have a hysterectomy and oophorectomy and therefore be at risk for bacterial STIs, HPV,
HSV,  HIV,  and  cervical  cancer  (366).  For  transgender  men  using  gender-affirming
hormone  therapy,  the  decrease  in  estradiol  levels  caused  by  exogenous  testosterone
can  lead  to  vaginal  atrophy  (367,368)  and  is  associated  with  a  high  prevalence  of
unsatisfactory  sample  acquisition  (369).  The  impact  of  these  hormonal  changes  on
mucosal  susceptibility  to  HIV  and  STIs  is  unknown.  Transgender  men  who  have  not
chosen to undergo hysterectomy with removal of the cervix remain at risk for cervical
cancer.  These  persons  often  avoid  cervical  cancer  screening  because  of  multiple
factors,  including  discomfort  with  medical  examinations  and  fear  of  discrimination
(338,370). Providers should be aware that conducting a speculum examination can be
technically difficult after metoidioplasty surgery because of narrowing of the introitus.
In these situations, high-risk HPV testing using a swab can be considered; self-collected
swabs  for  high-risk  HPV  testing  has  been  reported  to  be  an  acceptable  option  for
transgender men (371). The following are screening recommendations for transgender
and gender diverse persons: Multiple studies have demonstrated that persons entering
correctional facilities have a high prevalence of STIs, HIV, and viral hepatitis, especially
those  aged  ≤35  years  (141,372,373).  Risk  behaviors  for  acquiring  STIs  (e.g.,  having
condomless  sex,  having  multiple  sex  partners,  substance  misuse,  and  engaging  in
commercial,  survival,  or  coerced  sex)  are  common  among  incarcerated  populations.
Before  their  incarceration,  many  persons  have  had  limited  access  to  medical  care.
Other  social  determinants  of  health  (e.g.,  insufficient  social  and  economic  support  or
living in communities with high local STI prevalence) are common. Addressing STIs in
correctional  settings  is  vital  for  addressing  the  overall  STI  impact  among  affected
populations. Growing evidence demonstrates the usefulness of expanded STI screening
and  treatment  services  in  correctional  settings,  including  short-term  facilities  (jails),
long-term  institutions  (prisons),  and  juvenile  detention  centers.  For  example,  in
jurisdictions  with  comprehensive,  targeted  jail  screening,  more  chlamydial  infections
among females (and males if screened) are detected and subsequently treated in the
correctional  setting  than  in  any  other  single  reporting  source  (141,374)  and  might
represent the majority of reported cases in certain jurisdictions (375). Screening in the
jail setting has the potential to reach substantially more persons at risk than screening
among the prison population alone. Both males and females aged ≤35 years in juvenile
and adult detention facilities have been reported to have higher rates of chlamydia and
gonorrhea  than  nonincarcerated  persons  in  the  community  (141,374,376).  Syphilis
seroprevalence  rates,  which  can  indicate  previously  treated  or  current  infection,  are
considerably  higher  among  incarcerated  adult  men  and  women  than  among
adolescents,  which  is  consistent  with  the  overall  national  syphilis  trends  (141,374).
Detection and treatment of early syphilis in correctional facilities might affect rates of
transmission  among  adults  and  prevention  of  congenital  syphilis  (377).  In  jails,
approximately half of entrants are released back into the community within 48 hours.
As a result, treatment completion rates for those screened for STIs and who receive STI
diagnoses  in  short-term  facilities  might  not  be  optimal.  However,  because  of  the
mobility  of  incarcerated  populations  in  and  out  of  the  community,  the  impact  of
screening in correctional facilities on the prevalence of infections among detainees and
subsequent transmission in the community after release might be considerable (378).
Moreover, treatment completion rates of ≥95% in short-term facilities can be achieved
by offering screening at or shortly after intake, thus facilitating earlier receipt of test
results and, if needed, follow-up of untreated persons can be conducted through public
health  outreach.  Universal,  opt-out  screening  for  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  among
females  aged  ≤35  years  entering  juvenile  and  adult  correctional  facilities  is
recommended  (379).  Males  aged  <30  years  entering  juvenile  and  adult  correctional
facilities should also be screened for chlamydia and gonorrhea (380). Opt-out screening
has  the  potential  to  substantially  increase  the  number  tested  and  the  number  of
chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  infections  detected  (381–385).  Point-of-care  (POC)  NAAT
might  also  be  considered  if  the  tests  have  demonstrated  sufficient  sensitivity  and
specificity.  Studies  have  demonstrated  high  prevalence  of  trichomoniasis  among
incarcerated females (386–392). Females aged ≤35 years and males aged <30 years
housed in correctional facilities should be screened for chlamydia and gonorrhea. This
screening  should  be  conducted  at  intake  and  offered  as  opt-out  screening.  Females
aged  ≤35  years  housed  in  correctional  facilities  should  be  screened  for  trichomonas.
This screening should be conducted at intake and offered as opt-out screening. Opt-out
screening for incarcerated persons should be conducted on the basis of the local area
and  institutional  prevalence  of  early  (primary,  secondary,  or  early  latent)  infectious
syphilis.  Correctional  facilities  should  stay  apprised  of  local  syphilis  prevalence.  In
short-term  facilities,  screening  at  entry  might  be  indicated.  All  persons  housed  in
juvenile  and  adult  correctional  facilities  should  be  screened  at  entry  for  start
highlightviral  hepatitis,  including  HAV,  HBV,  and  HCV,  depending  on  local  prevalence
and the person’s vaccination status. Vaccination for HAV and HBV should be offered if
the person is susceptible.end highlight Women and transgender men who are housed in
correctional facilities should be screened for cervical cancer as for women who are not
incarcerated (393,394) (see Cervical Cancer). All persons being housed in juvenile and
adult  correctional  facilities  should  be  screened  at  entry  for  HIV  infection;  screening
should  be  offered  as  opt-out  screening.  For  those  identified  as  being  at  risk  for  HIV
infection (e.g., with diagnosed gonorrhea or syphilis or persons who inject drugs) and
being  released  into  the  community,  starting  HIV  PrEP  (or  providing  linkage  to  a
community  clinic  for  HIV  PrEP)  for  HIV  prevention  should  be  considered  (395,396).
Persons  are  likely  to  engage  in  high-risk  activities  immediately  after  release  from
incarceration  (397).  For  those  identified  with  HIV  infection,  treatment  should  be
initiated.  Those  persons  receiving  PrEP  or  HIV  treatment  should  have  linkage  to  care
established  before  release.  Correctional  settings  should  consider  implementing  other
STI  prevention  approaches,  both  during  incarceration  and  upon  release,  which  might
include  educational  and  behavioral  counseling  interventions  (398–401),  vaccination
(e.g., for HPV) (402,403), condom distribution (404,405), EPT (125), and PrEP to prevent
HIV infection (see Primary Prevention Methods). Top Infection with HIV causes an acute
but  brief  and  nonspecific  influenza-like  retroviral  syndrome  that  can  include  fever,
malaise, lymphadenopathy, pharyngitis, arthritis, or skin rash. Most persons experience
at least one symptom; however, some might be asymptomatic or have no recognition
of  illness  (406–409).  Acute  infection  transitions  to  a  multiyear,  chronic  illness  that
progressively  depletes  CD4+  T  lymphocytes  crucial  for  maintenance  of  effective
immune  function.  Ultimately,  persons  with  untreated  HIV  infection  experience
symptomatic,  life-threatening  immunodeficiency  (i.e.,  AIDS).  Effective  ART  that
suppresses  HIV  replication  to  undetectable  levels  reduces  morbidity,  provides  a
near-normal
 lifespan,
 and
 prevents
 sexual
 transmission
 of
 HIV
 to
 others
(95–97,410–412).  Early  diagnosis  of  HIV  and  rapid  linkage  to  care  are  essential  for
achieving these goals. Guidelines from both the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services and the International AIDS Society–USA Panel recommend that all persons with
HIV infection be offered effective ART as soon as possible, both to reduce morbidity and
mortality and to prevent HIV transmission (413). STD specialty or sexual health clinics
are a vital partner in reducing HIV infections in the United States. These clinics provide
safety  net  services  to  vulnerable  populations  in  need  of  HIV  prevention  services  who
are  not  served  by  the  health  care  system  and  HIV  partner  service  organizations.
Diagnosis of an STI is a biomarker for HIV acquisition, especially among persons with
primary or secondary syphilis or, among MSM, rectal gonorrhea or chlamydia (197). STD
clinics perform only approximately 20% of all federally funded HIV tests nationally but
identify  approximately  30%  of  all  new  infections  (414).  Among  testing  venues,  STD
clinics are high performing in terms of linkage to HIV care within 90 days of diagnosis;
during 2013–2017, the percentage of persons with a new diagnosis in an STD clinic and
linked  to  care  within  90  days  increased  from  55%  to  >90%  (415,415).  The  following
recommendations apply to testing for HIV: HIV infection can be diagnosed by HIV 1/2
Ag/Ab  combination  immunoassays.  All  FDA-cleared  HIV  tests  are  highly  sensitive  and
specific. Available serologic tests can detect all known subtypes of HIV-1. The majority
also  detect  HIV-2  and  uncommon  variants  of  HIV-1  (e.g.,  group  O  and  group  N).
According to an algorithm for HIV diagnosis, CDC recommends that HIV testing begin
with  a  laboratory-based  HIV-1/HIV-2  Ag/Ab  combination  assay,  which,  if  repeatedly
reactive,  is  followed  by  a  laboratory-based  assay  with  a  supplemental  HIV-1/HIV-2
antibody  differentiation  assay  (https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/50872).  This  algorithm
confers an additional advantage because it can detect HIV-2 antibodies after the initial
immunoassay. Although HIV-2 is uncommon in the United States, accurate identification
is vital because monitoring and therapy for HIV-2 differs from that for HIV-1 (420). RNA
testing should be performed on all specimens with reactive immunoassay but negative
supplemental  antibody  test  results  to  determine  whether  the  discordance  represents
acute  HIV  infection.  Rapid  POC  HIV  tests  can  enable  clinicians  to  make  a  preliminary
diagnosis  of  HIV  infection  in  <20  minutes.  The  majority  of  rapid  antibody  assays
become reactive later in the course of HIV infection than conventional laboratory-based
assays  and  thus  can  produce  negative  results  among  persons  recently  infected  (e.g.,
acutely infected persons). Furthermore, HIV home-test kits only detect HIV antibodies
and therefore will not detect acute HIV infection. If early or acute infection is suspected
and  a  rapid  HIV  antibody  assay  is  negative,  confirmatory  testing  with  combined
laboratory-based assays or RNA testing should be performed. CDC recommends that all
persons  with  reactive  rapid  tests  be  assessed  with  a  laboratory-based  Ag/Ab  assay.
Additional  details  about  interpretation  of  results  by  using  the  HIV  testing  algorithm
recommended by CDC are available at https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/48472. Providers
serving  persons  at  risk  for  STIs  are  in  a  position  to  diagnose  HIV  infection  during  its
acute phase. Diagnosing HIV infection during the acute phase is particularly important
because persons with acute HIV have highly infectious disease due to the concentration
of virus in plasma and genital secretions, which is extremely elevated during that stage
of
 infection
 (421,422)
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/adult-and-adolescent-arv/acute-and-recent-ear
ly-hiv-infection?view=full). ART during acute HIV infection is recommended because it
substantially reduces infection transmission to others, improves laboratory markers of
disease,  might  decrease  severity  of  acute  disease,  lowers  viral  setpoint,  reduces  the
size  of  the  viral  reservoir,  decreases  the  rate  of  viral  mutation  by  suppressing
replication,
 and
 preserves
 immune
 function
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/adult-and-adolescent-arv/acute-and-recent-ear
ly-hiv-infection?view=full).  Persons  who  receive  an  acute  HIV  diagnosis  should  be
referred  immediately  to  an  HIV  clinical  care  provider,  provided  prevention  counseling
(e.g.,  advised  to  reduce  the  number  of  partners  and  to  use  condoms  correctly  and
consistently),  and  screened  for  STIs.  Information  should  be  provided  regarding
availability  of  PEP  for  sexual  and  injecting  drug  use  partners  not  known  to  have  HIV
infection  if  the  most  recent  contact  was  <72  hours  preceding  HIV  diagnosis.  When
providers test by using the CDC algorithm, specimens collected during acute infection
might  give  indeterminate  or  negative  results  because  insufficient  anti-HIV  antibodies
and  potentially  insufficient  antigen  are  present  to  be  reactive  on  Ag/Ab  combination
assays and supplemental HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation assays. Whenever acute
HIV  infection  is  suspected  (e.g.,  initial  testing  according  to  the  CDC  algorithm  is
negative or indeterminate after a possible sexual exposure to HIV within the previous
few days to weeks, especially if the person has symptoms or has primary or secondary
syphilis,  gonorrhea,  or  chlamydia),  additional  testing  for  HIV  RNA  is  recommended.  If
this  additional  testing  for  HIV  RNA  is  also  negative,  repeat  testing  in  a  few  weeks  is
recommended  to  rule  out  very  early  acute  infection  when  HIV  RNA  might  not  be
detectable. A more detailed discussion of testing in the context of acute HIV infection is
available
 at
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines/adult-and-adolescent-arv/initiation-antiretrovira
l-therapy?view=full. ART should be initiated as soon as possible for all persons with HIV
infection regardless of CD4+ T-cell count, both for individual health and to prevent HIV
transmission
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf).
Persons with HIV infection who achieve and maintain a viral load suppressed to <200
copies/mL with ART have effectively no risk for sexually transmitting HIV (95–97,421).
Early HIV diagnosis and treatment is thus not only vital for individual health but also as
a  public  health  intervention  to  prevent  new  infections.  Knowledge  of  the  prevention
benefit of treatment can help reduce stigma and increase the person’s commitment to
start  and  remain  adherent  to  ART  (423).  The  importance  of  adherence  should  be
stressed as well as the fact that ART does not protect against other STIs that can be
prevented  by  using  condoms.  Interventions  to  assist  persons  to  remain  adherent  to
their  prescribed  HIV  treatment,  to  otherwise  reduce  the  possibility  of  transmission  to
others,  and  to  protect  themselves  against  STIs,  have  been  developed  for  diverse
populations
 at
 risk
 (424)
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf).
Comprehensive  HIV  treatment  and  care  services  might  not  be  available  in  facilities
focused primarily on STI treatment. Providers in such settings should be knowledgeable
about HIV treatment and care options available in their communities and promptly link
persons  who  have  newly  diagnosed  HIV  infection  and  any  persons  with  HIV  infection
who  are  not  engaged  in  ongoing  effective  care  to  a  health  care  provider  or  facility
experienced
 in
 caring
 for
 persons
 living
 with
 HIV
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf).
Behavioral  and  psychosocial  services  are  integral  to  caring  for  persons  with  HIV
infection.  Providers  should  expect  persons  to  be  distressed  when  first  informed  that
they  have  HIV.  They  face  multiple  adaptive  challenges,  including  coping  with  the
reactions  of  others  to  a  stigmatizing  illness,  developing  and  adopting  strategies  to
maintain physical and emotional health, initiating changes in behavior to prevent HIV
transmission  to  others,  and  reducing  the  risk  for  acquiring  additional  STIs.  Many
persons will require assistance gaining access to health care and other support services
and  coping  with  changes  in  personal  relationships.  Persons  with  HIV  infection  might
have  additional  needs  (e.g.,  referral  for  substance  use  or  mental  health  disorders).
Others  require  assistance  to  secure  and  maintain  employment  and  housing.  Persons
capable  of  reproduction  might  require  family  planning  counseling,  information  about
reproductive  health  choices,  and  referral  for  reproductive  health  care.  The  following
recommendations  apply  to  managing  persons  with  diagnosed  HIV  infection:  At  the
initial  HIV  care  visit,  providers  should  screen  all  sexually  active  persons  for  syphilis,
gonorrhea, and chlamydia, and perform screening for these infections at least annually
during the course of HIV care (425). Specific testing includes syphilis serology and NAAT
for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis at the anatomic site of exposure. Women should
also be screened for trichomoniasis at the initial visit and annually thereafter. Women
should  be  screened  for  cervical  cancer  precursor  lesions  per  existing  guidelines  (98).
More  frequent  screening  for  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydia  (e.g.,  every  3  or  6
months) should be tailored to individual risk and the local prevalence of specific STIs.
Certain  STIs  can  be  asymptomatic;  their  diagnosis  might  prompt  referral  for  partner
services, might identify sexual and needle-sharing partners who can benefit from early
diagnosis  and  treatment  of  HIV,  and  might  prompt  reengagement  in  care  or  HIV
prevention  services  (e.g.,  PEP  or  PrEP)  (8).  More  detailed  information  on  screening,
testing, and treatment is provided in pathogen-specific sections of this report. Partner
notification  is  a  key  component  in  the  evaluation  of  persons  with  HIV  infection.  Early
diagnosis and treatment of HIV among all potentially exposed sexual and injecting drug
sharing partners can improve their health and reduce new infections. For those partners
without  HIV  infection,  partner  services  also  provide  an  opportunity  for  offering  HIV
prevention services, including PrEP or PEP (if exposure was <72 hours previous) and STI
testing and treatment. Health care providers should inform persons with diagnosed HIV
infection about any legal obligations of providers to report cases of HIV to public health;
the local confidential processes for managing partner services, including that a public
health  department  still  might  be  in  contact  to  follow  up  in  their  care  and  partner
services;  and  the  benefits  and  risks  of  partner  notification  and  services.  Health  care
providers  should  also  encourage  persons  with  a  new  HIV  diagnosis  to  notify  their
partners and provide them with referral information for their partners about HIV testing.
Partner  notification  for  exposure  to  HIV  should  be  confidential.  Health  care  providers
can  assist  in  the  partner  notification  process,  either  directly  or  by  referral  to  health
department partner notification programs. Health department staff are trained to use
public health investigation strategies for confidentially locating persons who can benefit
from  HIV  treatment,  care,  or  prevention  services.  Guidance  regarding  spousal
notification varies by jurisdiction. Detailed recommendations for notification, evaluation,
and  treatment  of  exposed  partners  are  available  in  Recommendations  for  Partner
Services  Programs  for  HIV  Infection,  Syphilis,  Gonorrhea,  and  Chlamydial  Infections
(111).  All  pregnant  women  should  be  tested  for  HIV  during  the  first  prenatal  visit.  A
second test during the third trimester, preferably at <36 weeks’ gestation, should be
considered  and  is  recommended  for  women  who  are  at  high  risk  for  acquiring  HIV,
women  who  receive  health  care  in  jurisdictions  with  high  rates  of  HIV  infection,  and
women  served  in  clinical  settings  in  which  prenatal  screening  identifies  ≥1  pregnant
woman  with  HIV  per  1,000  women  screened  (138).  Diagnostic  algorithms  for  HIV  for
pregnant women do not differ from those for nonpregnant women (see STI Detection
Among Special Populations). Pregnant women should be informed that HIV testing will
be  performed  as  part  of  the  routine  panel  of  prenatal  tests  (138);  for  women  who
decline HIV testing, providers should address concerns that pose obstacles, discuss the
benefits of testing (e.g., early HIV detection, treatment, and care for improving health
of  the  mother  and  reducing  perinatal  transmission  of  HIV),  and  encourage  testing  at
subsequent  prenatal  visits.  Women  who  decline  testing  because  they  have  had  a
previous negative HIV test result should be informed about the importance of retesting
during each pregnancy. Women with no prenatal care should be tested for HIV at the
time  of  delivery.  Testing  pregnant  women  is  crucial  because  knowledge  of  infection
status  can  help  maintain  the  woman’s  health,  and  it  enables  receipt  of  interventions
(i.e.,  ART  or  specialized  obstetrical  care)  that  can  substantially  reduce  the  risk  for
perinatal transmission of HIV. Pregnant women with diagnosed HIV infection should be
educated about the benefits of ART for their own health and for reducing the risk for
HIV transmission to their infant. In the absence of ART, a mother’s risk for transmitting
HIV  to  her  neonate  is  approximately  30%;  however,  risk  can  be  reduced  to  <2%
through  ART,  obstetrical  interventions  (i.e.,  elective  cesarean  delivery  at  38  weeks’
pregnancy),
 and
 breastfeeding
 avoidance
(https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/PerinatalGL.pdf).
 Pregnant
women  with  HIV  infection  should  be  linked  to  an  HIV  care  provider  experienced  in
managing  HIV  in  pregnancy  and  provided  antenatal  and  postpartum  treatment  and
advice.  Detailed  and  regularly  updated  recommendations  for  managing  pregnant
patients
 with
 HIV
 infection
 are
 available
 at
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/PerinatalGL.pdf. Diagnosis of HIV
infection  in  a  pregnant  woman  indicates  the  need  for  evaluating  and  managing  the
HIV-exposed  neonate  and  considering  whether  the  woman’s  other  children,  if  any,
might be infected. Detailed recommendations regarding diagnosis and management of
HIV infection among neonates and children of mothers with HIV are beyond the scope
of  these  guidelines  but  are  available  at  https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/en/guidelines.
Exposed neonates and children with HIV infection should be referred to physicians with
expertise  in  neonatal  and  pediatric  HIV  management.  Top  In  the  United  States,  the
majority  of  young,  sexually  active  patients  who  have  genital,  anal,  or  perianal  ulcers
have  either  genital  herpes  or  syphilis.  The  frequency  of  each  condition  differs  by
geographic area and population; however, genital herpes is the most prevalent of these
diseases.  More  than  one  etiologic  agent  (e.g.,  herpes  and  syphilis)  can  be  present  in
any genital, anal, or perianal ulcer. Less common infectious causes of genital, anal, or
perianal ulcers include chancroid, LGV, and granuloma inguinale (donovanosis). GUDs
(e.g.,  syphilis,  herpes,  and  LGV)  might  also  present  as  oral  ulcers.  Genital  herpes,
syphilis, chlamydia, gonorrhea, and chancroid have been associated with an increased
risk for HIV acquisition and transmission. Genital, anal, or perianal lesions can also be
associated  with  infectious  and  noninfectious  conditions  that  are  not  sexually
transmitted  (e.g.,  yeast,  trauma,  carcinoma,  aphthae  or  Behcet’s  disease,  fixed  drug
eruption,  or  psoriasis).  A  diagnosis  based  only  on  medical  history  and  physical
examination  frequently  can  be  inaccurate.  Therefore,  all  persons  who  have  genital,
anal,  or  perianal  ulcers  should  be  evaluated.  Specific  evaluation  of  genital,  anal,  or
perianal  ulcers  includes  syphilis  serology  tests  and  darkfield  examination  from  lesion
exudate or tissue, or NAAT if available; NAAT or culture for genital herpes type 1 or 2;
and  serologic  testing  for  type-specific  HSV  antibody.  In  settings  where  chancroid  is
prevalent,  a  NAAT  or  culture  for  Haemophilus  ducreyi  should  be  performed.  No
FDA-cleared  NAAT  for  diagnosing  syphilis  is  available  in  the  United  States;  however,
multiple  FDA-cleared  NAATs  are  available  for  diagnosing  HSV-1  and  HSV-2  in  genital
specimens.  Certain  clinical  laboratories  have  developed  their  own  syphilis  and  HSV
NAATs  and  have  conducted  Clinical  Laboratory  Improvement  Amendment  (CLIA)
verification studies with genital specimens. Type-specific serology for HSV-2 might aid
in  identifying  persons  with  genital  herpes  (see  Genital  Herpes).  In  addition,  biopsy  of
ulcers with immunohistochemistry can help identify the cause of ulcers that are unusual
or that do not respond to initial therapy. HIV testing should be performed on all persons
not known to have HIV infection who present with genital, anal, or perianal ulcers (see
Diagnostic  Considerations  in  disease-specific  sections).  NAAT  testing  at  extragenital
sites  should  be  considered  for  cases  in  which  GUDs  are  suspected  (e.g.,  oral
manifestations  of  syphilis,  herpes,  or  LGV).  Commercially  available  NAATs  have  not
been cleared by FDA for these indications; however, they can be used by laboratories
that  have  met  regulatory  requirements  for  an  off-label  procedure.  Because  early
syphilis  treatment  decreases  transmission  possibility,  public  health  standards  require
health  care  providers  to  presumptively  treat  any  patient  with  a  suspected  case  of
infectious syphilis at the initial visit, even before test results are available. Presumptive
treatment  of  a  patient  with  a  suspected  first  episode  of  genital  herpes  also  is
recommended  because  HSV  treatment  benefits  depend  on  prompt  therapy  initiation.
The  clinician  should  choose  the  presumptive  treatment  on  the  basis  of  the  clinical
presentation (i.e., HSV lesions begin as vesicles and primary syphilis as a papule) and
epidemiologic  circumstances  (e.g.,  high  incidence  of  disease  among  populations  and
communities and travel history). For example, syphilis is so common among MSM that
any  male  who  has  sex  with  men  presenting  with  a  genital  ulcer  should  be
presumptively  treated  for  syphilis  at  the  initial  visit  after  syphilis  and  HSV  tests  are
performed. After a complete diagnostic evaluation, >25% of patients who have genital
ulcers  might  not  have  a  laboratory-confirmed  diagnosis  (426).  Chancroid  prevalence
has  declined  in  the  United  States  (141).  When  infection  does  occur,  it  is  usually
associated with sporadic outbreaks. Worldwide, chancroid appears to have decreased
as well, although infection might still occur in certain Africa regions and the Caribbean.
Chancroid  is  a  risk  factor  in  HIV  transmission  and  acquisition  (197).  A  definitive
diagnosis of chancroid requires identifying H. ducreyi on special culture media that is
not  widely  available  from  commercial  sources;  even  when  these  media  are  used,
sensitivity is <80% (427). No FDA-cleared NAAT for H. ducreyi is available in the United
States;  however,  such  testing  can  be  performed  by  clinical  laboratories  that  have
developed  their  own  NAAT  and  have  conducted  CLIA  verification  studies  on  genital
specimens. The combination of one or more deep and painful genital ulcers and tender
suppurative
 inguinal
 adenopathy
 indicates
 the
 chancroid
 diagnosis;
 inguinal
lymphadenitis typically occurs in <50% of cases (428). For both clinical and surveillance
purposes,  a  probable  diagnosis  of  chancroid  can  be  made  if  all  of  the  following  four
criteria  are  met:  1)  the  patient  has  one  or  more  painful  genital  ulcers;  2)  the  clinical
presentation,  appearance  of  genital  ulcers  and,  if  present,  regional  lymphadenopathy
are  typical  for  chancroid;  3)  the  patient  has  no  evidence  of  T.  pallidum  infection  by
darkfield examination or NAAT (i.e., ulcer exudate or serous fluid) or by serologic tests
for syphilis performed at least 7–14 days after onset of ulcers; and 4) HSV-1 or HSV-2
NAAT or HSV culture performed on the ulcer exudate or fluid are negative. Successful
antimicrobial  treatment  for  chancroid  cures  the  infection,  resolves  the  clinical
symptoms,  and  prevents  transmission  to  others.  In  advanced  cases,  genital  scarring
and rectal or urogenital fistulas from suppurative buboes can result despite successful
therapy. Azithromycin and ceftriaxone offer the advantage of single-dose therapy (429).
Worldwide,  several  isolates  with  intermediate  resistance  to  either  ciprofloxacin  or
erythromycin  have  been  reported.  However,  because  cultures  are  not  routinely
performed,  and  chancroid  is  uncommon,  data  are  limited  regarding  prevalence  of  H.
ducreyi  antimicrobial  resistance.  Men  who  are  uncircumcised  and  persons  with  HIV
infection do not respond as well to treatment as persons who are circumcised or are HIV
negative (430). Patients should be tested for HIV at the time chancroid is diagnosed. If
the  initial  HIV  test  results  were  negative,  the  provider  can  consider  the  benefits  of
offering  more  frequent  testing  and  HIV  PrEP  to  persons  at  increased  risk  for  HIV
infection. Patients should be reexamined 3–7 days after therapy initiation. If treatment
is  successful,  ulcers  usually  improve  symptomatically  within  3  days  and  objectively
within 7 days after therapy. If no clinical improvement is evident, the clinician should
consider whether the diagnosis is correct, another STI is present, the patient has HIV
infection, the treatment was not used as instructed, or the H. ducreyi strain causing the
infection  is  resistant  to  the  prescribed  antimicrobial.  The  time  required  for  complete
healing  depends  on  the  size  of  the  ulcer;  large  ulcers  might  require  >2  weeks.  In
addition,  healing  can  be  slower  for  uncircumcised  men  who  have  ulcers  under  the
foreskin. Clinical resolution of fluctuant lymphadenopathy is slower than that of ulcers
and  might  require  needle  aspiration  or  incision  and  drainage,  despite  otherwise
successful  therapy.  Although  needle  aspiration  of  buboes  is  a  simpler  procedure,
incision  and  drainage  might  be  preferred  because  of  reduced  need  for  subsequent
drainage  procedures.  Regardless  of  whether  disease  symptoms  are  present,  sex
partners of patients with chancroid should be examined and treated if they had sexual
contact  with  the  patient  during  the  10  days  preceding  the  patient’s  symptom  onset.
Data indicate ciprofloxacin presents a low risk to the fetus during pregnancy but has
potential for toxicity during breastfeeding (431). Alternative drugs should be used if the
patient is pregnant or lactating. No adverse effects of chancroid on pregnancy outcome
have been reported. Persons with HIV infection who have chancroid infection should be
monitored  closely  because  they  are  more  likely  to  experience  chancroid  treatment
failure  and  to  have  ulcers  that  heal  slowly  (430,432).  Persons  with  HIV  might  require
repeated  or  longer  courses  of  therapy,  and  treatment  failures  can  occur  with  any
regimen.  Data  are  limited  concerning  the  therapeutic  efficacy  of  the  recommended
single-dose azithromycin and ceftriaxone regimens among persons with HIV infection.
Because sexual contact is the major primary transmission route among U.S. patients,
diagnosis  of  chancroid  ulcers  among  infants  and  children,  especially  in  the  genital  or
perineal region, is highly suspicious of sexual abuse. However, H. ducreyi is recognized
as  a  major  cause  of  nonsexually  transmitted  cutaneous  ulcers  among  children  in
tropical  regions  and,  specifically,  countries  where  yaws  is  endemic  (433–435).
Acquisition  of  a  lower-extremity  ulcer  attributable  to  H.  ducreyi  in  a  child  without
genital  ulcers  and  reported  travel  to  a  region  where  yaws  is  endemic  should  not  be
considered evidence of sexual abuse. Genital herpes is a chronic, lifelong viral infection.
Two types of HSV can cause genital herpes: HSV-1 and HSV-2. Most cases of recurrent
genital  herpes  are  caused  by  HSV-2,  and  11.9%  of  persons  aged  14–49  years  are
estimated to be infected in the United States (436). However, an increasing proportion
of  anogenital  herpetic  infections  have  been  attributed  to  HSV-1,  which  is  especially
prominent  among  young  women  and  MSM  (186,437,438).  The  majority  of  persons
infected with HSV-2 have not had the condition diagnosed, many of whom have mild or
unrecognized  infections  but  shed  virus  intermittently  in  the  anogenital  area.
Consequently, most genital herpes infections are transmitted by persons unaware that
they  have  the  infection  or  who  are  asymptomatic  when  transmission  occurs.
Management of genital HSV should address the chronic nature of the infection rather
than focusing solely on treating acute episodes of genital lesions. Clinical diagnosis of
genital herpes can be difficult because the self-limited, recurrent, painful, and vesicular
or  ulcerative  lesions  classically  associated  with  HSV  are  absent  in  many  infected
persons  at  the  time  of  clinical  evaluation.  If  genital  lesions  are  present,  clinical
diagnosis of genital herpes should be confirmed by type-specific virologic testing from
the  lesion  by  NAAT  or  culture  (186).  Recurrences  and  subclinical  shedding  are  much
more  frequent  for  HSV-2  genital  herpes  infection  than  for  HSV-1  genital  herpes
(439,440). Therefore, prognosis and counseling depend on which HSV type is present.
Type-specific serologic tests can be used to aid in the diagnosis of HSV infection in the
absence of genital lesions. Both type-specific virologic and type-specific serologic tests
for HSV should be available in clinical settings that provide care to persons with or at
risk for STIs. HSV-2 genital herpes infection increases the risk for acquiring HIV twofold
to threefold; therefore, all persons with genital herpes should be tested for HIV (441).
HSV NAAT  assays  are the most sensitive tests  because they  detect HSV from genital
ulcers  or  other  mucocutaneous  lesions;  these  tests  are  increasingly  available
(442–444).  Although  multiple  FDA-cleared  assays  exist  for  HSV  detection,  these  tests
vary  in  sensitivity  from  90.9%  to  100%;  however,  they  are  considered  highly  specific
(445–447).  PCR  is  also  the  test  of  choice  for  diagnosing  HSV  infections  affecting  the
central  nervous  system  (CNS)  and  systemic  infections  (e.g.,  meningitis,  encephalitis,
and  neonatal  herpes).  HSV  PCR  of  the  blood  should  not  be  performed  to  diagnose
genital  herpes  infection,  except  in  cases  in  which  concern  exists  for  disseminated
infection (e.g., hepatitis). In certain settings, viral culture is the only available virologic
test.  The  sensitivity  of  viral  culture  is  low,  especially  for  recurrent  lesions,  and
decreases  rapidly  as  lesions  begin  to  heal  (443,448).  Viral  culture  isolates  and  PCR
amplicons  should  be  typed  to  determine  whether  HSV-1  or  HSV-2  is  causing  the
infection. Failure to detect HSV by NAAT or culture, especially in the presence of older
lesions or the absence of active lesions, does not indicate an absence of HSV infection
because viral shedding is intermittent. Similarly, random or blind genital swabs in the
absence  of  lesions  should  not  be  used  to  diagnose  genital  HSV  infection  because
sensitivity is low, and a negative result does not exclude the presence of HSV infection.
Cytologic detection of cellular changes associated with HSV infection is an insensitive
and  nonspecific  method  of  diagnosing  genital  lesions  (i.e.,  Tzanck  preparation)  and
therefore should not be relied on. Although a direct immunofluorescence assay using
fluorescein-labeled  monoclonal  antibodies  is  also  available  for  detecting  HSV  antigen
from  genital  specimens,  this  assay  lacks  sensitivity  and  is  not  recommended  (449).
Both type-specific and type-common antibodies to HSV develop during the first weeks
after infection and persist indefinitely. The majority of available, accurate type-specific
HSV serologic assays are based on the HSV-specific glycoprotein G2 (gG2) (HSV-2) and
glycoprotein  G1  (gG1)  (HSV-1).  Type-common  antibody  tests  do  not  distinguish
between HSV-1 and HSV-2 infection; therefore, type-specific serologic assays should be
requested (450–452). Both laboratory-based assays and POC tests that provide results
for  HSV-2  antibodies  from  capillary  blood  or  serum  during  a  clinic  visit  are  available.
The sensitivity of glycoprotein G type-specific tests for detecting HSV-2 antibody varies
from  80%  to  98%;  false-negative  results  might  be  more  frequent  at  early  stages  of
infection  (451,453,454).  Therefore,  in  cases  of  recent  suspected  HSV-2  acquisition,
repeat type-specific antibody testing 12 weeks after the presumed time of acquisition is
indicated.  The  most  commonly  used  test,  HerpeSelect  HSV-2  enzyme  immunoassay
(EIA),  often  is  falsely  positive  at  low  index  values  (1.1–3.0)  (457–457).  One  study
reported an overall specificity of 57.4%, with a specificity of 39.8% for index values of
1.1–2.9  (458).  Because  of  the  poor  specificity  of  commercially  available  type-specific
EIAs, particularly with low index values (<3.0), a confirmatory test (Biokit or Western
blot)  with  a  second  method  should  be  performed  before  test  interpretation.  Use  of
confirmatory testing with the Biokit or the Western blot assays have been reported to
improve accuracy of HSV-2 serologic testing (459). The HerpeSelect HSV-2 immunoblot
should not be used for confirmation because it uses the same antigen as the HSV-2 EIA.
If confirmatory tests are unavailable, patients should be counseled about the limitations
of available testing before obtaining serologic tests, and health care providers should
be aware that false-positive results occur. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) testing for HSV-1 or
HSV-2 is not useful because IgM tests are not type specific and might be positive during
recurrent  genital  or  oral  episodes  of  herpes  (460).  Therefore,  HSV  IgM  testing  is  not
recommended.  Because  approximately  all  HSV-2  infections  are  sexually  acquired,
presence of type-specific HSV-2 antibody implies anogenital infection. In this instance,
education and counseling for persons with genital HSV infections should be provided.
The  presence  of  HSV-1  antibody  alone  is  more  difficult  to  interpret.  HSV-1  serologic
testing does not distinguish between oral and genital infection and typically should not
be  performed  for  diagnosing  genital  HSV-1  infection.  Persons  with  HSV-1  antibodies
often have oral HSV infection acquired during childhood, which might be asymptomatic.
Lack of symptoms in a person who is HSV-1 seropositive does not distinguish anogenital
from orolabial or cutaneous infection, and, regardless of site of infection, these persons
remain  at  risk  for  acquiring  HSV-2.  In  addition,  HSV-1  serologic  testing  has  low
sensitivity for detection of HSV-1 antibody (458). However, acquisition of HSV-1 genital
herpes  is  increasing,  and  HSV-1  genital  herpes  also  can  be  asymptomatic
(437–439,461,462).  Diagnosis  of  HSV-1  infection  is  confirmed  by  virologic  tests  from
genital lesions. Type-specific HSV-2 serologic assays for diagnosing HSV-2 are useful in
the  following  scenarios:  recurrent  or  atypical  genital  symptoms  or  lesions  with  a
negative  HSV  PCR  or  culture  result,  clinical  diagnosis  of  genital  herpes  without
laboratory  confirmation,  and  a  patient’s  partner  has  genital  herpes.  HSV-2  serologic
screening  among  the  general  population  is  not  recommended.  Patients  who  are  at
higher  risk  for  infection  (e.g.,  those  presenting  for  an  STI  evaluation,  especially  for
persons with ≥10 lifetime sex partners, and persons with HIV infection) might need to
be  assessed  for  a  history  of  genital  herpes  symptoms,  followed  by  type-specific  HSV
serologic assays to diagnose genital herpes for those with genital symptoms. Antiviral
medication  offers  clinical  benefits  to  symptomatic  patients  and  is  the  mainstay  of
management. The goals for use of antiviral medications to treat genital herpes infection
are to treat or prevent symptomatic genital herpes recurrences and improve quality of
life  and  suppress  the  virus  to  prevent  transmission  to  sexual  partners.  Counseling
regarding  the  natural  history  of  genital  herpes,  risks  for  sexual  and  perinatal
transmission,  and  methods  for  reducing  transmission  is  also  integral  to  clinical
management. Systemic antiviral drugs can partially control the signs and symptoms of
genital herpes when used to treat first clinical and recurrent episodes or when used as
daily  suppressive  therapy.  However,  these  drugs  neither  eradicate  latent  virus  nor
affect  the  risk,  frequency,  or  severity  of  recurrences  after  the  drug  is  discontinued.
Randomized  trials  have  indicated  that  three  FDA-approved  antiviral  medications
provide  clinical  benefit  for  genital  herpes:  acyclovir,  valacyclovir,  and  famciclovir
(463–471).  Valacyclovir  is  the  valine  ester  of  acyclovir  and  has  enhanced  absorption
after  oral  administration,  allowing  for  less  frequent  dosing  than  acyclovir.  Famciclovir
also  has  high  oral  bioavailability.  Topical  therapy  with  antiviral  drugs  offers  minimal
clinical  benefit  and  is  discouraged.  Newly  acquired  genital  herpes  can  cause  a
prolonged  clinical  illness  with  severe  genital  ulcerations  and  neurologic  involvement.
Even  persons  with  first-episode  herpes  who  have  mild  clinical  manifestations  initially
can experience severe or prolonged symptoms during recurrent infection. Therefore, all
patients with first episodes of genital herpes should receive antiviral therapy. Almost all
persons with symptomatic first-episode HSV-2 genital herpes subsequently experience
recurrent  episodes  of  genital  lesions.  Intermittent  asymptomatic  shedding  occurs
among  persons  with  HSV-2  genital  herpes  infection,  even  those  with  longstanding
clinically  silent  infection.  Antiviral  therapy  for  recurrent  genital  herpes  can  be
administered either as suppressive therapy to reduce the frequency of recurrences or
episodically to ameliorate or shorten the duration of lesions. Certain persons, including
those  with  mild  or  infrequent  recurrent  outbreaks,  benefit  from  antiviral  therapy;
therefore, options for treatment should be discussed. Many persons prefer suppressive
therapy,  which  has  the  additional  advantage  of  decreasing  the  risk  for  transmitting
HSV-2  genital  herpes  to  susceptible  partners  (472,473).  Suppressive  therapy  reduces
frequency  of  genital  herpes  recurrences  by  70%–80%  among  patients  who  have
frequent  recurrences  (469–472).  Persons  receiving  such  therapy  often  report  having
experienced  no  symptomatic  outbreaks.  Suppressive  therapy  also  is  effective  for
patients  with  less  frequent  recurrences.  Long-term  safety  and  efficacy  have  been
documented  among  patients  receiving  daily  acyclovir,  valacyclovir,  and  famciclovir
(474).  Quality  of  life  is  improved  for  many  patients  with  frequent  recurrences  who
receive  suppressive  therapy  rather  than  episodic  treatment  (475).  Providers  should
discuss  with  patients  on  an  annual  basis  whether  they  want  to  continue  suppressive
therapy because frequency of genital HSV-2 recurrence diminishes over time for many
persons.  However,  neither  treatment  discontinuation  nor  laboratory  monitoring  is
necessary because adverse events and development of HSV antiviral resistance related
to  long-term  antiviral  use  are  uncommon.  Treatment  with  valacyclovir  500  mg  daily
decreases the rate of HSV-2 transmission for discordant heterosexual couples in which
a  partner  has  a  history  of  genital  HSV-2  infection  (473).  Such  couples  should  be
encouraged  to  consider  suppressive  antiviral  therapy  as  part  of  a  strategy  for
preventing transmission, in addition to consistent condom use and avoidance of sexual
activity during recurrences. Suppressive antiviral therapy for persons with a history of
symptomatic genital herpes also is likely to reduce transmission when used by those
who  have  multiple  partners.  HSV-2  seropositive  persons  without  a  history  of
symptomatic genital herpes have a 50% decreased risk for genital shedding, compared
with  those  with  symptomatic  genital  herpes  (476).  No  data  are  available  regarding
efficacy  of  suppressive  therapy  for  preventing  HSV-2  transmission  among  discordant
couples in which a partner has a history of asymptomatic HSV-2 infection identified by a
positive HSV-2 serologic test. Among HSV-2 seropositive persons without HIV infection,
oral  TDF/FTC  and  intravaginal  tenofovir  are  ineffective  at  reducing  the  risk  for  HSV-2
shedding  or  recurrences  (477).  Famciclovir  appears  somewhat  less  effective  for
suppression  of  viral  shedding  (478).  Ease  of  administration  and  cost  also  are  key
considerations  for  prolonged  treatment.  Recurrences  are  less  frequent  after  the  first
episode  of  HSV-1  genital  herpes,  compared  with  genital  HSV-2  genital  herpes,  and
genital shedding rapidly decreases during the first year of infection (479). No data are
available  regarding  the  efficacy  of  suppressive  therapy  for  preventing  transmission
among persons with HSV-1 genital herpes infection. Because of the decreased risk for
recurrences  and  shedding,  suppressive  therapy  for  HSV-1  genital  herpes  should  be
reserved  for  those  with  frequent  recurrences  through  shared  clinical  decision-making
between the patient and the provider. Episodic treatment of recurrent herpes is most
effective if therapy is initiated within 1 day of lesion onset or during the prodrome that
precedes some outbreaks. The patient should be provided with a supply of drug or a
prescription for the medication with instructions to initiate treatment immediately when
symptoms  begin.  Acyclovir,  famciclovir,  and  valacyclovir  appear  equally  effective  for
episodic  treatment  of  genital  herpes  (466–470).  Intravenous  (IV)  acyclovir  therapy
(5–10 mg/kg body weight IV every 8 hours) should be provided for patients who have
severe
 HSV
 disease
 or
 complications
 that
 necessitate
 hospitalization
 (e.g.,
disseminated infection, pneumonitis, or hepatitis) or CNS complications (e.g., meningitis
or  encephalitis).  HSV-2  meningitis  is  a  rare  complication  of  HSV-2  genital  herpes
infection  that  affects  women  more  than  men  (480).  IV  therapy  should  be  considered
until clinical improvement followed by oral antiviral therapy to complete >10 days of
total  therapy.  Longer  duration  is  recommended  for  CNS  complications.  HSV-2
meningitis  is  characterized  clinically  by  signs  of  headache,  photophobia,  fever,
meningismus,  and  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF)  lymphocytic  pleocytosis,  accompanied  by
mildly  elevated  protein  and  normal  glucose  (481).  Optimal  therapies  for  HSV-2
meningitis  have  not  been  well  studied  (482);  however,  acyclovir  5–10  mg/kg  body
weight IV every 8 hours until clinical improvement is observed, followed by high-dose
oral antiviral therapy (valacyclovir 1 g 3 times/day) to complete a 10- to 14-day course
of total therapy, is recommended. For patients with previous episodes of documented
HSV-2 meningitis, oral valacyclovir may be used for the entire course during episodes of
recurrent  HSV-2  meningitis.  A  randomized  clinical  trial  indicated  that  suppressive
therapy (valacyclovir 500 mg 2 times/day) did not prevent recurrent HSV-2 meningitis
episodes; however, the dose might not have been sufficient for CNS penetration (483).
Valacyclovir  500  mg  2  times/day  is  not  recommended  for  suppression  of  HSV-2
meningitis; higher doses have not been studied in clinical trials. HSV meningitis should
be distinguished from encephalitis, which requires a longer course (14–21 days) of IV
therapy. Impaired renal function warrants an adjustment in acyclovir dosage. Hepatitis
is a rare manifestation of disseminated HSV infection, often reported among pregnant
women who acquire HSV during pregnancy (484). Pregnant women in any trimester can
present with fever and hepatitis (markedly elevated transaminases) but might not have
any genital or skin lesions. HSV hepatitis is associated with fulminant liver failure and
high mortality (25%). Therefore, a high index of suspicion for HSV is necessary, with a
confirmatory  diagnosis  by  HSV  PCR  from  blood  (485).  Among  pregnant  women  with
fever  and  unexplained  severe  hepatitis,  disseminated  HSV  infection  should  be
considered,  and  empiric  IV  acyclovir  should  be  initiated  pending  confirmation  (484).
Consistent and correct condom use has been reported in multiple studies to decrease,
but  not  eliminate,  the  risk  for  HSV-2  transmission  from  men  to  women  (486–488).
Condoms are less effective for preventing transmission from women to men (489). Two
randomized  clinical  trials  of  medical  male  circumcision  (MMC)  demonstrated  a
decreased risk for HSV-2 acquisition among men in Uganda and South Africa (66,68).
Results  from  a  third  trial  conducted  in  Kenya  did  not  demonstrate  a  substantial
difference  in  HSV-2  acquisition  among  men  who  received  MMC  (490).  A  systematic
review  indicated  high  consistency  for  decreased  risk  for  HSV-2  acquisition  among
women with a male partner who underwent MMC (491). These data indicate that MMC
can be associated with decreased risk for HSV-2 acquisition among adult heterosexual
men  and  with  decreased  risk  for  HSV-2  transmission  from  male  to  female  partners.
Randomized  clinical  trials  have  demonstrated  that  PrEP  with  daily  oral  TDF/FTC
decreases  the  risk  for  HSV-2  acquisition  by  30%  in  heterosexual  partnerships  (492).
Pericoital  intravaginal  tenofovir  1%  gel  also  decreases  the  risk  for  HSV-2  acquisition
among  heterosexual  women  (493).  Among  MSM  and  transgender  women,  daily  oral
TDF/FTC decreases the risk for severe ulcers with symptomatic genital HSV-2 infection
but  not  for  HSV-2  acquisition  (494).  Insufficient  evidence  exists  that  TDF/FTC  use
among those who are not at risk for HIV acquisition will prevent HSV-2 infection, and it
should not be used for that sole purpose. Oral TDF does not prevent HSV-2 acquisition
among  persons  with  HIV  infection  who  are  taking  TDF  as  part  of  their  ART  regimen
(495).  No  data  indicate  that  antivirals  (acyclovir,  valacyclovir,  or  famciclovir)  can  be
taken  as  PrEP  by  persons  without  HSV-2  to  prevent  its  acquisition.  Counseling  of
persons with genital herpes and their sex partners is crucial for management. The goals
of  counseling  include  helping  patients  cope  with  the  infection  and  preventing  sexual
and perinatal transmission. Although initial counseling can be provided at the first visit,
patients often benefit from learning about the chronic aspects of the disease after the
acute illness subsides. Multiple resources, including Internet sites and printed materials,
are  available  to  assist  patients,  their  partners,  and  clinicians  who  provide  counseling
(496,497)
 (https://www.ashasexualhealth.org
 and
 https://www.cdc.gov/std/herpes).
Although the psychological effect of a serologic diagnosis of HSV-2 infection in a person
with  asymptomatic  or  unrecognized  genital  herpes  appears  minimal  and  transient
(498,499), certain persons with HSV infection might express anxiety concerning genital
herpes  that  does  not  reflect  the  actual  clinical  severity  of  their  disease;  the
psychological  effect  of  HSV  infection  can  be  substantial.  Common  concerns  about
genital herpes include the severity of initial clinical manifestations, recurrent episodes,
sexual  relationships  and  transmission  to  sex  partners,  and  ability  to  bear  healthy
children.  When  counseling  persons  with  symptomatic  HSV-2  genital  herpes  infection,
the provider should discuss the following: When counseling persons with asymptomatic
HSV-2  genital  herpes  infection,  the  provider  should  consider  the  following:  When
counseling  persons  with  HSV-1  genital  herpes  infection,  the  provider  should  consider
the  following:  For  persons  with  symptomatic  HSV-1  genital  herpes  or  asymptomatic
HSV-2  genital  herpes,  suppressive  therapy  can  be  considered  for  those  who  have
substantial psychosocial distress caused by the diagnosis of genital herpes. For women
who have genital herpes, the providers who care for them during pregnancy and those
who will care for their newborn infant should be informed of their infection (see Genital
Herpes During Pregnancy). The sex partners of persons who have symptomatic genital
herpes can benefit from evaluation and counseling. Symptomatic sex partners should
be  evaluated  and  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  patients  who  have  symptomatic
genital herpes. Asymptomatic sex partners of patients who have symptomatic genital
herpes should be asked about a history of genital symptoms and offered type-specific
serologic testing for HSV-2. For partners without genital herpes, no data are available
on which to base a recommendation for PEP or PrEP with antiviral medications or that
they  would  prevent  acquisition,  and  this  should  not  be  offered  to  patients  as  a
prevention strategy. Allergic and other adverse reactions to oral acyclovir, valacyclovir,
and  famciclovir  are  rare.  Desensitization  to  acyclovir  has  been  described  (500).
Immunocompromised  patients  can  have  prolonged  or  severe  episodes  of  genital,
perianal, or oral herpes. Lesions caused by HSV are common among persons with HIV
infection and might be severe, painful, and atypical (501). HSV shedding is increased
among  persons  with  HIV  infection  (502).  Whereas  ART  reduces  the  severity  and
frequency  of  symptomatic  genital  herpes,  frequent  subclinical  shedding  still  occurs
(503,504).  Clinical  manifestations  of  genital  herpes  might  worsen  during  immune
reconstitution early after initiation of ART. HSV-2 type-specific serologic testing can be
considered  for  persons  with  HIV  infection  during  their  initial  evaluation,  particularly
among  those  with  a  history  of  genital  symptoms  indicative  of  HSV  infection.
Recommended  therapy  for  first-episode  genital  herpes  is  the  same  as  for  persons
without HIV infection, although treatment courses might need to be extended for lesion
resolution.  Suppressive  or  episodic  therapy  with  oral  antiviral  agents  is  effective  in
decreasing  the  clinical  manifestations  of  HSV  infection  among  persons  with  HIV
(503,504).  The  risk  for  GUD  increases  during  the  first  6  months  after  starting  ART,
especially among persons who have a CD4+ T-cell count <200 cell/mm3. Suppressive
antiviral therapy reduces the risk for GUD among this population and can be continued
for 6 months after ART initiation (504) when the risk for GUD returns to baseline levels.
Suppressive  antiviral  therapy  among  persons  with  HIV  and  HSV  infection  does  not
reduce  the  risk  for  either  HIV  transmission  or  HSV-2  transmission  to  susceptible  sex
partners (88,505). Suppressive antiviral therapy does not delay HIV disease progression
and is not associated with decreased risk for HIV-related inflammation among persons
taking ART (506). For severe HSV disease, initiating therapy with acyclovir 5–10 mg/kg
IV every 8 hours might be necessary. If lesions persist or recur in a patient receiving
antiviral  treatment,  acyclovir  resistance  should  be  suspected  and  a  viral  culture
obtained  for  phenotypic  sensitivity  testing  (507).  Molecular  testing  for  acyclovir
resistance  is  not  available.  Such  persons  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  an
infectious  disease  specialist,  and  alternative  therapy  should  be  administered.  All
acyclovir-resistant  strains  are  also  resistant  to  valacyclovir,  and  the  majority  are
resistant to famciclovir. start highlightFoscarnet (40–80 mg/kg body weight IV every 8
hours
 until
 clinical
 resolution
 is
 attained)
 is
 the
 treatment
 of
 choice
 for
acyclovir-resistant genital herpes (508,509).end highlight Intravenous cidofovir 5 mg/kg
body  weight  once  weekly  might  also  be  effective.  Foscarnet  and  cidofovir  are
nephrotoxic  medications  that  require  intensive  laboratory  monitoring  and  infectious
disease  specialist  consultation.  Imiquimod  5%  applied  to  the  lesion  for  8  hours  3
times/week  until  clinical  resolution  is  an  alternative  that  has  been  reported  to  be
effective (510,511). Topical cidofovir gel 1% can be applied to lesions 2–4 times daily;
however, cidofovir must be compounded at a pharmacy (512). Prevention of antiviral
resistance  remains  challenging  among  persons  with  HIV  infection.  Experience  with
another  group  of  immunocompromised  persons  (e.g.,  hematopoietic  stem-cell
recipients)  demonstrated  that  persons  receiving  daily  suppressive  antiviral  therapy
were  less  likely  to  experience  acyclovir-resistant  HSV  infection  compared  with  those
who  received  episodic  therapy  for  outbreaks  (513).  Prevention  of  neonatal  herpes
depends  both  on  preventing  acquisition  of  genital  herpes  during  late  pregnancy  and
avoiding exposure of the neonate to herpetic lesions and viral shedding during delivery.
Mothers  of  newborns  who  acquire  neonatal  herpes  often  lack  histories  of  clinically
evident  genital  herpes  (514,515).  The  risk  for  transmission  to  the  neonate  from  an
infected mother is high (30%–50%) among women who acquire genital herpes near the
time  of  delivery  and  low  (<1%)  among  women  with  prenatal  histories  of  recurrent
herpes  or  who  acquire  genital  herpes  during  the  first  half  of  pregnancy  (516,517).
Women  who  acquire  HSV  in  the  second  half  of  pregnancy  should  be  managed  in
consultation  with  maternal-fetal  medicine  and  infectious  disease  specialists.  All
pregnant  women  should  be  asked  whether  they  have  a  history  of  genital  herpes  or
genital symptoms concerning for HSV infection. At the onset of labor, all women should
be  questioned  thoroughly  about  symptoms  of  genital  herpes,  including  prodromal
symptoms  (e.g.,  pain  or  burning  at  site  before  appearance  of  lesion),  and  all  women
should be examined thoroughly for herpetic lesions. Women without symptoms or signs
of genital herpes or its prodrome can deliver vaginally. Although cesarean delivery does
not eliminate the risk for HSV transmission to the neonate (517), women with recurrent
genital herpetic lesions at the onset of labor should have a cesarean delivery to reduce
the  risk  for  neonatal  HSV  infection.  Routine  HSV-2  serologic  screening  of  pregnant
women  is  not  recommended.  Women  without  known  genital  herpes  should  be
counseled to abstain from vaginal intercourse during the third trimester with partners
known  to  have  or  suspected  of  having  genital  herpes.  In  addition,  to  prevent  HSV-1
genital herpes, pregnant women without known orolabial herpes should be advised to
abstain from receptive oral sex during the third trimester with partners known to have
or  suspected  to  have  orolabial  herpes.  Type-specific  serologic  tests  can  be  useful  for
identifying  pregnant  women  at  risk  for  HSV  infection  and  for  guiding  counseling
regarding  the  risk  for  acquiring  genital  herpes  during  pregnancy.  For  example,  such
testing  might  be  offered  to  a  woman  with  no  history  of  genital  herpes  whose  sex
partner has HSV infection. Many fetuses are exposed to acyclovir each year, and the
medication  is  believed  to  be  safe  for  use  during  all  trimesters  of  pregnancy.  A
case-control  study  reported  an  increased  risk  for  the  rare  neonatal  outcome  of
gastroschisis among women who used antiviral medications between the month before
conception and the third month of pregnancy (518). Acyclovir is also believed to be safe
during  breastfeeding  (431,519).  Although  data  regarding  prenatal  exposure  to
valacyclovir  and  famciclovir  are  limited,  data  from  animal  trials  indicate  that  these
drugs also pose a low risk among pregnant women (520). Acyclovir can be administered
orally  to  pregnant  women  with  first-episode  genital  herpes  or  recurrent  herpes  and
should  be  administered  IV  to  pregnant  women  with  severe  HSV  (see  Genital  Herpes,
Hepatitis). Suppressive acyclovir treatment starting at 36 weeks’ gestation reduces the
frequency  of  cesarean  delivery  among  women  who  have  recurrent  genital  herpes  by
diminishing the frequency of recurrences at term (521–523). However, such treatment
might not protect against transmission to neonates in all cases (524). No data support
use  of  antiviral  therapy  among  asymptomatic  HSV-seropositive  women  without  a
history of genital herpes. In addition, the effectiveness of antiviral therapy among sex
partners with a history of genital herpes to decrease the risk for HSV transmission to a
pregnant  woman  has  not  been  studied.  Additional  information  on  the  clinical
management  of  genital  herpes  in  pregnancy  is  available  through  existing  guidelines
(525). Newborn infants exposed to HSV during birth, as documented by virologic testing
of maternal lesions at delivery or presumed by observation of maternal lesions, should
be  followed  clinically  in  consultation  with  a  pediatric  infectious  disease  specialist.
Detailed  guidance  is  available  regarding  management  of  neonates  who  are  delivered
vaginally in the presence of maternal genital herpes lesions and is beyond the scope of
these
 guidelines;
 more
 information
 is
 available
 from
 the
 AAP
(https://redbook.solutions.aap.org). Surveillance cultures or PCR of mucosal surfaces of
the  neonate  to  detect  HSV  infection  might  be  considered  before  the  development  of
clinical  signs  of  neonatal  herpes  to  guide  treatment  initiation.  In  addition,
administration  of  acyclovir  might  be  considered  for  neonates  born  to  women  who
acquired HSV near term because the risk for neonatal herpes is high for these newborn
infants.  All  newborn  infants  who  have  neonatal  herpes  should  be  promptly  evaluated
and treated with systemic acyclovir. The recommended regimen for infants treated for
known  or  suspected  neonatal  herpes  is  acyclovir  20  mg/kg  body  weight  IV  every  8
hours for 14 days if disease is limited to the skin and mucous membranes, or for 21
days  for  disseminated  disease  and  disease  involving  the  CNS.  Granuloma  inguinale
(donovanosis) is a genital ulcerative disease caused by the intracellular gram-negative
bacterium
 Klebsiella
 granulomatis
 (formerly
 known
 as
 Calymmatobacterium
granulomatis). The disease occurs rarely in the United States; however, sporadic cases
have  been  described  in  India,  South  Africa,  and  South  America  (526–535).  Although
granuloma  inguinale  was  previously  endemic  in  Australia,  it  is  now  extremely  rare
(536,537).  Clinically,  the  disease  is  characterized  as  painless,  slowly  progressive
ulcerative  lesions  on  the  genitals  or  perineum  without  regional  lymphadenopathy;
subcutaneous  granulomas  (pseudobuboes)  also  might  occur.  The  lesions  are  highly
vascular  (i.e.,  beefy  red  appearance)  and  can  bleed.  Extragenital  infection  can  occur
with infection extension to the pelvis, or it can disseminate to intra-abdominal organs,
bones,  or  the  mouth.  The  lesions  also  can  develop  secondary  bacterial  infection  and
can  coexist  with  other  sexually  transmitted  pathogens.  The  causative  organism  of
granuloma  inguinale  is  difficult  to  culture,  and  diagnosis  requires  visualization  of
dark-staining  Donovan  bodies  on  tissue  crush  preparation  or  biopsy.  Although  no
FDA-cleared molecular tests for the detection of K. granulomatis DNA exist, molecular
assays  might  be  useful  for  identifying  the  causative  agent.  Multiple  antimicrobial
regimens have been effective; however, only a limited number of controlled trials have
been published (538). Treatment has been reported to halt progression of lesions, and
healing typically proceeds inward from the ulcer margins. Prolonged therapy is usually
required to permit granulation and reepithelialization of the ulcers. Relapse can occur
6–18  months  after  apparently  effective  therapy.  The  addition  of  another  antibiotic  to
these  regimens  can  be  considered  if  improvement  is  not  evident  within  the  first  few
days of therapy. Patients should be followed clinically until signs and symptoms have
resolved. All persons who receive a diagnosis of granuloma inguinale should be tested
for HIV. Patients should be followed clinically until signs and symptoms resolve. Persons
who have had sexual contact with a patient who has granuloma inguinale within the 60
days before onset of the patient’s symptoms should be examined and offered therapy.
However, the value of empiric therapy in the absence of clinical signs and symptoms
has  not  been  established.  Use  of  doxycycline  in  pregnancy  might  be  associated  with
discoloration of teeth; however, the risk is not well defined. Doxycycline is compatible
with  breastfeeding  (431).  Sulfonamides  can  be  associated  with  neonatal  kernicterus
among those with glucose-6-phospate dehydrogenase deficiency and should be avoided
during the third trimester and while breastfeeding (431). For these reasons, pregnant
and  lactating  women  with  granuloma  inguinale  should  be  treated  with  a  macrolide
regimen  (erythromycin  or  azithromycin).  Persons  with  granuloma  inguinale  and  HIV
infection  should  receive  the  same  regimens  as  those  who  do  not  have  HIV.  LGV  is
caused  by  C.  trachomatis  serovars  L1,  L2,  or  L3  (539,540).  LGV  can  cause  severe
inflammation and invasive infection, in contrast with C. trachomatis serovars A—K that
cause mild or asymptomatic infection. Clinical manifestations of LGV can include GUD,
lymphadenopathy, or proctocolitis. Rectal exposure among MSM or women can result in
proctocolitis, which is the most common presentation of LGV infection (541), and can
mimic  inflammatory  bowel  disease  with  clinical  findings  of  mucoid  or  hemorrhagic
rectal  discharge,  anal  pain,  constipation,  fever,  or  tenesmus  (542,543).  Outbreaks  of
LGV  proctocolitis  have  been  reported  among  MSM  with  high  rates  of  HIV  infection
(544–547).  LGV  proctocolitis  can  be  an  invasive,  systemic  infection  and,  if  it  is  not
treated early, can lead to chronic colorectal fistulas and strictures; reactive arthropathy
has  also  been  reported.  However,  reports  indicate  that  rectal  LGV  can  also  be
asymptomatic (548). A common clinical manifestation of LGV among heterosexuals is
tender  inguinal  or  femoral  lymphadenopathy  that  is  typically  unilateral.  A  self-limited
genital  ulcer  or  papule  sometimes  occurs  at  the  site  of  inoculation.  However,  by  the
time  persons  seek  care,  the  lesions  have  often  disappeared.  LGV-associated
lymphadenopathy  can  be  severe,  with  bubo  formation  from  fluctuant  or  suppurative
inguinal  or  femoral  lymphadenopathy.  Oral  ulceration  can  occur  and  might  be
associated with cervical adenopathy (549–551). Persons with genital or colorectal LGV
lesions can also experience secondary bacterial infection or can be infected with other
sexually  and  nonsexually  transmitted  pathogens.  A  definitive  LGV  diagnosis  can  be
made  only  with  LGV-specific  molecular  testing  (e.g.,  PCR-based  genotyping).  These
tests can differentiate LGV from non–LGV C. trachomatis in rectal specimens. However,
these  tests  are  not  widely  available,  and  results  are  not  typically  available  in  a  time
frame  that  would  influence  clinical  management.  Therefore,  diagnosis  is  based  on
clinical  suspicion,  epidemiologic  information,  and  a  C.  trachomatis  NAAT  at  the
symptomatic  anatomic  site,  along  with  exclusion  of  other  etiologies  for  proctocolitis,
inguinal  lymphadenopathy,  or  genital,  oral,  or  rectal  ulcers  (551,552).  Genital  or  oral
lesions,  rectal  specimens,  and  lymph  node  specimens  (i.e.,  lesion  swab  or  bubo
aspirate)  can  be  tested  for  C.  trachomatis  by  NAAT  or  culture.  NAAT  is  the  preferred
approach  for  testing  because  it  can  detect  both  LGV  strains  and  non–LGV  C.
trachomatis strains (553). Therefore, all persons presenting with proctocolitis should be
tested for chlamydia with a NAAT performed on rectal specimens. Severe symptoms of
proctocolitis (e.g., bloody discharge, tenesmus, and rectal ulcers) indicate LGV. A rectal
Gram stain with >10 white blood cells (WBCs) has also been associated with rectal LGV
(545,554,555). Chlamydia serology (complement fixation or microimmunofluorescence)
should not be used routinely as a diagnostic tool for LGV because the utility of these
serologic methods has not been established, interpretation has not been standardized,
and validation for clinical proctitis presentation has not been done. It might support an
LGV  diagnosis  in  cases  of  isolated  inguinal  or  femoral  lymphadenopathy  for  which
diagnostic  material  for  C.  trachomatis  NAAT  cannot  be  obtained.  At  the  time  of  the
initial visit (before diagnostic NAATs for chlamydia are available), persons with a clinical
syndrome consistent with LGV should be presumptively treated. Presumptive treatment
for  LGV  is  indicated  among  patients  with  symptoms  or  signs  of  proctocolitis  (e.g.,
bloody
 discharge,
 tenesmus,
 or
 ulceration);
 in
 cases
 of
 severe
 inguinal
lymphadenopathy with bubo formation, particularly if the patient has a recent history of
a genital ulcer; or in the presence of a genital ulcer if other etiologies have been ruled
out.  The  goal  of  treatment  is  to  cure  infection  and  prevent  ongoing  tissue  damage,
although  tissue  reaction  to  the  infection  can  result  in  scarring.  Buboes  might  require
aspiration through intact skin or incision and drainage to prevent formation of inguinal
or  femoral  ulcerations.  The  optimal  treatment  duration  for  symptomatic  LGV  has  not
been studied in clinical trials. The recommended 21-day course of doxycycline is based
on long-standing clinical practice and is highly effective, with an estimated cure rate of
>98.5% (555,556). Shorter courses of doxycycline might be effective on the basis of a
small  retrospective  study  of  MSM  with  rectal  LGV,  50%  of  whom  were  symptomatic,
who  received  a  7-  to  14-day  course  of  doxycycline  and  had  a  97%  cure  rate  (558).
Randomized  prospective  studies  of  shorter-course  doxycycline  for  treating  LGV  are
needed. Longer courses of therapy might be required in the setting of fistulas, buboes,
and  other  forms  of  severe  disease  (559).  A  small  nonrandomized  study  from  Spain
involving patients with rectal LGV demonstrated cure rates of 97% with a regimen of
azithromycin  1  g  once  weekly  for  3  weeks  (560).  Pharmacokinetic  data  support  this
dosing
 strategy
 (561);
 however,
 this
 regimen
 has
 not
 been
 validated.
Fluoroquinolone-based  treatments  also  might  be  effective;  however,  the  optimal
duration of treatment has not been evaluated. The clinical significance of asymptomatic
LGV is unknown, and it is effectively treated with a 7-day course of doxycycline (562).
Patients should be followed clinically until signs and symptoms have resolved. Persons
who  receive  an  LGV  diagnosis  should  be  tested  for  other  STIs,  especially  HIV,
gonorrhea, and syphilis. Those whose HIV test results are negative should be offered
HIV PrEP. All persons who have been treated for LGV should be retested for chlamydia
approximately  3  months  after  treatment.  If  retesting  at  3  months  is  not  possible,
providers should retest at the patient’s next visit for medical care within the 12-month
period after initial treatment. Persons who have had sexual contact with a patient who
has  LGV  within  the  60  days  before  onset  of  the  patient’s  symptoms  should  be
evaluated, examined, and tested for chlamydial infection, depending on anatomic site
of exposure. Asymptomatic partners should be presumptively treated with a chlamydia
regimen  (doxycycline  100  mg  orally  2  times/day  for  7  days).  Use  of  doxycycline  in
pregnancy might be associated with discoloration of teeth; however, the risk is not well
defined (563). Doxycycline is compatible with breastfeeding (431). Azithromycin might
prove useful for LGV treatment during pregnancy, at a presumptive dose of 1 g weekly
for 3 weeks; no published data are available regarding an effective dose and duration of
treatment. Pregnant and lactating women with LGV can be treated with erythromycin,
although this regimen is associated with frequent gastrointestinal side effects. Pregnant
women treated for LGV should have a test of cure performed 4 weeks after the initial C.
trachomatis NAAT-positive test. Persons with LGV and HIV infection should receive the
same  regimens  as  those  who  do  not  have  HIV.  Prolonged  therapy  might  be  required
because  a  delay  in  resolution  of  symptoms  might  occur.   Top  Syphilis  is  a  systemic
disease caused by T. pallidum. The disease has been divided into stages on the basis of
clinical findings, which guide treatment and follow-up. Persons who have syphilis might
seek treatment for signs or symptoms. Primary syphilis classically presents as a single
painless  ulcer  or  chancre  at  the  site  of  infection  but  can  also  present  with  multiple,
atypical,  or  painful  lesions  (564).  Secondary  syphilis  manifestations  can  include  skin
rash, mucocutaneous lesions, and lymphadenopathy. Tertiary syphilis can present with
cardiac  involvement,  gummatous  lesions,  tabes  dorsalis,  and  general  paresis.  Latent
infections (i.e., those lacking clinical manifestations) are detected by serologic testing.
Latent syphilis acquired within the preceding year is referred to as early latent syphilis;
all other cases of latent syphilis are classified as late latent syphilis or latent syphilis of
unknown  duration.  T.  pallidum  can  infect  the  CNS,  which  can  occur  at  any  stage  of
syphilis and result in neurosyphilis. Early neurologic clinical manifestations or syphilitic
meningitis  (e.g.,  cranial  nerve  dysfunction,  meningitis,  meningovascular  syphilis,
stroke, and acute altered mental status) are usually present within the first few months
or  years  of  infection.  Late  neurologic  manifestations  (e.g.,  tabes  dorsalis  and  general
paresis)  occur  10  to  >30  years  after  infection.  Infection  of  the  visual  system  (ocular
syphilis)  or  auditory  system  (otosyphilis)  can  occur  at  any  stage  of  syphilis  but  is
commonly identified during the early stages and can present with or without additional
CNS  involvement.  Ocular  syphilis  often  presents  as  panuveitis  but  can  involve
structures  in  both  the  anterior  and  posterior  segment  of  the  eye,  including
conjunctivitis,  anterior  uveitis,  posterior  interstitial  keratitis,  optic  neuropathy,  and
retinal  vasculitis.  Ocular  syphilis  can  result  in  permanent  vision  loss.  Otosyphilis
typically  presents  with  cochleo-vestibular  symptoms,  including  tinnitus,  vertigo,  and
sensorineural  hearing  loss.  Hearing  loss  can  be  unilateral  or  bilateral,  have  a  sudden
onset, and progress rapidly. Otosyphilis can result in permanent hearing loss. Darkfield
examinations and molecular tests for detecting T. pallidum directly from lesion exudate
or tissue are the definitive methods for diagnosing early syphilis and congenital syphilis
(565).  Although  no  T.  pallidum  direct-detection  molecular  NAATs  are  commercially
available,  certain  laboratories  provide  locally  developed  and  validated  PCR  tests  for
detecting  T.  pallidum  DNA.  A  presumptive  diagnosis  of  syphilis  requires  use  of  two
laboratory  serologic  tests:  a  nontreponemal  test  (i.e.,  Venereal  Disease  Research
Laboratory [VDRL] or rapid plasma reagin [RPR] test) and a treponemal test (i.e., the T.
pallidum passive particle agglutination [TP-PA] assay, various EIAs, chemiluminescence
immunoassays  [CIAs]  and  immunoblots,  or  rapid  treponemal  assays)  (566–568).  At
least 18 treponemal-specific tests are cleared for use in the United States. Use of only
one  type  of  serologic  test  (nontreponemal  or  treponemal)  is  insufficient  for  diagnosis
and can result in false-negative results among persons tested during primary syphilis
and false-positive results among persons without syphilis or previously treated syphilis.
False-positive  nontreponemal  test  results  can  be  associated  with  multiple  medical
conditions  and  factors  unrelated  to  syphilis,  including  other  infections  (e.g.,  HIV),
autoimmune  conditions,  vaccinations,  injecting  drug  use,  pregnancy,  and  older  age
(566,569). Therefore, persons with a reactive nontreponemal test should always receive
a  treponemal  test  to  confirm  the  syphilis  diagnosis  (i.e.,  traditional  algorithm).
Nontreponemal test antibody titers might correlate with disease activity and are used
for monitoring treatment response. Serum should be diluted to identify the highest titer,
and results should be reported quantitatively. A fourfold change in titer, equivalent to a
change  of  two  dilutions  (e.g.,  from  1:16  to  1:4  or  from  1:8  to  1:32),  is  considered
necessary
 for
 demonstrating
 a
 clinically
 significant
 difference
 between
 two
nontreponemal test results obtained by using the same serologic test, preferably from
the  same  manufacturer  to  avoid  variation  in  results.  Sequential  serologic  tests  for  a
patient should be performed using the same testing method (VDRL or RPR), preferably
by the same laboratory. VDRL and RPR are equally valid assays; however, quantitative
results  from  the  two  tests  cannot  be  compared  directly  with  each  other  because  the
methods  are  different,  and  RPR  titers  frequently  are  slightly  higher  than  VDRL  titers.
Nontreponemal  test  titers  usually  decrease  after  treatment  and  might  become
nonreactive with time. However, for certain persons, nontreponemal antibodies might
decrease  less  than  fourfold  after  treatment  (i.e.,  inadequate  serologic  response)  or
might decline appropriately but fail to serorevert and persist for a long period. Atypical
nontreponemal serologic test results (e.g., unusually high, unusually low, or fluctuating
titers)  might  occur  regardless  of  HIV  status.  When  serologic  tests  do  not  correspond
with  clinical  findings  indicative  of  primary,  secondary,  or  latent  syphilis,  presumptive
treatment is recommended for persons with risk factors for syphilis, and use of other
tests  (e.g.,  biopsy  for  histology  and  immunostaining  and  PCR  of  lesion)  should  be
considered. For the majority of persons with HIV infection, serologic tests are accurate
and reliable for diagnosing syphilis and evaluating response to treatment. The majority
of  patients  who  have  reactive  treponemal  tests  will  have  reactive  tests  for  the
remainder of their lives, regardless of adequate treatment or disease activity. However,
15%–25%  of  patients  treated  during  the  primary  stage  revert  to  being  serologically
nonreactive after 2–3 years (570). Treponemal antibody titers do not predict treatment
response  and  therefore  should  not  be  used  for  this  purpose.  Clinical  laboratories
sometimes  screen  syphilis  serologic  samples  by  using  automated  treponemal
immunoassays, typically by EIA or CIA (571–573). This reverse sequence algorithm for
syphilis testing can identify persons previously treated for syphilis, those with untreated
or  incompletely  treated  syphilis,  and  those  with  false-positive  results  that  can  occur
with a low likelihood of infection (574). Persons with a positive treponemal screening
test  should  have  a  standard  quantitative  nontreponemal  test  with  titer  performed
reflexively  by  the  laboratory  to  guide  patient  management  decisions.  If  the
nontreponemal  test  is  negative,  the  laboratory  should  perform  a  treponemal  test
different  from  the  one  used  for  initial  testing,  preferably  TP-PA  or  treponemal  assay
based on different antigens than the original test, to adjudicate the results of the initial
test.  If  a  second  treponemal  test  is  positive  (e.g.,  EIA  reactive,  RPR  nonreactive,  or
TP-PA  reactive),  persons  with  a  history  of  previous  treatment  will  require  no  further
management  unless  sexual  history  indicates  a  reexposure.  In  this  instance,  a  repeat
nontreponemal  test  2–4  weeks  after  a  confirmed  medical  history  and  physical
examination is recommended to evaluate for early infection. Those without a history of
treatment for syphilis should be offered treatment. Unless a medical history or results
of  a  physical  examination  indicate  a  recent  infection,  previously  untreated  persons
should be treated for syphilis of unknown duration or late latent syphilis. If the second
treponemal test is negative (e.g., EIA reactive, RPR nonreactive, TP-PA nonreactive) and
the epidemiologic risk and clinical probability for syphilis are low, further evaluation or
treatment  is  not  indicated.  Multiple  studies  demonstrate  that  high  quantitative  index
values  or  high  signal-to-cutoff  ratio  from  treponemal  EIA  or  CIA  tests  correlate  with
TP-PA  positivity,  which  might  eliminate  the  need  for  additional  confirmatory  testing;
however, the range of index values varies among different treponemal immunoassays,
and  the  values  that  correspond  to  high  levels  of  reactivity  with  confirmatory  testing
might  differ  by  immunoassay  (567,575–582).  Further  testing  with  CSF  evaluation  is
warranted  for  persons  with  clinical  signs  of  neurosyphilis  (e.g.,  cranial  nerve
dysfunction,  meningitis,  stroke,  acute  or  chronic  altered  mental  status,  or  loss  of
vibration sense). All patients with ocular symptoms and reactive syphilis serology need
a full ocular examination, including cranial nerve evaluation. If cranial nerve dysfunction
is present, a CSF evaluation is needed. Among persons with isolated ocular symptoms
(i.e., no cranial nerve dysfunction or other neurologic abnormalities), confirmed ocular
abnormalities  on  examination,  and  reactive  syphilis  serology,  a  CSF  examination  is
unnecessary before treatment. CSF analysis can be helpful in evaluating persons with
ocular  symptoms  and  reactive  syphilis  serology  who  do  not  have  ocular  findings  or
cranial  nerve  dysfunction  on  examination.  Among  patients  with  isolated  auditory
abnormalities and reactive syphilis serology, CSF evaluation is likely to be normal and is
unnecessary before treatment (583,584). Laboratory testing is helpful in supporting the
diagnosis  of  neurosyphilis;  however,  no  single  test  can  be  used  to  diagnose
neurosyphilis in all instances. Diagnosis of neurosyphilis depends on a combination of
CSF  tests  (e.g.,  CSF  cell  count,  protein,  or  reactive  CSF-VDRL)  in  the  presence  of
reactive  serologic  test  (nontreponemal  and  treponemal)  results  and  neurologic  signs
and  symptoms.  CSF  laboratory  abnormalities  are  common  for  persons  with  early
syphilis and are of unknown medical significance in the absence of neurologic signs or
symptoms  (585).  CSF-VDRL  is  highly  specific  but  insensitive.  For  a  person  with
neurologic  signs  or  symptoms,  a  reactive  CSF-VDRL  (in  the  absence  of  blood
contamination)  is  considered  diagnostic  of  neurosyphilis.  When  CSF-VDRL  is  negative
despite  clinical  signs  of  neurosyphilis,  reactive  serologic  tests  results,  lymphocytic
pleocytosis, or protein, neurosyphilis should be considered. In that instance, additional
evaluation  by  using  fluorescent  treponemal-antibody  absorption  (FTA-ABS)  or  TP-PA
testing  on  CSF  might  be  warranted.  The  CSF  FTA-ABS  test  is  less  specific  for
neurosyphilis  than  the  CSF-VDRL  but  is  highly  sensitive.  Fewer  data  are  available
regarding CSF TP-PA; however, the sensitivity and specificity appear similar to the CSF
FTA-ABS (586). Neurosyphilis is highly unlikely with a negative CSF FTA-ABS or TP-PA
test, especially among persons with nonspecific neurologic signs and symptoms (587).
Among  persons  with  HIV  infection,  CSF  leukocyte  count  can  be  elevated  (>5
WBCs/mm3);  the  association  with  CSF  leukocyte  count  and  plasma  HIV  viral
suppression has not been well characterized. Using a higher cutoff (>20 WBCs/mm3)
might  improve  the  specificity  of  neurosyphilis  diagnosis  among  this  population  (588).
Penicillin G, administered parenterally, is the preferred drug for treating patients in all
stages of syphilis. The preparation used (i.e., benzathine, aqueous procaine, or aqueous
crystalline),  dosage,  and  length  of  treatment  depend  on  the  stage  and  clinical
manifestations  of  the  disease.  Treatment  for  late  latent  syphilis  (>1  years’  duration)
and  tertiary  syphilis  requires  a  longer  duration  of  therapy  because  organisms
theoretically might be dividing more slowly (the validity of this rationale has not been
assessed).  Longer  treatment  duration  is  required  for  persons  with  latent  syphilis  of
unknown  duration  to  ensure  that  those  who  did  not  acquire  syphilis  within  the
preceding  year  are  adequately  treated.  Selection  of  the  appropriate  penicillin
preparation is important because T. pallidum can reside in sequestered sites (e.g., the
CNS  and  aqueous  humor)  that  are  poorly  accessed  by  certain  forms  of  penicillin.
Combinations  of  benzathine  penicillin,  procaine  penicillin,  and  oral  penicillin
preparations  are  not  considered  appropriate  for  syphilis  treatment.  Reports  have
indicated  that  practitioners  have  inadvertently  prescribed  combination  long-  and
short-acting  benzathine-procaine  penicillin  (Bicillin  C-R)  instead  of  the  standard
benzathine  penicillin  product  (Bicillin  L-A)  recommended  in  the  United  States  for
treating  primary,  secondary,  and  latent  syphilis.  Practitioners,  pharmacists,  and
purchasing agents should be aware of the similar names of these two products to avoid
using  the  incorrect  combination  therapy  agent  for  treating  syphilis  (589).  Penicillin’s
effectiveness for treating syphilis was well established through clinical experience even
before  the  value  of  randomized  controlled  clinical  trials  was  recognized.  Therefore,
approximately all recommendations for treating syphilis are based not only on clinical
trials and observational studies, but on many decades of clinical experience. Parenteral
penicillin G is the only therapy with documented efficacy for syphilis during pregnancy.
Pregnant  women  with  syphilis  at  any  stage  who  report  penicillin  allergy  should  be
desensitized  and  treated  with  penicillin  (see  Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a
History of Penicillin Allergy). The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction is an acute febrile reaction
frequently accompanied by headache, myalgia, and fever that can occur within the first
24 hours after the initiation of any syphilis therapy; it is a reaction to treatment and not
an  allergic  reaction  to  penicillin.  Patients  should  be  informed  about  this  possible
adverse  reaction  and  how  to  manage  it  if  it  occurs.  The  Jarisch-Herxheimer  reaction
occurs  most  frequently  among  persons  who  have  early  syphilis,  presumably  because
bacterial  loads  are  higher  during  these  stages.  Antipyretics  can  be  used  to  manage
symptoms;  however,  they  have  not  been  proven  to  prevent  this  reaction.  The
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction might induce early labor or cause fetal distress in pregnant
women; however, this should not prevent or delay therapy (590) (see Syphilis During
Pregnancy).  Sexual  transmission  of  T.  pallidum  is  thought  to  occur  only  when
mucocutaneous syphilitic lesions are present. Such manifestations are uncommon after
the first year of infection. Persons exposed through sexual contact with a person who
has  primary,  secondary,  or  early  latent  syphilis  should  be  evaluated  clinically  and
serologically  and  treated  according  to  the  following  recommendations:  Parenteral
penicillin G has been used effectively for achieving clinical resolution (i.e., the healing
of  lesions  and  prevention  of  sexual  transmission)  and  for  preventing  late  sequelae.
However, no comparative trials have been conducted to guide selection of an optimal
penicillin  regimen.  Substantially  fewer  data  are  available  for  nonpenicillin  regimens.
Available  data  demonstrate  that  use  of  additional  doses  of  benzathine  penicillin  G,
amoxicillin, or other antibiotics do not enhance efficacy of this recommended regimen
when used to treat primary and secondary syphilis, regardless of HIV status (591–593).
Infants and children aged ≥1 month who receive a syphilis diagnosis should have birth
and  maternal  medical  records  reviewed  to  assess  whether  they  have  congenital  or
acquired  syphilis  (see  Congenital  Syphilis).  Infants  and  children  aged  ≥1  month  with
primary  and  secondary  syphilis  should  be  managed  by  a  pediatric  infectious  disease
specialist  and  evaluated  for  sexual  abuse  (e.g.,  through  consultation  with  child
protective  services)  (see  Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of  Children).  All  persons  who  have
primary and secondary syphilis should be tested for HIV at the time of diagnosis and
treatment.  Those  persons  whose  HIV  test  results  are  negative  should  be  offered  HIV
PrEP. In geographic areas in which HIV prevalence is high, persons who have primary or
secondary syphilis should be offered PrEP and retested for HIV in 3 months if the initial
HIV  test  result  was  negative.  Persons  who  have  syphilis  and  symptoms  or  signs
indicating  neurologic  disease  (e.g.,  cranial  nerve  dysfunction,  meningitis,  stroke,  or
altered  mental  state)  should  have  an  evaluation  that  includes  CSF  analysis.  Persons
with  syphilis  who  have  symptoms  or  signs  of  ocular  syphilis  (e.g.,  uveitis,  iritis,
neuroretinitis, or optic neuritis) should have a thorough cranial nerve examination and
ocular slit-lamp and ophthalmologic examinations. CSF evaluation is not always needed
for  persons  with  ocular  syphilis  if  no  evidence  of  cranial  nerves  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6
dysfunction  or  other  evidence  of  neurologic  disease  exists.  If  symptoms  and  signs  of
otic  syphilis  are  present  then  an  otologic  examination  is  needed;  CSF  evaluation  in
persons with otic syphilis does not aid in the clinical management and therefore is not
recommended (see Cerebrospinal Fluid Evaluation). Treatment should be guided by the
results  of  these  evaluations.  Invasion  of  CSF  by  T.  pallidum  accompanied  by  CSF
laboratory  abnormalities  is  common  among  adults  who  have  primary  or  secondary
syphilis  but  has  unknown  medical  significance  (585).  In  the  absence  of  clinical
neurologic findings, no evidence supports variation from the recommended treatment
regimen for primary or secondary syphilis. Symptomatic neurosyphilis after treatment
with the penicillin regimens recommended for primary and secondary syphilis is rare.
Therefore, unless clinical signs or symptoms of neurologic or ophthalmic involvement
are present, routine CSF analysis is not recommended for persons who have primary or
secondary syphilis. Clinical and serologic evaluation should be performed at 6 and 12
months after treatment; more frequent evaluation might be prudent if opportunity for
follow-up is uncertain or if repeat infection is a clinical concern. Serologic response (i.e.,
titer) should be compared with the titer at the time of treatment. However, assessing
serologic response to treatment can be difficult, and definitive criteria for cure or failure
by  serologic  criteria  have  not  been  well  established.  In  addition,  nontreponemal  test
titers might decrease more slowly for persons previously treated for syphilis (594,595).
Persons  who  have  signs  or  symptoms  that  persist  or  recur  and  those  with  at  least  a
fourfold  increase  in  nontreponemal  test  titer  persisting  for  >2  weeks  likely  were
reinfected  or  experienced  treatment  failure.  Among  persons  who  have  neurologic
findings or persons with no neurologic findings without any reported sexual exposure
during the previous 3–6 months indicating that treatment failure might be possible, a
CSF  examination  is  recommended  with  treatment  guided  by  CSF  findings.  These
persons should also be reevaluated for HIV infection. Among persons with no neurologic
findings  after  a  thorough  neurologic  examination  and  who  are  sexually  active,
reinfection  is  likely  and  repeat  treatment  for  early  syphilis  is  recommended.  These
persons  should  also  be  reevaluated  for  HIV  infection.  Failure  of  nontreponemal  test
titers  to  decrease  fourfold  within  12  months  after  therapy  for  primary  or  secondary
syphilis  (inadequate  serologic  response)  might  be  indicative  of  treatment  failure.
However, clinical trial data have demonstrated that 10%–20% of persons with primary
and  secondary  syphilis  treated  with  the  recommended  therapy  will  not  achieve  the
fourfold  decrease  in  nontreponemal  titer  within  12  months  after  treatment
(591,596,597). Serologic response to treatment appears to be associated with multiple
factors, including the person’s syphilis stage (earlier stages are more likely to decrease
fourfold and become nonreactive), initial nontreponemal antibody titers (titers <1:8 are
less likely to decline fourfold than higher titers), and age (titers among older patients
might  be  less  likely  to  decrease  fourfold  than  those  of  younger  patients)  (596–598).
Optimal  management  of  persons  who  have  an  inadequate  serologic  response  after
syphilis  treatment  is  unclear.  At  a  minimum,  these  persons  should  receive  additional
neurologic examinations, clinical and serologic follow-up annually, and reevaluation for
HIV  infection.  If  neurologic  symptoms  or  signs  are  identified,  a  CSF  evaluation  is
recommended,  with  findings  guiding  management.  If  additional  follow-up  cannot  be
ensured, retreatment is recommended. Because treatment failure might be the result of
unrecognized CNS infection, CSF examination can be considered in situations in which
follow-up is uncertain. For retreatment, weekly injections of benzathine penicillin G 2.4
million units intramuscularly (IM) for 3 weeks is recommended, unless CSF examination
indicates  that  neurosyphilis  is  present  (see  Neurosyphilis,  Ocular  Syphilis,  and
Otosyphilis). Serologic titers might not decrease, despite a negative CSF examination
and  a  repeated  3-week  therapy  course  (599).  In  these  circumstances,  the  benefit  of
additional  therapy  or  repeated  CSF  examinations  is  unclear,  and  it  is  not  typically
recommended.  Serologic  and  clinical  monitoring  at  least  annually  should  continue  to
monitor for any sustained increases in nontreponemal titer. See Syphilis, Management
of Sex Partners. Data to support use of alternatives to penicillin in treating primary and
secondary  syphilis  are  limited.  However,  multiple  therapies  might  be  effective  for
nonpregnant  persons  with  penicillin  allergy  who  have  primary  or  secondary  syphilis.
Doxycycline  (100  mg  orally  2  times/day  for  14  days)  (600,601)  and  tetracycline  (500
mg  orally  4  times/day  for  14  days)  have  been  used  for  years  and  can  be  effective.
Compliance  is  likely  to  be  better  with  doxycycline  than  tetracycline  because
tetracycline  can  cause  more  gastrointestinal  side  effects  and  requires  more  frequent
dosing.  Limited  clinical  studies,  along  with  biologic  and  pharmacologic  evidence,
indicate that ceftriaxone (1 g daily either IM or IV for 10 days) is effective for treating
primary and secondary syphilis; however, the optimal dose and duration of ceftriaxone
therapy have not been defined (602,603). Azithromycin as a single 2-g oral dose has
been  effective  for  treating  primary  and  secondary  syphilis  among  certain  populations
(602,604,605).  However,  because  of  T.  pallidum  chromosomal  mutations  associated
with  azithromycin  and  other  macrolide  resistance  and  documented  treatment  failures
start  highlightin  multiple  U.S.  geographic  areasend  highlight,  azithromycin  should  not
be  used  as  treatment  for  syphilis  start  highlight(606–608)end  highlight.  Thorough
clinical and serologic follow-up of persons receiving any alternative therapy is essential.
Persons with a penicillin allergy whose compliance with therapy or follow-up cannot be
ensured should be desensitized and treated with benzathine penicillin G. Skin testing
for  penicillin  allergy  might  be  useful  in  circumstances  in  which  the  reagents  and
expertise are available for performing the test adequately (see Management of Persons
Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy). Pregnant women with primary or secondary
syphilis who are allergic to penicillin should be desensitized and treated with penicillin
G. Skin testing or oral graded penicillin dose challenge might be helpful in identifying
women  at  risk  for  acute  allergic  reactions  (see  Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a
History of Penicillin Allergy; Syphilis During Pregnancy). Persons with HIV infection who
have primary or secondary syphilis should be treated similarly to those without HIV (see
Syphilis  Among  Persons  with  HIV  Infection).  Latent  syphilis  is  defined  as  syphilis
characterized  by  seroreactivity  without  other  evidence  of  primary,  secondary,  or
tertiary disease. Persons who have latent syphilis and who acquired syphilis during the
preceding  year  are  classified  as  having  early  latent  syphilis  (early  nonprimary,
nonsecondary).  Persons  can  receive  a  diagnosis  of  early  latent  syphilis  if,  during  the
year  preceding  the  diagnosis,  they  had  a  documented  seroconversion  or  a  sustained
(>2  weeks)  fourfold  or  greater  increase  in  nontreponemal  test  titers  in  a  previously
treated  person;  unequivocal  symptoms  of  primary  or  secondary  syphilis;  or  a  sex
partner documented to have primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis. In addition, for
persons  with  reactive  nontreponemal  and  treponemal  tests  whose  only  possible
exposure  occurred  during  the  previous  12  months,  early  latent  syphilis  can  be
assumed.  In  the  absence  of  these  conditions  associated  with  latent  syphilis,  an
asymptomatic person should be considered to have latent syphilis of unknown duration
or late latent syphilis (>1 year’s duration). Nontreponemal serologic titers usually are
higher early in the course of syphilis infection. However, early latent syphilis cannot be
reliably diagnosed solely on the basis of nontreponemal titers. All persons with latent
syphilis should have careful examination of all accessible mucosal surfaces to evaluate
for  mucosal  lesions  (primary  or  secondary  syphilis)  before  making  a  latent  syphilis
diagnosis. Physical examination should include the oral cavity, perianal area, perineum,
rectum, and genitals (vagina and cervix for women; scrotum, penis, and underneath the
foreskin for uncircumcised men). Because latent syphilis is not transmitted sexually, the
objective of treating persons in this disease stage is to prevent medical complications
of syphilis. Latent syphilis can also be vertically transmitted to a fetus; therefore, the
goal of treating a pregnant woman is to prevent congenital syphilis. Although clinical
experience  supports  the  effectiveness  of  penicillin  in  achieving  this  goal,  limited
evidence is available for guiding choice of specific regimens or duration. Available data
demonstrate  that  additional  doses  of  benzathine  penicillin  G,  amoxicillin,  or  other
antibiotics  in  early  latent  syphilis  do  not  enhance  efficacy,  regardless  of  HIV  status
(592,593,609).  Infants  and  children  aged  ≥1  month  with  diagnosed  latent  syphilis
should  be  managed  by  a  pediatric  infectious  disease  specialist  and  receive  a  CSF
examination.  In  addition,  birth  and  maternal  medical  records  should  be  reviewed  to
assess  whether  these  infants  and  children  have  congenital  or  acquired  syphilis.  For
those  with  congenital  syphilis,  treatment  should  be  undertaken  as  described  (see
Congenital Syphilis). Those with acquired syphilis should be evaluated for sexual abuse
(e.g., through consultation with child protection services) (see Sexual Assault or Abuse
of Children). These regimens are for children who are not allergic to penicillin who have
acquired syphilis and who have normal CSF examinations. All persons who have latent
syphilis should be tested for HIV at the time of diagnosis or treatment. Those persons
whose HIV test results are negative should be offered HIV PrEP. In geographic areas in
which the prevalence of HIV infection is high or among populations vulnerable to HIV
acquisition, persons who have early latent or late latent syphilis should be offered PrEP
and retested for HIV in 3 months if the first HIV test result was negative. Persons who
receive a diagnosis of latent syphilis and have neurologic or ocular signs and symptoms
(e.g.,  cognitive  dysfunction,  motor  or  sensory  deficits,  ophthalmic  or  auditory
symptoms, cranial nerve palsies, or symptoms or signs of meningitis or stroke) should
be evaluated for neurosyphilis, ocular syphilis, or otosyphilis according to their clinical
presentation (see Neurosyphilis, Ocular Syphilis, and Otosyphilis). If a person receives a
delayed  dose  of  penicillin  in  a  course  of  weekly  therapy  for  late  latent  syphilis  or
syphilis  of  unknown  duration,  the  course  of  action  that  should  be  recommended  is
unclear. Clinical experience indicates that an interval of 10–14 days between doses of
benzathine  penicillin  for  latent  syphilis  might  be  acceptable  before  restarting  the
sequence of injections (i.e., if dose 1 is administered on day 0, dose 2 is administered
on  days  10–14).  Pharmacologic  considerations  indicate  that  an  interval  of  7–9  days
between  doses,  if  feasible,  might  be  preferred  (610–612).  Delayed  doses  are  not
optimal  for  pregnant  women  receiving  therapy  for  latent  syphilis  (613).  Pregnant
women who have delays in any therapy dose >9 days between doses should repeat the
full course of therapy. Quantitative nontreponemal serologic tests should be repeated
at 6, 12, and 24 months. These serologic titers should be compared with the titer at the
time of treatment. Persons with at least a fourfold sustained increase in nontreponemal
test titer persisting for >2 weeks or who experienced signs or symptoms attributable to
primary or secondary syphilis were likely reinfected or experienced treatment failure.
These persons should be retreated and reevaluated for HIV infection. Among persons
who  have  neurologic  findings  after  a  thorough  neurologic  examination  or  among
persons with no neurologic findings and no sexual exposure during the previous year, a
CSF examination is recommended. Treatment should be guided by CSF findings. Among
persons with no neurologic findings after neurologic examination and who are sexually
active, treatment with weekly injections of benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM
for 3 weeks is recommended. Optimal management of persons who have less than a
fourfold  decrease  in  titers  24  months  after  treatment  (i.e.,  an  inadequate  serologic
response)  is  unclear,  especially  if  the  initial  titer  was  <1:8.  At  a  minimum,  these
persons should receive additional clinical and serologic follow-up and be evaluated for
HIV  infection.  If  neurologic  symptoms  or  signs  are  identified,  a  CSF  evaluation  is
recommended, with the findings guiding management. If additional follow-up cannot be
ensured  or  if  an  initially  high  titer  (>1:32)  does  not  decrease  at  least  fourfold  24
months after treatment, retreatment with weekly injections of benzathine penicillin G
2.4 million units IM for 3 weeks is recommended. Because treatment failure might be
the result of unrecognized CNS infection, CSF examination can be considered in such
situations  where  follow-up  is  uncertain  or  initial  high  titers  do  not  decrease  after  24
months.  If  the  CSF  examination  is  negative,  repeat  treatment  for  latent  syphilis  is
recommended. Serologic titers might not decrease despite a negative CSF examination
and  a  repeated  course  of  therapy,  especially  if  the  initial  nontreponemal  titer  is  low
(<1:8);  in  these  circumstances,  the  need  for  additional  therapy  or  repeated  CSF
examinations  is  unclear  but  is  usually  not  recommended.  Serologic  and  clinical
monitoring at least annually should continue to monitor for any sustained increases in
nontreponemal  titer.  See  Syphilis,  Management  of  Sex  Partners.  The  effectiveness  of
alternatives  to  penicillin  in  treating  latent  syphilis  has  not  been  well  documented.
Nonpregnant patients allergic to penicillin who have clearly defined early latent syphilis
should  respond  to  antibiotics  recommended  as  alternatives  to  penicillin  for  treating
primary  and  secondary  syphilis  (see  Primary  and  Secondary  Syphilis).  The  only
acceptable alternatives for treating late latent syphilis or syphilis of unknown duration
are doxycycline (100 mg orally 2 times/day) or tetracycline (500 mg orally 4 times/day),
each for 28 days. The efficacy of these alternative regimens among persons with HIV
infection has not been well studied. These therapies should be used only in conjunction
with close serologic and clinical follow-up, especially among persons with HIV infection.
On the basis of biologic plausibility and pharmacologic properties, ceftriaxone might be
effective  for  treating  latent  syphilis.  However,  the  optimal  dose  and  duration  of
ceftriaxone therapy have not been defined; treatment decisions should be discussed in
consultation with a specialist. Persons with a penicillin allergy whose compliance with
therapy  or  follow-up  cannot  be  ensured  should  be  desensitized  and  treated  with
benzathine  penicillin  G.  Skin  testing  for  penicillin  allergy  might  be  useful  in
circumstances in which the reagents and expertise are available for performing the test
adequately  (see  Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy).
Pregnant women who are allergic to penicillin should be desensitized and treated with
penicillin G. Skin testing for penicillin allergy might be useful in circumstances in which
the  reagents  and  expertise  are  available  for  performing  the  test  adequately  (see
Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy;  Syphilis  During
Pregnancy).  Persons  with  HIV  infection  who  have  latent  syphilis  should  be  treated
similarly  to  persons  who  do  not  have  HIV  (see  Syphilis  Among  Persons  with  HIV
Infection).  Tertiary  syphilis  refers  to  gummas,  cardiovascular  syphilis,  psychiatric
manifestations  (e.g.,  memory  loss  or  personality  changes),  or  late  neurosyphilis.
Guidelines for all forms of neurosyphilis (e.g., early or late neurosyphilis) are discussed
elsewhere  in  these  recommendations  (see  Neurosyphilis,  Ocular  Syphilis,  and
Otosyphilis). Persons with gummas and cardiovascular syphilis who are not allergic to
penicillin and have no evidence of neurosyphilis by clinical and CSF examination should
be  treated  with  the  following  regimen.  All  persons  who  have  tertiary  syphilis  should
receive  a  CSF  examination  before  therapy  is  initiated  and  have  an  HIV  test.  Those
persons whose HIV test results are negative should be offered HIV PrEP. Persons with
CSF  abnormalities  should  be  treated  with  a  neurosyphilis  regimen.  Certain  providers
treat all persons who have cardiovascular syphilis with a neurosyphilis regimen. These
persons  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist.
Limited information is available concerning clinical response and follow-up of persons
who  have  tertiary  syphilis.  See  Syphilis,  Management  of  Sex  Partners.  Any  person
allergic  to  penicillin  should  be  treated  in  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease
specialist.  Pregnant  women  who  are  allergic  to  penicillin  should  be  desensitized  and
treated with penicillin G. Skin testing or oral graded penicillin dose challenge might be
helpful  in  identifying  women  at  risk  for  acute  allergic  reactions  (see  Management  of
Persons  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy;  Syphilis  During  Pregnancy).  Persons
with HIV infection who have tertiary syphilis should be treated as described for persons
without  HIV  (see  Syphilis  Among  Persons  with  HIV  Infection).  CNS  involvement  can
occur  during  any  stage  of  syphilis,  and  CSF  laboratory  abnormalities  are  common
among persons with early syphilis, even in the absence of clinical neurologic findings.
No evidence exists to support variation from recommended diagnosis and treatment for
syphilis  at  any  stage  for  persons  without  clinical  neurologic  findings,  except  tertiary
syphilis.  If  clinical  evidence  of  neurologic  involvement  is  observed  (e.g.,  cognitive
dysfunction, motor or sensory deficits, cranial nerve palsies, or symptoms or signs of
meningitis  or  stroke),  a  CSF  examination  should  be  performed  before  treatment.
Syphilitic  uveitis  or  other  ocular  syphilis  manifestations  (e.g.,  neuroretinitis  and  optic
neuritis)  can  occur  at  any  stage  of  syphilis  and  can  be  isolated  abnormalities  or
associated with neurosyphilis. All persons with ocular symptoms and reactive syphilis
serology  need  a  full  ocular  examination,  including  cranial  nerve  evaluation.  If  cranial
nerve dysfunction is present, a CSF evaluation is needed. Among persons with isolated
ocular  symptoms  (no  cranial  nerve  dysfunction  or  other  neurologic  abnormalities),
reactive  syphilis  serology,  and  confirmed  ocular  abnormalities  on  examination,  CSF
examination  is  unnecessary  before  treatment.  CSF  analysis  might  be  helpful  in
evaluating  persons  with  ocular  symptoms  and  reactive  syphilis  serology  who  do  not
have ocular findings on examination. If ocular syphilis is suspected, immediate referral
to and management in collaboration with an ophthalmologist is crucial. Ocular syphilis
should  be  treated  similarly  to  neurosyphilis,  even  if  a  CSF  examination  is  normal.
Hearing loss and other otologic symptoms can occur at any stage of syphilis and can be
isolated  abnormalities  or  associated  with  neurosyphilis,  especially  of  cranial  nerve  8.
However,  among  persons  with  isolated  auditory  symptoms,  normal  neurologic
examination, and reactive syphilis serology, CSF examination is likely to be normal and
is not recommended before treatment. Otosyphilis should be managed in collaboration
with an otolaryngologist and treated by using the same regimen as for neurosyphilis. If
compliance  with  therapy  can  be  ensured,  the  following  alternative  regimen  might  be
considered.  The  durations  of  the  recommended  and  alternative  regimens  for
neurosyphilis  are  shorter  than  the  duration  of  the  regimen  used  for  latent  syphilis.
Therefore, benzathine penicillin, 2.4 million units IM once per week for 1–3 weeks, can
be considered after completion of these neurosyphilis treatment regimens to provide a
comparable  total  duration  of  therapy.  The  following  are  other  considerations  in  the
management of persons who have neurosyphilis: Data from two studies indicate that,
among immunocompetent persons and persons with HIV infection who are on effective
ART,  normalization  of  the  serum  RPR  titer  predicts  normalization  of  abnormal  CSF
parameters  after  neurosyphilis  treatment  (614,615).  Therefore,  repeated  CSF
examinations  are  unnecessary  for  persons  without  HIV  infection  or  persons  with  HIV
infection  who  are  on  ART  and  who  exhibit  serologic  and  clinical  responses  after
treatment.  See  Syphilis,  Management  of  Sex  Partners.  Limited  data  indicate  that
ceftriaxone  1–2  g  daily  either  IM  or  IV  for  10–14  days  can  be  used  as  an  alternative
treatment  for  persons  with  neurosyphilis  (603,616,617).  Cross-sensitivity  between
ceftriaxone  and  penicillin  can  occur;  however,  the  risk  for  penicillin  cross-reactivity
between  third-generation  cephalosporins  is  negligible  (618–621)  (see  Management  of
Persons Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy). If concern exists regarding ceftriaxone
safety  for  a  patient  with  neurosyphilis,  skin  testing  should  be  performed  to  confirm
penicillin  allergy  and,  if  necessary,  penicillin  desensitization  in  consultation  with  a
specialist  is  recommended.  Other  regimens  have  not  been  adequately  evaluated  for
treatment  of  neurosyphilis.  Pregnant  women  who  are  allergic  to  penicillin  should  be
desensitized  and  treated  with  penicillin  G.  Skin  testing  or  oral  graded  penicillin  dose
challenge might be helpful in identifying women at risk for acute allergic reactions (see
Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy).  Persons  with  HIV
infection who have neurosyphilis should be treated as described for persons without HIV
(see  Syphilis  Among  Persons  with  HIV  Infection).  Interpretation  of  treponemal  and
nontreponemal serologic tests for persons with HIV infection is the same as for persons
without  HIV.  Although  rare,  unusual  serologic  responses  have  been  observed  among
persons  with  HIV  infection  who  have  syphilis.  The  majority  of  reports  have  involved
posttreatment  serologic  titers  that  were  higher  than  expected  (i.e.,  high  serofast)  or
fluctuated,  and  false-negative  serologic  test  results  and  delayed  appearance  of
seroreactivity  have  also  been  reported  (622).  When  clinical  findings  are  indicative  of
syphilis, but serologic tests are nonreactive or their interpretation is unclear, alternative
tests (e.g., biopsy of a lesion, darkfield examination, or PCR of lesion material) might be
useful for diagnosis. Neurosyphilis, ocular syphilis, and otosyphilis should be considered
in the differential diagnosis of neurologic, ocular, and other signs and symptoms among
persons with HIV infection. Persons with HIV infection who have early syphilis might be
at  increased  risk  for  neurologic  complications  (623)  and  might  have  higher  rates  of
inadequate  serologic  response  with  recommended  regimens.  The  magnitude  of  these
risks  is  not  defined  precisely  but  is  likely  small.  Although  long-term  (>1  year)
comparative  data  are  lacking,  no  treatment  regimens  for  syphilis  have  been
demonstrated to be more effective in preventing neurosyphilis among persons with HIV
infection  than  the  syphilis  regimens  recommended  for  persons  without  HIV  (609).
Careful follow-up after therapy is essential. Using ART per current HIV guidelines might
improve  clinical  outcomes  among  persons  coinfected  with  HIV  and  syphilis;  concerns
regarding adequate treatment of syphilis among persons with HIV infection might not
apply  to  those  with  HIV  virologic  suppression  (624,625).  Available  data  demonstrate
that  additional  doses  of  benzathine  penicillin  G,  amoxicillin,  or  other  antibiotics  in
primary  and  secondary  syphilis  among  persons  with  HIV  infection  do  not  result  in
enhanced  efficacy  (592,593,609).  The  majority  of  persons  with  HIV  infection  respond
appropriately  to  the  recommended  benzathine  penicillin  G  treatment  regimen  for
primary and secondary syphilis (626). CSF abnormalities (e.g., mononuclear pleocytosis
and  elevated  protein  levels)  can  be  common  among  persons  with  HIV,  even  those
without  syphilis.  The  clinical  and  prognostic  significance  of  such  CSF  laboratory
abnormalities among persons with primary and secondary syphilis who lack neurologic
symptoms  is  unknown.  Certain  studies  have  demonstrated  that  among  persons  with
HIV infection and syphilis, CSF abnormalities are associated with a CD4+ T-cell count of
≤350 cells/mL or an RPR titer of ≥1:32 (614,627). However, CSF examination followed
by  treatment  for  neurosyphilis  on  the  basis  of  laboratory  abnormalities  has  not  been
associated  with  improved  clinical  outcomes  in  the  absence  of  neurologic  signs  and
symptoms.  All  persons  with  HIV  infection  and  primary  and  secondary  syphilis  should
have  a  thorough  neurologic,  ocular,  and  otic  examination  (614,622,625).  CSF
examination  should  be  reserved  for  those  with  an  abnormal  neurologic  examination.
Persons  with  HIV  infection  and  primary  or  secondary  syphilis  should  be  evaluated
clinically and serologically for possible treatment failure at 3, 6, 9, 12, and 24 months
after therapy; those who meet the criteria for treatment failure (i.e., signs or symptoms
that  persist  or  recur  or  a  sustained  [>2  weeks]  fourfold  or  greater  increase  in  titer)
should  be  managed  in  the  same  manner  as  persons  without  HIV  infection  (i.e.,
depending  on  history  of  sexual  activity  and  on  findings  of  neurologic  examination,
either  repeat  treatment  with  weekly  injections  of  benzathine  penicillin  G  2.4  million
units IM for 3 weeks or CSF examination and repeat treatment guided by CSF findings)
(see  Primary  and  Secondary  Syphilis).  In  addition,  CSF  examination  and  retreatment
can  be  considered  for  persons  whose  nontreponemal  test  titers  do  not  decrease
fourfold  within  24  months  of  therapy.  If  CSF  examination  is  normal,  treatment  with
benzathine  penicillin  G  administered  as  2.4  million  units  IM  at  weekly  intervals  for  3
weeks  is  recommended.  Serologic  titers  might  not  decrease  despite  a  negative  CSF
examination  and  a  repeated  3-week  course  of  therapy  (599).  Especially  if  the  initial
nontreponemal  titer  is  low  (<1:8)  in  these  circumstances,  the  benefit  of  additional
therapy  or  repeated  CSF  examinations  is  unclear  but  is  not  usually  recommended.
Serologic and clinical monitoring at least annually should continue to monitor for any
sustained increases in nontreponemal titer. See Syphilis, Management of Sex Partners.
Persons with HIV infection who are allergic to penicillin and have primary or secondary
syphilis should be managed according to the recommendations for persons without HIV
who  are  allergic  to  penicillin  (see  Primary  and  Secondary  Syphilis).  Persons  with
penicillin  allergy  whose  compliance  with  alternative  therapy  or  follow-up  cannot  be
ensured  should  be  desensitized  and  treated  with  penicillin  G  (see  Management  of
Persons Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy). Using penicillin alternatives has not
been well studied among persons with HIV infection; azithromycin is not recommended
for persons with HIV and primary or secondary syphilis infection. Alternative therapies
should be used only in conjunction with close serologic and clinical follow-up. Persons
with HIV and latent syphilis should be treated similarly to persons who do not have HIV
(see Latent Syphilis). All persons with HIV and latent syphilis infection should undergo a
thorough neurologic, ocular, and otic examination; those with neurologic symptoms or
signs  should  undergo  immediate  CSF  examination.  In  the  absence  of  neurologic
symptoms  or  signs,  CSF  examination  has  not  been  associated  with  improved  clinical
outcomes  and  therefore  is  not  recommended.  Those  with  ocular  or  otic  symptoms  or
signs should be evaluated for ocular syphilis and otosyphilis according to those clinical
presentations  (see  Neurosyphilis,  Ocular  Syphilis,  and  Otosyphilis).  Patients  with  HIV
and latent syphilis infection should be evaluated clinically and serologically at 6, 12, 18,
and 24 months after therapy. Those persons who meet the criteria for treatment failure
(i.e.,  signs  or  symptoms  that  persist  or  recur  or  a  sustained  [>2  weeks]  fourfold  or
greater increase in titer) should be managed in the same manner as persons without
HIV  (i.e.,  depending  on  history  of  sexual  activity  and  on  findings  of  neurologic
examination, either repeat treatment with weekly injections of benzathine penicillin G
2.4 million units IM for 3 weeks or CSF examination and repeat treatment guided by CSF
findings)  (see  Latent  Syphilis).  In  addition,  CSF  examination  and  retreatment  can  be
considered for persons whose nontreponemal test titers do not decrease fourfold within
24  months  of  therapy.  If  CSF  examination  is  normal,  treatment  with  benzathine
penicillin  G  administered  as  2.4  million  units  IM  at  weekly  intervals  for  3  weeks  is
recommended. Serologic titers might not decrease despite a negative CSF examination
and a repeated 3-week course of therapy (599). Especially if the initial nontreponemal
titer is low (<1:8) in these circumstances, the benefit of additional therapy or repeated
CSF  examinations  is  unclear  but  is  not  usually  recommended.  Serologic  and  clinical
monitoring  at  least  annually  should  continue  to  ensure  nontreponemal  titers  remain
stable without any sustained titer increases. See Syphilis, Management of Sex Partners.
The  efficacy  of  alternative  nonpenicillin  regimens  for  latent  syphilis  for  persons  living
with HIV infection has not been well studied, and these therapies should be used only in
conjunction  with  close  serologic  and  clinical  follow-up.  Patients  with  penicillin  allergy
whose compliance with alternative therapy or follow-up cannot be ensured should be
desensitized  and  treated  with  penicillin  G  (see  Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a
History of Penicillin Allergy). All persons with HIV and syphilis infection should receive a
careful  neurologic  ocular  and  otic  examination.  Persons  with  HIV  infection  and
neurosyphilis  should  be  treated  according  to  the  recommendations  for  persons  with
neurosyphilis  and  without  HIV  infection  (see  Neurosyphilis,  Ocular  Syphilis,  and
Otosyphilis). Persons with HIV and neurosyphilis infection should be managed according
to the recommendations for persons without HIV infection. Serum RPR can be followed
for  necessary  treatment  success  rather  than  following  CSF  parameters  (see
Neurosyphilis, Ocular Syphilis, and Otosyphilis). Limited data indicate that changes in
CSF parameters might occur more slowly among persons with HIV infection, especially
those with more advanced immunosuppression (588,624). See Syphilis, Management of
Sex  Partners.  Persons  with  HIV  who  are  allergic  to  penicillin  and  have  neurosyphilis
infection  should  be  managed  according  to  the  recommendations  for  persons  without
HIV infection with neurosyphilis who are allergic to penicillin (see Neurosyphilis, Ocular
Syphilis, and Otosyphilis). Small observational studies conducted among persons with
HIV  and  neurosyphilis  report  that  ceftriaxone  1–2  g  IV  daily  for  10–14  days  might  be
effective as an alternative agent (628–630). The possibility of cross-sensitivity between
ceftriaxone and penicillin exists; however, the risk for penicillin cross-reactivity between
third-generation  cephalosporins  is  negligible  (619–621,631)  (see  Management  of
Persons Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy). If concern exists regarding the safety
of ceftriaxone for a person with HIV and neurosyphilis, skin testing should be performed
to confirm penicillin allergy and, if necessary, penicillin desensitization in consultation
with a specialist is recommended. Other regimens have not been adequately evaluated
for treatment of neurosyphilis. All women should be screened serologically for syphilis
at the first prenatal care visit (174), which is mandated by the majority of states (142).
Among populations for whom receipt of prenatal care is not optimal, serologic screening
and  treatment  (if  serologic  test  is  reactive)  should  be  performed  at  the  time  of
pregnancy  testing  (632).  Antepartum  screening  can  be  performed  by  manual
nontreponemal antibody testing (e.g., RPR) by using the traditional syphilis screening
algorithm  or  by  treponemal  antibody  testing  (e.g.,  immunoassays)  using  the  reverse
sequence  algorithm.  Pregnant  women  with  positive  treponemal  screening  tests  (e.g.,
EIA,  CIA,  or  immunoblot)  should  have  additional  quantitative  nontreponemal  testing
because titers are essential for monitoring treatment response. Serologic testing should
also  be  performed  twice  during  the  third  trimester:  at  28  weeks’  gestation  and  at
delivery for pregnant women who live in communities with high rates of syphilis and for
women who have been at risk for syphilis acquisition during pregnancy. Maternal risk
factors  for  syphilis  during  pregnancy  include  sex  with  multiple  partners,  sex  in
conjunction with drug use or transactional sex, late entry to prenatal care (i.e., first visit
during the second trimester or later) or no prenatal care, methamphetamine or heroin
use, incarceration of the woman or her partner, and unstable housing or homelessness
(174,633–636).  Moreover,  as  part  of  the  management  of  pregnant  women  who  have
syphilis,  providers  should  obtain  information  concerning  ongoing  risk  behaviors  and
treatment of sex partners to assess the risk for reinfection. Any woman who has a fetal
death  after  20  weeks’  gestation  should  be  tested  for  syphilis.  No  mother  or  neonate
should leave the hospital without maternal serologic status having been documented at
least once during pregnancy. Any woman who at the time of delivery has no prenatal
care history or has been at risk for syphilis acquisition during pregnancy (e.g., misuses
drugs; has had another STI during pregnancy; or has had multiple sex partners, a new
partner,  or  a  partner  with  an  STI)  should  have  the  results  of  a  syphilis  serologic  test
documented  before  discharge.  Pregnant  women  seropositive  for  syphilis  should  be
considered infected unless an adequate treatment history is clearly documented in the
medical  records  and  sequential  serologic  antibody  titers  have  decreased  as
recommended  for  the  syphilis  stage.  The  risk  for  antepartum  fetal  infection  or
congenital syphilis at delivery is related to the syphilis stage during pregnancy, with the
highest risk occurring during the primary and secondary stages. Quantitative maternal
nontreponemal  titer,  especially  if  >1:8,  might  be  a  marker  of  early  infection  and
bacteremia. However, risk for fetal infection is still substantial among pregnant women
with  late  latent  syphilis  and  low  titers.  Pregnant  women  with  stable,  serofast  low
nontreponemal titers who have previously been treated for syphilis might not require
additional treatment; however, increasing or high antibody titers in a pregnant woman
previously treated might indicate reinfection or treatment failure, and treatment should
be offered. If an automated treponemal test (e.g., EIA or CIA) is used for antepartum
syphilis screening, all positive tests should be reflexed to a quantitative nontreponemal
test  (e.g.,  RPR  or  VDRL).  If  the  nontreponemal  test  is  negative,  the  results  are
considered  discrepant  and  a  second  treponemal  test  (TP-PA  is  preferred)  should  be
performed, preferably on the same specimen. If the second treponemal test is positive
(e.g.,  EIA  positive,  RPR  negative,  or  TP-PA  positive),  current  or  previous  syphilis
infection can be confirmed. For women with a history of adequately treated syphilis who
do not have ongoing risk, no further treatment is necessary. Women without a history
of  treatment  should  have  the  syphilis  stage  determined  and  should  be  treated
accordingly  with  a  recommended  penicillin  regimen.  If  the  second  treponemal  test  is
negative (e.g., EIA positive, RPR negative, or TP-PA negative), the positive EIA or CIA is
more  likely  to  represent  a  false-positive  test  result  for  women  who  are  living  in
communities with low rates of syphilis, have a partner who is uninfected, and have no
history of treated syphilis (637,638). If the woman is at low risk for syphilis, lacks signs
or symptoms of primary syphilis, has a partner with no clinical or serologic evidence of
syphilis,  and  is  likely  to  follow  up  with  clinical  care,  repeat  serologic  testing  within  4
weeks can be considered to determine whether the EIA or CIA remains positive or if the
RPR,  VDRL,  or  TP-PA  result  becomes  positive.  If  both  the  RPR  and  TP-PA  remain
negative,  no  further  treatment  is  necessary.  If  follow-up  is  not  likely,  women  with  an
isolated  reactive  treponemal  test  and  without  a  history  of  treated  syphilis  should  be
treated  according  to  the  syphilis  stage.  Penicillin  G  is  the  only  known  effective
antimicrobial  for  treating  fetal  infection  and  preventing  congenital  syphilis  (639).
Evidence  is  insufficient  to  determine  the  optimal  penicillin  regimen  during  pregnancy
(640). The following recommendations should be considered for pregnant women with
syphilis infection: Coordinated prenatal care and treatment are vital because providers
should document that women are adequately treated for the syphilis stage and ensure
that the clinical and antibody responses are appropriate for the patient’s disease stage.
If  syphilis  is  diagnosed  and  treated  at  or  before  24  weeks’  gestation,  serologic  titers
should not be repeated before 8 weeks after treatment (e.g., at 32 weeks’ gestation)
but should be repeated again at delivery. Titers should be repeated sooner if reinfection
or  treatment  failure  is  suspected.  For  syphilis  diagnosed  and  treated  after  24  weeks’
gestation, serologic titers should be repeated at delivery. A majority of women will not
achieve  a  fourfold  decrease  in  titers  before  delivery,  although  this  does  not  indicate
treatment failure (645). However, a fourfold increase in titer after treatment (e.g., from
1:8 to 1:32) that is sustained for >2 weeks is concerning for reinfection or treatment
failure.  Nontreponemal  titers  can  increase  immediately  after  treatment,  presumably
related  to  the  treatment  response.  Therefore,  unless  symptoms  and  signs  exist  of
primary  or  secondary  syphilis,  follow-up  titer  should  not  be  repeated  until
approximately  8  weeks  after  treatment.  Inadequate  maternal  treatment  is  likely  if
delivery  occurs  within  30  days  of  therapy,  clinical  signs  of  infection  are  present  at
delivery,  or  the  maternal  antibody  titer  at  delivery  is  fourfold  higher  than  the
pretreatment titer. See Syphilis, Management of Sex Partners. No proven alternatives to
penicillin are available for treatment of syphilis during pregnancy. Pregnant women who
have a history of penicillin allergy should be desensitized and treated with penicillin G.
Skin  testing  or  oral  graded  penicillin  dose  challenge  might  be  helpful  in  identifying
women  at  risk  for  acute  allergic  reactions  (see  Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a
History  of  Penicillin  Allergy).  Tetracycline  and  doxycycline  are  to  be  avoided  in  the
second and third trimesters of pregnancy (431). Erythromycin and azithromycin should
not  be  used  because  neither  reliably  cures  maternal  infection  nor  treats  an  infected
fetus (640). Data are insufficient to recommend ceftriaxone or other cephalosporins for
treatment  of  maternal  infection  and  prevention  of  congenital  syphilis  (646,647).
Placental  inflammation  from  congenital  syphilis  infection  might  increase  the  risk  for
perinatal  transmission  of  HIV.  All  women  with  HIV  infection  should  be  evaluated  for
syphilis  and  receive  a  penicillin  regimen  appropriate  for  the  syphilis  stage.  Data  are
insufficient to recommend any alternative regimens for pregnant women with syphilis
and  HIV  infection  (see  Syphilis  Among  Persons  with  HIV).  The  rate  of  reported
congenital syphilis in the United States has increased dramatically since 2012. During
2019, a total of 1,870 cases of congenital syphilis were reported, including 94 stillbirths
and 34 infant deaths (141). The 2019 national rate of 48.5 cases per 100,000 live births
represents a 41% increase relative to 2018 (34.3 cases per 100,000 live births) and a
477% increase relative to 2012 (8.4 cases per 100,000 live births). During 2015–2019,
the rate of congenital syphilis increased 291.1% (12.4 to 48.5 per 100,000 live births),
which mirrors increases in the rate of primary and secondary syphilis among females
aged 15–44 years (a 171.9% increase, from 3.2 to 8.7 per 100,000 females). Effective
prevention  and  detection  of  congenital  syphilis  depend  on  identifying  syphilis  among
pregnant women and, therefore, on the routine serologic screening of pregnant women
during the first prenatal visit and at 28 weeks’ gestation and at delivery for women who
live in communities with high rates of syphilis, women with HIV infection, or those who
are  at  increased  risk  for  syphilis  acquisition.  Certain  states  have  recommended
screening  three  times  during  pregnancy  for  all  women;  clinicians  should  screen
according to their state’s guidelines. Maternal risk factors for syphilis during pregnancy
include  sex  with  multiple  partners,  sex  in  conjunction  with  drug  use  or  transactional
sex, late entry to prenatal care (i.e., first visit during the second trimester or later) or no
prenatal  care,  methamphetamine  or  heroin  use,  incarceration  of  the  woman  or  her
partner, and unstable housing or homelessness (174,633–636). Moreover, as part of the
management  of  pregnant  women  who  have  syphilis,  providers  should  obtain
information concerning ongoing risk behaviors and treatment of sex partners to assess
the risk for reinfection. Routine screening of neonatal sera or umbilical cord blood is not
recommended because diagnosis at that time does not prevent congenital syphilis in
certain  newborns.  No  mother  or  newborn  infant  should  leave  the  hospital  without
maternal serologic status having been documented at least once during pregnancy. Any
woman who had no prenatal care before delivery or is considered at increased risk for
syphilis acquisition during pregnancy should have the results of a syphilis serologic test
documented before she or her neonate is discharged. A quantitative RPR is needed at
the time of delivery to compare with the neonate’s nontreponemal test result. If a stat
RPR  is  unavailable  and  a  rapid  treponemal  test  is  performed  at  delivery,  the  results
should be confirmed by using standard syphilis serologic laboratory tests (e.g., RPR and
treponemal  test)  and  algorithms.  Diagnosis  of  congenital  syphilis  can  be  difficult
because  maternal  nontreponemal  and  treponemal  immunoglobulin  G  (IgG)  antibodies
can be transferred through the placenta to the fetus, complicating the interpretation of
reactive  serologic  tests  for  syphilis  among  neonates  (infants  aged  <30  days).
Therefore, treatment decisions frequently must be made on the basis of identification of
syphilis in the mother; adequacy of maternal treatment; presence of clinical, laboratory,
or  radiographic  evidence  of  syphilis  in  the  neonate;  and  comparison  of  maternal  (at
delivery) and neonatal nontreponemal serologic titers (e.g., RPR or VDRL) by using the
same  test,  preferably  conducted  by  the  same  laboratory.  Any  neonate  at  risk  for
congenital  syphilis  should  receive  a  full  evaluation  and  testing  for  HIV.  All  neonates
born to mothers who have reactive nontreponemal and treponemal test results should
be evaluated with a quantitative nontreponemal serologic test (RPR or VDRL) performed
on the neonate’s serum because umbilical cord blood can become contaminated with
maternal blood and yield a false-positive result, and Wharton’s jelly within the umbilical
cord  can  yield  a  false-negative  result.  The  nontreponemal  test  performed  on  the
neonate  should  be  the  same  type  of  nontreponemal  test  performed  on  the  mother.
Conducting  a  treponemal  test  (e.g.,  TP-PA,  immunoassay-EIA,  CIA,  or  microbead
immunoassay)  on  neonatal  serum  is  not  recommended  because  it  is  difficult  to
interpret,  as  passively  transferred  maternal  antibodies  can  persist  for  >15  months.
Commercially available IgM tests are not recommended. All neonates born to women
who  have  reactive  nontreponemal  serologic  tests  for  syphilis  at  delivery  should  be
examined  thoroughly  for  evidence  of  congenital  syphilis  (e.g.,  nonimmune  hydrops,
conjugated  or  direct  hyperbilirubinemia†  or  cholestatic  jaundice  or  cholestasis,
hepatosplenomegaly, rhinitis, skin rash, or pseudoparalysis of an extremity). Pathologic
examination of the placenta or umbilical cord using specific staining (e.g., silver) or a T.
pallidum PCR test using a CLIA-validated test should be considered; direct fluorescence
antibody (DFA-TP) reagents are unavailable (565). Darkfield microscopic examination or
PCR testing of suspicious lesions or body fluids (e.g., bullous rash or nasal discharge)
also should be performed. In addition to these tests, for stillborn infants, skeletal survey
demonstrating typical osseous lesions might aid in the diagnosis of congenital syphilis
because  these  abnormalities  are  not  detected  on  fetal  ultrasound.  The  following
scenarios  describe  the  recommended  congenital  syphilis  evaluation  and  treatment  of
neonates  born  to  women  who  had  reactive  nontreponemal  and  treponemal  serologic
tests for syphilis during pregnancy (e.g., RPR reactive, TP-PA reactive or EIA reactive,
RPR reactive) and have a reactive nontreponemal test at delivery (e.g., RPR reactive).
Maternal  history  of  infection  with  T.  pallidum  and  treatment  for  syphilis  should  be
considered  when  evaluating  and  treating  the  neonate  for  congenital  syphilis  in  most
scenarios, except when congenital syphilis is proven or highly probable. Any neonate
with  If  >1  day  of  therapy  is  missed,  the  entire  course  should  be  restarted.  Data  are
insufficient regarding use of other antimicrobial agents (e.g., ampicillin). When possible,
a full 10-day course of penicillin is preferred, even if ampicillin was initially provided for
possible  sepsis  (648–650).  Using  agents  other  than  penicillin  requires  close  serologic
follow-up  for  assessing  therapy  adequacy.  Any  neonate  who  has  a  normal  physical
examination  and  a  serum  quantitative  nontreponemal  serologic  titer  equal  to  or  less
than fourfold of the maternal titer at delivery (e.g., maternal titer = 1:8, neonatal titer
≤1:16) and one of the following: This evaluation is not necessary if a 10-day course of
parenteral  therapy  is  administered,  although  such  evaluations  might  be  useful.  For
instance,  a  lumbar  puncture  might  document  CSF  abnormalities  that  would  prompt
close follow-up. Other tests (e.g., CBC, platelet count, and long-bone radiographs) can
be  performed  to  further  support  a  diagnosis  of  congenital  syphilis.  Before  using  the
single-dose  benzathine  penicillin  G  regimen,  the  recommended  evaluation  (i.e.,  CSF
examination,  long-bone  radiographs,  and  CBC  with  platelets)  should  be  normal,  and
follow-up should be certain. If any part of the neonate’s evaluation is abnormal or not
performed, if the CSF analysis is uninterpretable because of contamination with blood,
or if follow-up is uncertain, a 10-day course of penicillin G is required. If the neonate’s
nontreponemal test is nonreactive and the provider determines that the mother’s risk
for  untreated  syphilis  is  low,  treatment  of  the  neonate  with  a  single  IM  dose  of
benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight for possible incubating syphilis can
be  considered  without  an  evaluation.  Neonates  born  to  mothers  with  untreated  early
syphilis  at  the  time  of  delivery  are  at  increased  risk  for  congenital  syphilis,  and  the
10-day course of penicillin G should be considered even if the neonate’s nontreponemal
test  is  nonreactive,  the  complete  evaluation  is  normal,  and  follow-up  is  certain.  Any
neonate  who  has  a  normal  physical  examination  and  a  serum  quantitative
nontreponemal  serologic  titer  equal  or  less  than  fourfold  of  the  maternal  titer  at
delivery (e.g., maternal titer = 1:8, neonatal titer ≤1:16) and both of the following are
true:  No  evaluation  is  recommended.  Any  neonate  who  has  a  normal  physical
examination  and  a  serum  quantitative  nontreponemal  serologic  titer  equal  to  or  less
than fourfold of the maternal titer at delivery§ and both of the following are true: No
evaluation is recommended. The following situations describe management of neonates
born  to  women  screened  during  pregnancy  by  using  the  reverse  sequence  algorithm
with  reactive  treponemal  serologic  tests  and  a  nonreactive  nontreponemal  serologic
test.  Reactive  maternal  treponemal  serologies  with  a  nonreactive  nontreponemal
serology  (e.g.,  EIA  reactive,  RPR  nonreactive,  or  TP-PA  reactive)  during  pregnancy.
Syphilis  is  highly  unlikely  for  neonates  born  to  mothers  with  a  nonreactive
nontreponemal  test  after  adequate  treatment  for  syphilis  during  pregnancy  or
documentation  of  adequate  treatment  before  pregnancy  (with  no  evidence  of
reinfection  of  relapse).  If  testing  is  performed  again  at  delivery  and  1)  the  maternal
nontreponemal  test  remains  nonreactive  and  2)  the  neonate  has  a  normal  physical
examination and nonreactive nontreponemal test (e.g., RPR nonreactive), the provider
should consider managing similarly to Scenario 4 without a laboratory evaluation and
with no treatment required. Benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight as a
single IM injection might be considered if syphilis exposure is possible within 1 month of
delivery and follow-up of the mother and infant is uncertain. Isolated reactive maternal
treponemal serology (e.g., EIA reactive, RPR nonreactive, or TP-PA nonreactive) during
pregnancy. Syphilis is unlikely for neonates born to mothers screened with the reverse
sequence  algorithm  with  isolated  reactive  maternal  treponemal  serology.  Among
low-prevalence  populations,  these  are  likely  false-positive  results  and  might  become
nonreactive  with  repeat  testing  (638).  If  these  neonates  have  a  normal  physical
examination and the risk for syphilis is low in the mother, no evaluation and treatment
are recommended for the neonate. If syphilis exposure is possible or unknown in the
mother or the mother desires further evaluation to definitively rule out syphilis, repeat
serology  within  4  weeks  is  recommended  to  evaluate  for  early  infection  (see  Syphilis
During  Pregnancy).  Isolated  reactive  maternal  treponemal  serology  (e.g.,  rapid
treponemal test) at delivery. For mothers with late or no prenatal care with a reactive
rapid  treponemal  test  at  delivery,  confirmatory  laboratory-based  testing  should  be
performed; however, results should not delay evaluation and treatment of the neonate.
These neonates should be evaluated and treated with a 10-day course of penicillin as
recommended  in  Scenario  1,  and  consultation  with  a  specialist  is  recommended.  All
neonates  with  reactive  nontreponemal  tests  should  receive  thorough  follow-up
examinations and serologic testing (i.e., RPR or VDRL) every 2–3 months until the test
becomes nonreactive. For a neonate who was not treated because congenital syphilis
was considered less likely or unlikely, nontreponemal antibody titers should decrease
by age 3 months and be nonreactive by age 6 months, indicating that the reactive test
result was caused by passive transfer of maternal IgG antibody. At age 6 months, if the
nontreponemal test is nonreactive, no further evaluation or treatment is needed; if the
nontreponemal test is still reactive, the infant is likely infected and should be treated.
Treated neonates who exhibit persistent nontreponemal test titers by age 6–12 months
should be reevaluated through CSF examination and managed in consultation with an
expert. Retreatment with a 10-day course of a penicillin G regimen might be indicated.
Neonates  with  a  negative  nontreponemal  test  at  birth  and  whose  mothers  were
seroreactive  at  delivery  should  be  retested  at  age  3  months  to  rule  out  serologically
negative incubating congenital syphilis at the time of birth. Treponemal tests should not
be  used  to  evaluate  treatment  response  because  the  results  are  qualitative,  and
passive  transfer  of  maternal  IgG  treponemal  antibody  might  persist  for  >15  months.
Neonates  whose  initial  CSF  evaluations  are  abnormal  do  not  need  repeat  lumbar
puncture unless they exhibit persistent nontreponemal serologic test titers at age 6–12
months. Persistent nontreponemal titers and CSF abnormalities should be managed in
consultation with an expert. Neonates who require treatment for congenital syphilis but
who  have  a  history  of  penicillin  allergy  or  develop  an  allergic  reaction  presumed
secondary to penicillin should be desensitized and then treated with penicillin G (see
Management of Persons Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy). Skin testing remains
unavailable for neonates because the procedure has not been standardized for this age
group.  Data  are  insufficient  regarding  use  of  other  antimicrobial  agents  (e.g.,
ceftriaxone) for congenital syphilis among neonates. If a nonpenicillin G agent is used,
close clinical and serologic follow-up is required in consultation with an expert. Repeat
CSF  examination  should  be  performed  if  the  initial  CSF  examination  was  abnormal.
During periods when the availability of aqueous crystalline penicillin G is compromised,
the  following  is  recommended  (https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/drug-notices.htm):
Evidence  is  insufficient  to  determine  whether  neonates  who  have  congenital  syphilis
and  HIV  infection  or  whose  mothers  have  HIV  require  different  therapy  or  clinical
management  than  is  recommended  for  all  neonates.  All  neonates  with  congenital
syphilis  should  be  managed  similarly,  regardless  of  HIV  status.  Infants  and  children
aged ≥1 month who are identified as having reactive serologic tests for syphilis (e.g.,
RPR  reactive,  TP-PA  reactive  or  EIA  reactive,  RPR  reactive)  should  be  examined
thoroughly and have maternal serology and records reviewed to assess whether they
have  congenital  or  acquired  syphilis  (see  Primary  and  Secondary  Syphilis;  Latent
Syphilis;  Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of  Children).  In  the  case  of  extremely  early  or
incubating syphilis at the time of delivery, all maternal serologic tests might have been
negative;  thus,  infection  might  be  undetected  until  a  diagnosis  is  made  later  in  the
infant  or  child.  Any  infant  or  child  at  risk  for  congenital  syphilis  should  receive  a  full
evaluation  and  testing  for  HIV  infection.  International  adoptee,  immigrant,  or  refugee
children from countries where treponemal infections (e.g., yaws or pinta) are endemic
might  have  reactive  nontreponemal  and  treponemal  serologic  tests,  which  cannot
distinguish between syphilis and other subspecies of T. pallidum (651). These children
might also have syphilis (T. pallidum subspecies pallidum) and should be evaluated for
congenital syphilis. The following evaluations should be performed: If the infant or child
has  no  clinical  manifestations  of  congenital  syphilis  and  the  evaluation  (including  the
CSF examination) is normal, treatment with start highlight<3end highlight weekly doses
of benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight IM can be considered. A single
dose of benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight IM up to the adult dose of
2.4  million  units  in  a  single  dose  can  be  considered  after  the  10-day  course  of  IV
aqueous penicillin G to provide more comparable duration for treatment in those who
have no clinical manifestations and normal CSF. All of these treatment regimens should
also be adequate for children who might have other treponemal infections. Thorough
follow-up examinations and serologic testing (i.e., RPR or VDRL) of infants and children
treated  for  congenital  syphilis  after  the  neonatal  period  (aged  >30  days)  should  be
performed  every  3  months  until  the  test  becomes  nonreactive  or  the  titer  has
decreased  fourfold.  The  serologic  response  after  therapy  might  be  slower  for  infants
and  children  than  neonates.  If  these  titers  increase  at  any  point  >2  weeks  or  do  not
decrease fourfold after 12–18 months, the infant or child should be evaluated (e.g., CSF
examination), treated with a 10-day course of parenteral penicillin G, and managed in
consultation with an expert. Treponemal tests (e.g., EIA, CIA, or TP-PA) should not be
used  to  evaluate  treatment  response  because  the  results  are  qualitative  and  persist
after  treatment,  and  passive  transfer  of  maternal  IgG  treponemal  antibody  might
persist for >15 months after delivery. Infants or children whose initial CSF evaluations
are abnormal do not need repeat lumbar puncture unless their serologic titers do not
decrease  fourfold  after  12–18  months.  After  18  months  of  follow-up,  abnormal  CSF
indices  that  persist  and  cannot  be  attributed  to  other  ongoing  illness  indicate  that
retreatment  is  needed  for  possible  neurosyphilis  and  should  be  managed  in
consultation with an expert. Infants and children who require treatment for congenital
syphilis  but  who  have  a  history  of  penicillin  allergy  or  develop  an  allergic  reaction
presumed secondary to penicillin should be desensitized and treated with penicillin G
(see  Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy).  Skin  testing
remains  unavailable  for  infants  and  children  because  the  procedure  has  not  been
standardized  for  this  age  group.  Data  are  insufficient  regarding  use  of  other
antimicrobial  agents  (e.g.,  ceftriaxone)  for  congenital  syphilis  among  infants  and
children. If a nonpenicillin G agent is used, close clinical, serologic, and CSF follow-up is
required in consultation with an expert. During periods when availability of penicillin G
is  compromised,  management  options  are  similar  to  options  for  the  neonate  (see
Evaluation and Treatment of Neonates). Evidence is insufficient to determine whether
infants and children who have congenital syphilis and HIV infection or whose mothers
have HIV require different therapy or clinical management than what is recommended
for all infants and children. All infants and children with congenital syphilis should be
managed  similarly,  regardless  of  HIV  status.     Top  Penicillin  and  other  ß-lactam
antibiotics have a crucial role in treating STIs. Penicillin is recommended for all clinical
stages of syphilis, and no proven alternatives exist for treating neurosyphilis, congenital
syphilis, or syphilis during pregnancy. Ceftriaxone, a third-generation cephalosporin, is
recommended  for  gonorrhea  treatment.  For  extragenital  site  infections,  especially
pharyngeal, failure rates of nonceftriaxone regimens can be substantial. In most clinical
settings,  patients  who  report  a  penicillin  allergy  are  not  treated  with  ß-lactam
antimicrobials. For patients with a diagnosis of gonorrhea and a concomitant reported
allergy  to  penicillin,  ceftriaxone  is  often  avoided,  even  though  the  cross-reactivity
between  penicillin  allergy  and  third-generation  cephalosporins  is  low  (652–654).
Prevalence  of  reported  allergy  to  penicillin  is  approximately  10%  among  the  U.S.
population  and  higher  among  hospital  inpatients  and  residents  in  health  care–related
facilities  (655–658).  One  large  study  in  an  STI  clinic  revealed  that  8.3%  of  patients
reported penicillin or another ß-lactam antibiotic allergy (659). Penicillin allergy is often
overreported, with the majority of patients who report penicillin allergy able to tolerate
the  medication  (660).  The  prevalence  of  reported  penicillin  allergy  in  low-income
countries is unknown; however, limited data indicate that penicillin is one of the most
frequently reported antibiotic allergies (661). Patients often are incorrectly labeled as
allergic  to  penicillin  and  are  therefore  denied  the  benefit  of  a  ß-lactam  therapy.  The
presence  of  a  penicillin  allergy  label  considerably  reduces  prescribing  options  for
affected patients. Moreover, penicillin allergy labels lead to the use of more expensive
and  less  effective  drugs  and  can  result  in  adverse  consequences,  including  longer
length of hospital stay and increased risk for infection. Multiple studies have described
that persons with reported penicillin or another ß-lactam antibiotic allergy have higher
rates of surgical-site infections,  methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections,
and  higher  medical  care  usage  (653,662–664).  The  overreported  prevalence  of
penicillin  allergy  is  secondary  to  imprecise  use  of  the  term  “allergy”  by  families  and
clinicians and lack of clarity to differentiate between immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated
hypersensitivity reactions, drug intolerances, and other idiosyncratic reactions that can
occur  days  after  exposure.  Approximately  80%  of  patients  with  a  true  IgE-mediated
allergic  reaction  to  penicillin  have  lost  the  sensitivity  after  10  years  (658).  Thus,
patients with recent reactions are more likely to be allergic than patients with remote
reactions, and patients who had allergic reactions in the distant past might no longer be
reactive.  In  a  Baltimore,  Maryland,  STI  clinic  study,  only  7.1%  of  the  patients  who
reported allergy to penicillin or to another ß-lactam antibiotic had an objective positive
test  for  penicillin  allergy  (659).  Moreover,  in  studies  that  have  incorporated  penicillin
skin testing and graded oral challenge among persons with reported penicillin allergy,
the  true  rates  of  allergy  are  low,  ranging  from  1.5%  to  6.1%  (665–667).  Studies  in
preoperative
 surgical
 patients
 with
 reported
 penicillin
 allergy,
 evaluated
 for
cardiovascular  surgery  (668)  or  orthopedics  (669),  have  rates  of  skin  test  positivity
<8.5%. However, when patients with high-risk penicillin allergy histories are excluded,
99% of patients could receive ß-lactams. In hospitalized patients and other populations
with comorbidities, the typical rates of validated penicillin allergy among patients who
report  a  history  of  penicillin  allergy  are  2.5%–9.0%  (670–673).  Penicillin  and
cephalosporins  both  contain  a  ß-lactam  ring.  This  structural  similarity  has  led  to
considerable  confusion  regarding  cross-reactivity  of  these  drugs  and  the  risks  for
allergic reactions from cephalosporins among penicillin-allergic patients. In most clinical
settings,  patients  with  reported  penicillin  allergy  are  precluded  from  treatment  with
such  cephalosporin  antibiotics  as  ceftriaxone.  Third-generation  cephalosporins  (e.g.,
ceftriaxone
 and
 cefixime)
 have
 lower
 cross-reactivity
 with
 IgE-mediated
penicillin-allergic
 patients
 (<1%)
 compared
 with
 first-
 and
 second-generation
cephalosporins (range: 1%–8%). Moreover, anaphylaxis secondary to cephalosporins is
extremely rare among persons who report a penicillin allergy and is estimated to occur
at  a  rate  of  one  per  52,000  persons  (652).  Data  from  the  Kaiser  health  care  system
reported  that  among  3,313  patients  with  self-reported  cephalosporin  allergy  who
received  a  cephalosporin  (mostly  first  generation),  no  cases  of  anaphylaxis  were
reported (652). Use of third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins and carbapenems is
safe for patients without a history of any IgE-mediated symptoms (e.g., anaphylaxis or
urticaria)  from  penicillin  during  the  preceding  10  years.  Evaluating  a  patient  who
reports  a  penicillin  or  another  ß-lactam  antibiotic  allergy  involves  three  steps:  1)
obtaining a thorough medical history, including previous exposures to penicillin or other
ß-lactam antibiotics (658); 2) performing a skin test evaluation by using the penicillin
major and minor determinants; and 3) among those who have a negative penicillin skin
test, performing an observed oral challenge with 250 mg amoxicillin before proceeding
directly to treatment with the indicated ß-lactam therapy (667,675). For persons who
have  a  positive  skin  test  reactive  to  penicillin  (either  to  the  major  or  minor
determinants),  treatment  with  a  ß-lactam  antibiotic  is  not  usually  advised,  and  other
effective antimicrobials should be used (656,658). For persons among whom the only
therapy option is a penicillin antibiotic (e.g., a patient with neurosyphilis or a pregnant
woman  with  syphilis)  and  among  whom  a  penicillin  skin  test  is  positive,  induction  of
penicillin
 tolerance
 (also
 referred
 to
 as
 desensitization)
 is
 required
 (675).
Desensitization  protocols  to  penicillin  should  be  performed  by  allergists,  and  they
require  a  monitored  inpatient  environment.  Penicillin  skin  testing  with  a  major
determinant analog (penicilloyl-polylysine) and minor determinants (benzylpenicilloate,
benzylpenilloate,  or  benzylpenicillin  isomers  of  penicillin)  are  used  for  skin  test
evaluation for IgE-dependent penicillin allergy and can reliably identify persons at high
risk for IgE-mediated reactions to penicillin (658,660,676). Until recently, penicillin skin
testing  in  the  United  States  only  included  the  major  determinant  benzyl  penicillin
poly-L-lysine  (Pre-Pen)  in  addition  to  penicillin  G.  This  test  identifies  approximately
90%–99%  of  the  IgE-mediated  penicillin-allergic  patients.  Because  the  remaining
1%–10% of penicillin-allergic patients who are not captured by this penicillin skin test
are  due  to  minor  determinants  IgE  antibodies,  the  standard  practice  is  to  follow  skin
testing  with  an  observed  oral  challenge  of  amoxicillin  250  mg  with  1  hour  of
observation.  If  the  skin  test  and  oral  challenge  are  both  negative,  the  risk  for
IgE-mediated  anaphylaxis  approaches  zero  and  is  equivalent  to  that  of  a  person  who
has never reported an allergy to penicillin. A revised version of the penicillin skin test
kit,  which  includes  the  major  determinant  reagent  Pre-Pen,  minor  determinants,  and
amoxicillin, is being evaluated by FDA. This penicillin skin test kit has been evaluated
among 455 patients (677) with previous allergy history and has a negative predictive
value of 98%. If approved, this kit might eliminate the need for oral challenge. Penicillin
skin  testing  has  become  a  clinically  significant  element  in  antibiotic  stewardship
programs,  and  the  procedure  has  been  increasingly  used  by  hospital-based
pharmacists,  hospitalists,  and  infectious  disease  physicians  (670,672,673,678,679)  as
part of overall antibiotic stewardship interventions. When integrated into stewardship,
the rates of ß-lactam antibiotic use increased substantially (670). Persons with a history
of  severe  adverse  cutaneous  reaction  (e.g.,  Stevens-Johnson  syndrome  or  toxic
epidermal  necrolysis)  and  other  severe  non–IgE-mediated  reactions  (e.g.,  interstitial
nephritis  or  hemolytic  anemia)  are  not  candidates  for  penicillin  skin  testing  or
challenge.  Penicillin  and  any  other  ß-lactam  antibiotics  should  be  avoided  indefinitely
among  these  patients,  who  should  be  referred  to  an  allergy  center  for  further
evaluation.  Similarly,  patients  who  deny  penicillin  allergy,  but  who  report  previous
IgE-type  reactions  to  cephalosporins,  should  be  referred  to  an  allergist  for  specific
cephalosporin  testing.  In  a  time  of  increasing  antimicrobial  resistance,  following
recommended use of antibiotic treatments is crucial. STI programs and clinicians should
promote increased access to penicillin allergy testing. Allergy testing is being provided
by  clinicians  in  primary  care  and  hospital  settings.  If  appropriate,  STI  programs  and
ambulatory  settings  should  consider  developing  expanded  access  to  penicillin  or
ß-lactam  allergy  assessment.  Persons  with  high-risk  symptom  histories  (e.g.,
anaphylaxis  within  the  previous  10  years)  should  not  be  administered  penicillin  or  a
ß-lactam antibiotic in an ambulatory setting. Furthermore, these persons with high-risk
symptoms should not receive penicillin skin testing or amoxicillin oral challenge in an
ambulatory  STI  setting  and  should  be  referred  to  an  allergist  for  further  evaluation.
High-risk  symptom  histories  include  development  of  the  following  after  penicillin  or
ß-lactam  administration:  anaphylaxis  within  6  hours  or  severe  adverse  cutaneous
reaction  (e.g.,  eosinophilia  and  systemic  symptoms,  Stevens-Johnson  syndrome,  toxic
epidermal necrolysis, or acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis) and other severe
non–IgE-mediated  reactions  (e.g.,  kidney  or  hepatic  injury,  hemolytic  anemia,  or
thrombocytopenia). Among persons with confirmed IgE-mediated penicillin allergy, the
level of cross-reactivity with third-generation cephalosporins is low (652,680,681). If a
patient has a low-risk history for an IgE-mediated penicillin allergy, ambulatory settings
often treat with third-generation cephalosporins without further testing. Low-risk history
includes one nonspecific symptom (e.g., gastrointestinal intolerance, headache, fatigue,
or  nonurticarial  rash)  (Box  2).  In  addition,  a  family  history  of  penicillin  or  ß-lactam
allergy  alone  is  not  a  contraindication  for  treatment  with  ß-lactam  antibiotics.  This
practice  is  increasingly  being  used  in  ambulatory  settings  and  for  preoperative
prophylaxis  (658,663,680,682–684).  If  the  patient  gives  only  a  low-risk  history  of
IgE-mediated
 penicillin
 allergy
 that
 includes
 symptoms
 such
 gastrointestinal
intolerance, headache, fatigue, or nonspecific pruritus, or gives a family history only, an
oral challenge can be administered to document the absence of allergy (Box 2). If the
reaction occurred in the distant past (>10 years), the likelihood is reduced even further
(653,658,663,682,683,685,686).  The  risk  for  severe  amoxicillin-mediated  anaphylaxis
has  decreased  over  time  and  is  rare.  In  the  United  Kingdom  during  1972–2007,  one
fatal  case  of  amoxicillin-medicated  anaphylaxis  was  reported  (684).  Skin  testing  for
penicillin allergy should be performed if any indication exists that the symptoms were
secondary to an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity. Testing is also indicated as a potential
diagnostic procedure to definitively rule out penicillin allergy and document a negative
allergy status in the medical record (i.e., delabeling). Because penicillin allergy testing
does not test for multiple minor determinants, a person with a negative skin test should
follow up with an oral challenge to confirm the negative status. Persons with negative
results  of  a  penicillin  skin  test,  followed  by  an  amoxicillin  oral  challenge,  can  receive
conventional penicillin therapy safely if needed. Persons with positive skin test results
and  for  whom  no  other  clinical  options  exist  (e.g.,  neurosyphilis  and  syphilis  in  a
pregnant woman) should be referred to an allergist and desensitized before initiating
treatment.  Penicillin  skin  testing  includes  use  of  skin  test  reagents  for  identifying
persons at risk for adverse reactions (Box 3), followed by initial pinprick screening with
penicillin major determinants (Pre-Pen) and penicillin G, followed by intradermal testing
if  pinprick  results  are  negative.  Penicillin  testing  procedures  are  performed  in
accordance
 with
 the
 Pre-Pen
 test
 kit
 instructions
(https://penallergytest.com/wp-content/uploads/PRE-PEN-Package-Insert.pdf).
 Saline
negative controls and histamine positive controls are an integral part of the procedure.
Penicillin  skin  testing  should  not  be  performed  for  patients  who  have  taken
antihistamines within the past 7 days. Skin testing can be safely performed by trained
nonallergists and has been implemented as an antimicrobial stewardship intervention
by  internal  medicine  physicians,  pharmacists,  hospitalists,  and  infectious  disease
physicians  (670,673,678,679).  Patients  tested  should  also  receive  documentation  of
status, and the results should be entered in the medical record. Penicillin skin testing
during  pregnancy  is  considered  safe.  For  pregnant  persons  who  report  a  penicillin  or
ß-lactam  allergy,  penicillin  allergy  is  an  important  consideration  in  treating  syphilis
during pregnancy and the potential for group B streptococcal infection and preoperative
prophylaxis if a cesarean delivery is required. However, oral challenges should not be
performed unless in a setting where additional support services are available. Patients
who  have  a  positive  skin  test  should  not  receive  ß-lactam  drugs  in  the  ambulatory
setting  and  should  be  referred  to  an  allergist  or  penicillin  allergy  expert  for  further
evaluation.  The  allergy  testing  results  should  be  documented  in  the  medical  record.
Patients  who  test  negative  should  be  informed  that  their  risk  for  anaphylaxis  is
extremely low and is equivalent to a person who does not report an allergy history. If
treatment  with  penicillin  or  ceftriaxone  is  indicated,  it  can  be  administered  safely.
Documentation of testing results should be provided to the patient. Desensitization is
required  for  persons  who  have  a  documented  penicillin  allergy  and  for  whom  no
therapeutic  alternatives  exist  (e.g.,  syphilis  during  pregnancy  and  persons  with
neurosyphilis).  Modified  protocols  might  be  considered  on  the  basis  of  the  clinical
syndrome, drug of choice, and route of administration (687–690). Patients might require
referral to a specialty center where desensitization can be performed. With increased
access  to  skin  testing  kits  and  the  need  to  better  target  therapy  for  gonorrhea  and
syphilis, programs should identify local allergy consultant resources. Top Urethritis, as
characterized  by  urethral  inflammation,  can  result  from  either  infectious  or
noninfectious  conditions.  Symptoms,  if  present,  include  dysuria,  urethral  pruritis,  and
mucoid,  mucopurulent,  or  purulent  discharge.  Signs  of  urethral  discharge  on
examination  can  also  be  present  among  persons  without  symptoms.  Although  N.
gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis are well established as clinically important infectious
causes of urethritis, M. genitalium has been strongly associated with urethritis and, less
commonly,  prostatitis  (691–697).  If  POC  diagnostic  tools  (e.g.,  Gram,  methylene  blue
[MB], or gentian violet [GV] stain microscopy) are unavailable, drug regimens effective
against  both  gonorrhea  and  chlamydia  should  be  administered.  Further  testing  to
determine  the  specific  etiology  is  recommended  for  preventing  complications,
reinfection,  and  transmission  because  a  specific  diagnosis  might  improve  treatment
compliance,  delivery  of  risk-reduction  interventions,  and  partner  services.  Both
chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  are  reportable  to  health  departments.  NAATs  are  preferred
for detecting C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae, and urine is the preferred specimen
for males (553). NAAT-based tests for diagnosing T. vaginalis among men with urethritis
have  not  been  cleared  by  FDA;  however,  laboratories  have  performed  the
CLIA-compliant  validation  studies  (698)  needed  to  provide  such  testing.  Multiple
organisms can cause infectious urethritis. The presence of gram-negative intracellular
diplococci  (GNID)  or  purple  intracellular  diplococci  (MB  or  GV)  on  urethral  smear  is
indicative  of  presumed  gonococcal  infection,  which  is  frequently  accompanied  by
chlamydial  infection.  Nongonococcal  urethritis  (NGU),  which  is  diagnosed  when
microscopy  of  urethral  secretions  indicate  inflammation  without  GNID  or  MB  or  GV
purple  intracellular  diplococci,  is  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  in  15%–40%  of  cases;
however, prevalence varies by age group, with a lower proportion of disease occurring
among  older  men  (699).  Documentation  of  chlamydial  infection  as  NGU  etiology  is
essential  because  of  the  need  for  partner  referral  for  evaluation  and  treatment  to
prevent complications of chlamydia, especially for female partners. Complications of C.
trachomatis–associated  NGU  among  males  include  epididymitis,  prostatitis,  and
reactive arthritis. M. genitalium is associated with symptoms of urethritis and urethral
inflammation  and  accounts  for  15%–25%  of  NGU  cases  in  the  United  States
(691–693,696,697,700).  Among  men  with  symptoms  of  urethritis,  M.  genitalium  was
detected  in  11%  of  those  with  urethritis  in  Australia  (701),  12%–15%  in  the  United
Kingdom (702–704), 15% in South Africa (696), 19% in China (705), 21% in Korea, 22%
in Japan (706), and 28.7% in the United States (range: 20.4%–38.8%) (697). Data are
inconsistent regarding other Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma species as etiologic agents of
urethritis  (707).  The  majority  of  men  with  Ureaplasma  infections  do  not  have  overt
disease unless a high organism load is present. T. vaginalis can cause urethritis among
heterosexual  men;  however,  the  prevalence  varies  substantially  by  U.S.  geographic
region, age, and sexual behavior and within specific populations. Studies among men
with and without overt urethritis in developed countries document relatively low rates
of  T.  vaginalis  in  the  Netherlands  (0.5%)  (708),  Japan  (1.3%)  (706,709),  the  United
States (2.4%) (710), and the United Kingdom (3.6%) (703). Studies in other countries
have documented higher rates, such as in Croatia (8.2%) (711) and Zimbabwe (8.4%)
(712),  particularly  among  symptomatic  patients.  Neisseria  meningitidis  can  colonize
mucosal  surfaces  and  cause  urethritis  (713).  Urogenital  N.  meningitidis  rates  and
duration  of  carriage,  prevalence  of  asymptomatic  and  symptomatic  infection,  and
modes  of  transmission  have  not  been  systematically  described;  however,  studies
indicate  that  N.  meningitidis  can  be  transmitted  through  oral-penile  contact  (i.e.,
fellatio)  (714–716).  N.  meningitidis  has  similar  colony  morphology  appearance  on
culture and cannot be distinguished from N. gonorrhoeae on Gram stain. Identification
of  N.  meningitidis  as  the  etiologic  agent  with  presumed  gonococcal  urethritis  on  the
basis of Gram stain but negative NAAT for gonorrhea requires a confirmation by culture.
Meningococcal urethritis is treated with the same antimicrobial regimens as gonococcal
urethritis.  Although  evidence  is  limited  regarding  the  risk  for  sexual  transmission  or
recurrent infections with meningococcal urethritis, treatment of sex partners of patients
with meningococcal urethritis with the same antimicrobial regimens as for exposure to
gonococcal infection can be considered. No indication exists for treating persons with N.
meningitidis identified in their oropharynx when not also associated with symptomatic
urethritis.  In  other  instances,  NGU  can  be  caused  by  HSV,  Epstein-Barr  virus,  and
adenovirus (699) acquired by fellatio (i.e., oral-penile contact). In a retrospective review
of  80  cases  of  HSV  urethritis  in  Australia  (717),  the  majority  of  infections  were
associated with HSV-1 with clinical findings of meatitis (62%), genital ulceration (37%),
and  dysuria  (20%).  Adenovirus  can  present  with  dysuria,  meatal  inflammation,  and
conjunctivitis  (718).  Enteric  bacteria  have  been  identified  as  an  uncommon  cause  of
NGU  and  might  be  associated  with  insertive  anal  intercourse  (699).  Other  bacterial
pathogens  have  been  implicated  as  potential  causes  of  clinical  urethritis,  either  in
clustered  case  series  or  as  sporadic  cases  such  as  Haemophilus  influenzae  and
Haemophilus parainfluenzae (719–723). Haemophilus was identified in 12.6% of cases
among  413  men  (mostly  MSM  reporting  insertive  oral  sex)  (724),  and  high  rates  of
azithromycin resistance (39.5%) were identified among Haemophilus urethritis patients
(725). Individual case reports have linked NGU to multiple bacterial species, including
Corynebacterium
 propinquum
 (726),
 Kurthia
 gibsonii
 (727),
 Corynebacterium
glucuronolyticum  (728,729),  Corynebacterium  striatrium  (730),  Aerococcus  urinae
(731), and Neisseria elongata (732). Diagnostic testing and treatment for less-common
organisms  are  reserved  for  situations  in  which  these  infections  are  suspected  (e.g.,
sexual partner with trichomoniasis, urethral lesions, or severe dysuria and meatitis) or
when  NGU  is  not  responsive  to  recommended  therapy.  Even  in  settings  that  provide
comprehensive  diagnostic  testing,  etiology  can  remain  obscure  in  half  of  cases.
Idiopathic NGU was reported in 772 (59%) of 1,295 first presentations of NGU among
men  seeking  sexual  health  services  in  Australia  (701).  In  a  case-control  study  of  211
men with NGU symptoms in Denmark, no identifiable pathogen was identified in 24% of
acute  cases  and  33%  of  chronic  cases  (733).  NGU’s  importance  if  not  caused  by  a
defined  pathogen  is  uncertain;  neither  complications  (e.g.,  urethral  stricture  or
epididymitis) nor adverse outcomes among sex partners have been identified in these
cases.  Associations  between  NGU  and  insertive  anal  and  oral  exposure  have  been
reported (734), as have higher rates of BV-associated Leptotrichia or Sneathia species
among  heterosexual  men  with  urethritis  (735).  These  studies  increase  concern  for
possible undetected infectious rectal or vaginal pathogens, or alternatively, a transient
reactive dysbiosis after exposure to a new microbiome or even a noninfectious reactive
etiology  (736).  Clinicians  should  attempt  to  obtain  objective  evidence  of  urethral
inflammation.  If  POC  diagnostic  tests  (e.g.,  Gram  stain  or  MB  or  GV  microscopy)  are
unavailable, urethritis can be documented on the basis of any of the following signs or
laboratory tests: Men evaluated in settings in which Gram stain or MB or GV smear is
unavailable  who  meet  at  least  one  criterion  for  urethritis  (i.e.,  urethral  discharge,
positive  leukocyte  esterase  test  on  first  void  urine,  or  microscopic  examination  of
first-void urine sediment with ≥10 WBCs/HPF) should be tested for C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae by NAATs and treated with regimens effective against gonorrhea and
chlamydia.  If  symptoms  are  present  but  no  evidence  of  urethral  inflammation  is
present, NAATs for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae might identify infections (739).
Persons with chlamydia or gonorrhea should receive recommended treatment, and sex
partners  should  be  referred  for  evaluation  and  treatment.  If  none  of  these  clinical
criteria  are  present,  empiric  treatment  of  men  with  symptoms  of  urethritis  is
recommended only for those at high risk for infection who are unlikely to return for a
follow-up  evaluation  or  test  results.  Such  men  should  be  treated  with  drug  regimens
effective  against  gonorrhea  and  chlamydia.  NGU  is  a  nonspecific  diagnosis  that  can
have various infectious etiologies. C. trachomatis has been well established as an NGU
etiology;  however,  prevalence  varies  across  populations  and  accounts  for  <50%  of
overall  cases  (712,740–742).  M.  genitalium  is  estimated  to  account  for  10%–25%  of
cases  (696,697,701,703,704,706,733,743),  and  T.  vaginalis  for  1%–8%  of  cases
depending on population and location (703,706,708,710,712). Other etiologies include
different  bacteria,  such  as  Haemophilus  species  (724,725),  N.  meningitidis  (713,716),
HSV  (706,717),  and  adenovirus  (744).  However,  even  when  extensive  testing  is
performed,  no  pathogens  are  identified  in  approximately  half  of  cases  (701,733).
Clinical  presentation  can  include  urethral  discharge,  irritation,  dysuria,  or  meatal
pruritus  (697,743,745).  NGU  is  confirmed  for  symptomatic  men  when  diagnostic
evaluation of urethral secretions indicates inflammation, without evidence of diplococci
by Gram, MB, or GV smear on microscopy (712,746,747). Visible discharge or secretions
can be collected by a swab without inserting it into the urethra; if no visible secretions,
the swab can be inserted into the urethral meatus and rotated, making contact with the
urethral  wall  before  removal.  If  microscopy  is  unavailable,  urine  testing  for  leukocyte
esterase can be performed on first-void urine, and microscopic examination of sediment
from  a  spun  first-void  urine  demonstrating  ≥10  WBCs/HPF  has  a  high  negative
predictive value. All men who have suspected or confirmed NGU should be tested for
chlamydia and gonorrhea by using NAATs. A specific diagnosis can potentially reduce
complications, reinfection, and transmission. M. genitalium testing should be performed
for  men  who  have  persistent  or  recurrent  symptoms  after  initial  empiric  treatment.
Testing for T. vaginalis should be considered in areas or among populations with high
prevalence,  in  cases  where  a  partner  is  known  to  be  infected,  or  for  men  who  have
persistent  or  recurrent  symptoms  after  initial  empiric  treatment.  Ideally,  treatment
should be pathogen based; however, diagnostic information might not be immediately
available. Presumptive treatment should be initiated at NGU diagnosis. Doxycycline is
highly  effective  for  chlamydial  urethral  infections  and  is  also  effective  for  chlamydial
infections  of  the  rectum;  it  also  has  some  activity  against  M.  genitalium.  In  contrast,
reports  have  increased  of  azithromycin  treatment  failures  for  chlamydial  infection
(748,749),  and  the  incidence  of  macrolide  resistance  in  M.  genitalium  also  has  been
rapidly  rising  (697,702,705,750,751).  Pharmacokinetic  data  indicate  that  changing
azithromycin dosing from a single-dose strategy to a multiday strategy might protect
against  inducing  resistance  in  M.  genitalium  infections  (745,752)  (see  Mycoplasma
genitalium). To maximize compliance with recommended therapies, medications should
be dispensed on-site at the clinic, and, regardless of the number of doses involved in
the  regimen,  the  first  dose  should  be  directly  observed.  Erythromycin  is  no  longer
recommended  for  NGU  because  of  its  gastrointestinal  side  effects  and  dosing
frequency.  Levofloxacin  is  no  longer  recommended  for  NGU  because  of  its  inferior
efficacy, especially for M. genitalium. To minimize transmission and reinfections, men
treated for NGU should be instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until they and
their  partners  have  been  treated  (i.e.,  until  completion  of  a  7-day  regimen  and
symptoms have resolved or for 7 days after single-dose therapy). Men with NGU should
be tested for HIV and syphilis. Men should be provided their testing results obtained as
part of the NGU evaluation. Those with a specific diagnosis of chlamydia, gonorrhea, or
trichomoniasis  should  be  offered  partner  services  and  instructed  to  return  3  months
after  treatment  for  repeat  testing  because  of  high  rates  of  reinfection,  regardless  of
whether their sex partners were treated (136,137,753,754) (see Chlamydial Infections;
Gonococcal  Infections;  Trichomoniasis).  If  symptoms  persist  or  recur  after  therapy
completion, men should be instructed to return for reevaluation and should be tested
for M. genitalium and T. vaginalis. Symptoms alone, without documentation of signs or
laboratory  evidence  of  urethral  inflammation,  are  insufficient  basis  for  retreatment.
Providers  should  be  alert  to  the  possible  diagnosis  of  chronic  prostatitis  or  chronic
pelvic pain syndrome in men experiencing persistent perineal, penile, or pelvic pain or
discomfort; voiding symptoms; pain during or after ejaculation; or new-onset premature
ejaculation  lasting  for  >3  months.  Men  with  persistent  pain  should  be  referred  to  a
urologist with expertise in pelvic pain disorders. All sex partners of men with NGU within
the preceding 60 days should be referred for evaluation and testing and presumptive
treatment  with  a  drug  regimen  effective  against  chlamydia.  All  partners  should  be
evaluated  and  treated  according  to  the  management  section  for  their  respective
pathogen; EPT could be an alternate approach if a partner is unable to access timely
care.  To  avoid  reinfection,  sex  partners  should  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until
they and their partners are treated. The objective diagnosis of persistent or recurrent
NGU should be made before considering additional antimicrobial therapy. Symptomatic
recurrent  or  persistent  urethritis  might  be  caused  by  treatment  failure  or  reinfection
after successful treatment. Among men who have persistent symptoms after treatment
without objective signs of urethral inflammation, the value of extending the duration of
antimicrobials  has  not  been  demonstrated.  Treatment  failure  for  chlamydial  urethritis
has  been  estimated  at  6%–12%  (755).  The  most  common  cause  of  persistent  or
recurrent  NGU  is  M.  genitalium,  especially  after  doxycycline  therapy  (756,757).
Treatment failure for M. genitalium is harder to determine because certain men achieve
clinical cure (i.e., resolution of symptoms) but can still have detectable M. genitalium in
urethral specimens (758). The initial step in recurrent urethritis is assessing compliance
with  treatment  or  potential  reexposure  to  an  untreated  sex  partner  (697,743).  If  the
patient did not comply with the treatment regimen or was reexposed to an untreated
partner,  retreatment  with  the  initial  regimen  can  be  considered.  If  therapy  was
appropriately  completed  and  no  reexposure  occurred,  therapy  is  dependent  on  the
initial  treatment  regimen.  Ideally,  diagnostic  testing  among  men  with  recurrent  or
persistent  symptoms,  including  those  with  gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  M.  genitalium,  and
trichomoniasis, can be used to guide further management decisions. T. vaginalis is also
known  to  cause  urethritis  among  men  who  have  sex  with  women.  In  areas  where  T.
vaginalis  is  prevalent,  men  who  have  sex  with  women  with  persistent  or  recurrent
urethritis  should  be  tested  for  T.  vaginalis  and  presumptively  treated  with
metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose or tinidazole 2 g orally in a single dose; their
partners  should  be  referred  for  evaluation  and  treatment,  if  needed.  If  T.  vaginalis  is
unlikely (MSM with NGU or negative T. vaginalis NAAT), men with recurrent NGU should
be tested for M. genitalium by using an FDA-cleared NAAT. Treatment for M. genitalium
includes a two-stage approach, ideally using resistance-guided therapy. If M. genitalium
resistance testing is available it should be performed, and the results should be used to
guide therapy (see Mycoplasma genitalium). If M. genitalium resistance testing is not
available, doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 7 days followed by moxifloxacin
400 mg orally once daily for 7 days should be used. The rationale for this approach is
that  although  not  curative,  doxycycline  decreases  the  M.  genitalium  bacterial  load,
thereby  increasing  likelihood  of  moxifloxacin  success  (759).  Higher  doses  of
azithromycin  have  not  been  effective  for  M.  genitalium  after  azithromycin  treatment
failures. Men with persistent or recurrent NGU after treatment for M. genitalium or T.
vaginalis should be referred to an infectious disease or urology specialist. NGU might
facilitate HIV transmission (760). Persons with NGU and HIV infection should receive the
same  treatment  regimen  as  those  who  do  not  have  HIV.  Two  major  diagnostic  signs
characterize  cervicitis:  1)  a  purulent  or  mucopurulent  endocervical  exudate  visible  in
the endocervical canal or on an endocervical swab specimen (commonly referred to as
mucopurulent  cervicitis),  and  2)  sustained  endocervical  bleeding  easily  induced  by
gentle passage of a cotton swab through the cervical os. Either or both signs might be
present. Cervicitis frequently is asymptomatic; however, certain women might report an
abnormal vaginal discharge and intermenstrual vaginal bleeding (e.g., especially after
sexual  intercourse).  The  criterion  of  using  an  increased  number  of  WBCs  on
endocervical Gram stain in the diagnosis of cervicitis has not been standardized; it is
not sensitive, has a low positive predictive value for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
infections, and is not available in most clinical settings (297,761). Leukorrhea, defined
as  >10  WBCs/HPF  on  microscopic  examination  of  vaginal  fluid,  might  be  a  sensitive
indicator of cervical inflammation with a high negative predictive value (i.e., cervicitis is
unlikely  in  the  absence  of  leukorrhea)  (762,763).  Finally,  although  the  presence  of
gram-negative intracellular diplococci on Gram stain of endocervical exudate might be
specific for diagnosing gonococcal cervical infection when evaluated by an experienced
laboratorian,  it  is  not  a  sensitive  indicator  of  infection  (764).  C.  trachomatis  or  N.
gonorrhoeae  is  the  most  common  etiology  of  cervicitis  defined  by  diagnostic  testing.
Trichomoniasis,  genital  herpes  (especially  primary  HSV-2  infection),  or  M.  genitalium
(761,765–768)  also  have  been  associated  with  cervicitis.  However,  in  many  cases  of
cervicitis,  no  organism  is  isolated,  especially  among  women  at  relatively  low  risk  for
recent  acquisition  of  these  STIs  (e.g.,  women  aged  >30  years)  (769).  Limited  data
indicate that BV and frequent douching might cause cervicitis (770–772). The majority
of persistent cases of cervicitis are not caused by reinfection with C. trachomatis or N.
gonorrhoeae;  other  factors  might  be  involved  (e.g.,  persistent  abnormality  of  vaginal
flora,  M.  genitalium,  douching  or  exposure  to  other  types  of  chemical  irritants,
dysplasia,  or  idiopathic  inflammation  in  the  zone  of  ectopy).  Available  data  do  not
indicate  an  association  between  group  B  streptococcus  colonization  and  cervicitis
(773,774). No specific evidence exists for a role for Ureaplasma parvum or Ureaplasma
urealyticum in cervicitis (707,761,765,775,776). Because cervicitis might be a sign of
upper genital tract infection (e.g., endometritis), women should be assessed for signs of
PID and tested for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae with NAAT on vaginal, cervical, or
urine  samples  (553)  (see  Chlamydial  Infections;  Gonococcal  Infections).  Women  with
cervicitis  also  should  be  evaluated  for  concomitant  BV  and  trichomoniasis.  Because
sensitivity  of  microscopy  for  detecting  T.  vaginalis  is  relatively  low  (approximately
50%),  symptomatic  women  with  cervicitis  and  negative  wet-mount  microscopy  for
trichomonads  should  receive  further  testing  (i.e.,  NAAT,  culture,  or  other  FDA-cleared
diagnostic  test)  (see  Trichomoniasis).  Testing  for  M.  genitalium  with  the  FDA-cleared
NAAT can be considered. Although HSV-2 infection has been associated with cervicitis,
the utility of specific testing (i.e., PCR or culture) for HSV-2 is unknown. Testing for U.
parvum,  U.  urealyticum,  Mycoplasma  hominis,  or  genital  culture  for  group  B
streptococcus  is  not  recommended.  Multiple  factors  should  affect  the  decision  to
provide  presumptive  therapy  for  cervicitis.  Presumptive  treatment  with  antimicrobials
for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae should be provided for women at increased risk
(e.g.,  those  aged  <25  years  and  women  with  a  new  sex  partner,  a  sex  partner  with
concurrent partners, or a sex partner who has an STI), if follow-up cannot be ensured,
or  if  testing  with  NAAT  is  not  possible.  Trichomoniasis  and  BV  should  be  treated  if
detected  (see  Bacterial  Vaginosis;  Trichomoniasis).  For  women  at  lower  risk  for  STIs,
deferring  treatment  until  results  of  diagnostic  tests  are  available  is  an  option.  If
treatment  is  deferred  and  C.  trachomatis  and  N.  gonorrhoeae  NAATs  are  negative,  a
follow-up visit to determine whether the cervicitis has resolved can be considered. To
minimize  transmission  and  reinfection,  women  treated  for  cervicitis  should  be
instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until they and their partners have been
treated  (i.e.,  until  completion  of  a  7-day  regimen  or  for  7  days  after  single-dose
therapy)  and  symptoms  have  resolved.  Women  who  receive  a  cervicitis  diagnosis
should  be  tested  for  syphilis  and  HIV  in  addition  to  other  recommended  diagnostic
tests. Women receiving treatment should return to their provider for a follow-up visit to
determine whether cervicitis has resolved. For women who are untreated, a follow-up
visit gives providers an opportunity to communicate test results obtained as part of the
cervicitis evaluation. Providers should treat on the basis of any positive test results and
determine  whether  cervicitis  has  resolved.  Women  with  a  specific  diagnosis  of
chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  or  trichomoniasis  should  be  offered  partner  services  and
instructed to return in 3 months after treatment for repeat testing because of high rates
of reinfection, regardless of whether their sex partners were treated (753). If symptoms
persist or recur, women should be instructed to return for reevaluation. Management of
sex partners of women treated for cervicitis should be tailored for the specific infection
identified or suspected. All sex partners during the previous 60 days should be referred
for  evaluation,  testing,  and  presumptive  treatment  if  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  or
trichomoniasis  was  identified.  EPT  and  other  effective  partner  referral  strategies  are
alternative  approaches  for  treating  male  partners  of  women  who  have  chlamydial  or
gonococcal  infection  (125–127)  (see  Partner  Services).  To  avoid  reinfection,  sex
partners  should  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  partners  are
treated.  Women  with  persistent  or  recurrent  cervicitis  despite  antimicrobial  therapy
should  be  reevaluated  for  possible  reexposure  or  treatment  failure.  If  relapse  or
reinfection  with  a  specific  infection  has  been  excluded,  BV  is  not  present,  and  sex
partners  have  been  evaluated  and  treated,  management  options  for  persistent
cervicitis  are  undefined.  In  addition,  the  usefulness  of  repeated  or  prolonged
administration  of  antimicrobial  therapy  for  persistent  symptomatic  cervicitis  remains
unknown.  The  etiology  of  persistent  cervicitis,  including  the  potential  role  of  M.
genitalium (777), is unclear. M. genitalium might be considered for cases of cervicitis
that  persist  after  azithromycin  or  doxycycline  therapy  in  which  reexposure  to  an
infected  partner  or  medical  nonadherence  is  unlikely.  Among  women  with  persistent
cervicitis who were previously treated with doxycycline or azithromycin, testing for M.
genitalium  can  be  considered  and  treatment  initiated  on  the  basis  of  results  of
diagnostic  testing  (318)  (see  Mycoplasma  genitalium).  For  women  with  persistent
symptoms that are clearly attributable to cervicitis, referral to a gynecologic specialist
can  be  considered  for  evaluation  of  noninfectious  causes  (e.g.,  cervical  dysplasia  or
polyps)  (778).  Women  with  cervicitis  and  HIV  infection  should  receive  the  same
treatment regimen as those who do not have HIV. Cervicitis can increase cervical HIV
shedding,  and  treatment  reduces  HIV  shedding  from  the  cervix  and  thereby  might
reduce  HIV  transmission  to  susceptible  sex  partners  (779–783).  Diagnosis  and
treatment of cervicitis for pregnant women start highlightdoes not differ from that for
women who are not pregnant (see Diagnostic Considerations; Treatment).end highlight
According to U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use, 2016, leaving an IUD
in  place  during  treatment  for  cervicitis  is  advisable  (58).  However,  current
recommendations  specify  that  an  IUD  should  not  be  placed  if  active  cervicitis  is
diagnosed  (59).  Top  Chlamydial  infection  is  the  most  frequently  reported  bacterial
infectious disease in the United States, and prevalence is highest among persons aged
≤24 years (141,784). Multiple sequelae can result from C. trachomatis infection among
women,  the  most  serious  of  which  include  PID,  ectopic  pregnancy,  and  infertility.
Certain  women  who  receive  a  diagnosis  of  uncomplicated  cervical  infection  already
have  subclinical  upper  genital  tract  infection.  Asymptomatic  infection  is  common
among  both  men  and  women.  To  detect  chlamydial  infection,  health  care  providers
frequently rely on screening tests. Annual screening of all sexually active women aged
<25  years  is  recommended,  as  is  screening  of  older  women  at  increased  risk  for
infection (e.g., women aged ≥25 years who have a new sex partner, more than one sex
partner, a sex partner with concurrent partners, or a sex partner who has an STI) (149).
In a community-based cohort of female college students, incident chlamydial infection
was  also  associated  with  BV  and  high-risk  HPV  infection  (785).  Although  chlamydia
incidence  might  be  higher  among  certain  women  aged  ≥25  years  in  certain
communities,  overall,  the  largest  proportion  of  infection  is  among  women  aged  <25
years  (141).  Chlamydia  screening  programs  have  been  demonstrated  to  reduce  PID
rates among women (786,787). Although evidence is insufficient to recommend routine
screening  for  C.  trachomatis  among  sexually  active  young  men  because  of  certain
factors  (i.e.,  feasibility,  efficacy,  and  cost-effectiveness),  screening  of  sexually  active
young  men  should  be  considered  in  clinical  settings  with  a  high  prevalence  of
chlamydia (e.g., adolescent clinics, correctional facilities, or STD specialty clinics) or for
populations with a high burden of infection (e.g., MSM) (149,788). Among women, the
primary focus of chlamydia screening should be to detect and treat chlamydia, prevent
complications, and test and treat their partners, whereas targeted chlamydia screening
for men should be considered only when resources permit, prevalence is high, and such
screening  does  not  hinder  chlamydia  screening  efforts  for  women  (789–791).  More
frequent  screening  than  annual  for  certain  women  (e.g.,  adolescents)  or  certain  men
(e.g.,  MSM)  might  be  indicated  on  the  basis  of  risk  behaviors.  For  women,  C.
trachomatis  urogenital  infection  can  be  diagnosed  by  vaginal  or  cervical  swabs  or
first-void urine. For men, C. trachomatis urethral infection can be diagnosed by testing
first-void  urine  or  a  urethral  swab.  NAATs  are  the  most  sensitive  tests  for  these
specimens and are the recommended test for detecting C. trachomatis infection (553).
NAATs that are FDA cleared for use with vaginal swab specimens can be collected by a
clinician  or  patient  in  a  clinical  setting.  Patient-collected  vaginal  swab  specimens  are
equivalent  in  sensitivity  and  specificity  to  those  collected  by  a  clinician  using  NAATs
(792,793),  and  this  screening  strategy  is  highly  acceptable  among  women  (794,795).
Optimal  urogenital  specimen  types  for  chlamydia  screening  by  using  NAAT  include
first-catch urine (for men) and vaginal swabs (for women) (553). Recent studies have
demonstrated  that  among  men,  NAAT  performance  on  self-collected  meatal  swabs  is
comparable  to  patient-collected  urine  or  provider-collected  urethral  swabs  (796–798).
Patient  collection  of  a  meatal  swab  for  C.  trachomatis  testing  might  be  a  reasonable
approach for men who are either unable to provide urine or prefer to collect their own
meatal  swab  over  providing  urine.  Previous  evidence  indicates  that  the  liquid-based
cytology specimens collected for Pap smears might be acceptable specimens for NAAT,
although  test  sensitivity  using  these  specimens  might  be  lower  than  that  associated
with use of cervical or vaginal swab specimens (799); regardless, certain NAATs have
been  cleared  by  FDA  for  use  on  liquid-based  cytology  specimens.  Rectal  and
oropharyngeal  C.  trachomatis  infection  among  persons  engaging  in  receptive  anal  or
oral  intercourse  can  be  diagnosed  by  testing  at  the  anatomic  exposure  site.  NAATs
have  been  demonstrated  to  have  improved  sensitivity  and  specificity,  compared  with
culture, for detecting C. trachomatis at rectal and oropharyngeal sites (553,800–804),
and certain NAAT platforms have been cleared by FDA for these anatomic sites (805).
Data  indicate  that  NAAT  performance  on  self-collected  rectal  swabs  is  comparable  to
clinician-collected  rectal  swabs,  and  this  specimen  collection  strategy  for  rectal  C.
trachomatis screening is highly acceptable among men (217,806). Self-collected rectal
swabs are a reasonable alternative to clinician-collected rectal swabs for C. trachomatis
screening by NAAT, especially when clinicians are not available or when self-collection
is preferred over clinician collection. Annual screening for rectal C. trachomatis infection
should  be  performed  among  men  who  report  sexual  activity  at  the  rectal  site.
Extragenital chlamydial testing at the rectal site can be considered for females on the
basis
 of
 reported
 sexual
 behaviors
 and
 exposure
 through
 shared
 clinical
decision-making  by  the  patient  and  the  provider.  The  majority  of  persons  with  C.
trachomatis detected at oropharyngeal sites do not have oropharyngeal symptoms. The
clinical  significance  of  oropharyngeal  C.  trachomatis  infection  is  unclear,  and
prevalence  is  low,  even  among  populations  at  high  risk.  However,  when  gonorrhea
testing is performed at the oropharyngeal site, chlamydia test results might be reported
because certain NAATs detect both bacteria from a single specimen. POC tests for C.
trachomatis among asymptomatic persons can expedite treatment of infected persons
and their sex partners. Among symptomatic patients, POC tests for C. trachomatis can
optimize  treatment  by  limiting  unnecessary  presumptive  treatment  at  the  time  of
clinical decision-making and improve antimicrobial stewardship. Thus, using a POC test
will  likely  be  a  cost-effective  diagnostic  strategy  for  C.  trachomatis  infection  (807).
Newer  NAAT-based  POC  tests  have  promising  performance  and  are  becoming
commercially  available  (807–809).  Treating  persons  with  C.  trachomatis  prevents
adverse  reproductive  health  complications  and  continued  sexual  transmission.
Furthermore, treating their sex partners can prevent reinfection and infection of other
partners. Treating pregnant women usually prevents transmission of C. trachomatis to
neonates  during  birth.  Treatment  should  be  provided  promptly  for  all  persons  with
chlamydial infection; treatment delays have been associated with complications (e.g.,
PID)  in  a  limited  proportion  of  women  (810).  A  meta-analysis  and  a  Cochrane
systematic review evaluated data from randomized clinical trials of azithromycin versus
doxycycline for treating urogenital chlamydial infection determined that microbiologic
treatment  failure  among  men  was  higher  for  azithromycin  than  for  doxycycline
(748,749).  Observational  studies  have  also  demonstrated  that  doxycycline  is  more
efficacious  for  rectal  C.  trachomatis  infection  for  men  and  women  than  azithromycin
(748,811).  A  randomized  trial  for  the  treatment  of  rectal  chlamydia  infection  among
MSM  reported  microbiologic  cure  was  100%  with  doxycycline  and  74%  with
azithromycin  (812).  A  published  review  reported  that  C.  trachomatis  was  detected  at
the  anorectal  site  among  33%–83%  of  women  who  had  urogenital  C.  trachomatis
infection, and its detection was not associated with report of receptive anorectal sexual
activity  (813).  Although  the  clinical  significance  of  oropharyngeal  C.  trachomatis
infection  is  unclear  and  routine  oropharyngeal  screening  is  not  recommended,
oropharyngeal  C.  trachomatis  can  be  sexually  transmitted  to  genital  sites  (211,814);
therefore,  if  C.  trachomatis  is  identified  from  an  oropharyngeal  specimen  while
screening for pharyngeal gonorrhea, it should be treated. Evidence is limited regarding
the efficacy of antimicrobial regimens for oropharyngeal chlamydia; however, a recently
published  observational  study  indicates  doxycycline  might  be  more  efficacious  than
azithromycin  for  oropharyngeal  chlamydia  (815).  Available  evidence  supports  that
doxycycline  is  efficacious  for  C.  trachomatis  infections  of  urogenital,  rectal,  and
oropharyngeal  sites.  Although  azithromycin  maintains  high  efficacy  for  urogenital  C.
trachomatis  infection  among  women,  concern  exists  regarding  effectiveness  of
azithromycin  for  concomitant  rectal  C.  trachomatis  infection,  which  can  occur
commonly  among  women  and  cannot  be  predicted  by  reported  sexual  activity.
Inadequately treated rectal C. trachomatis infection among women who have urogenital
chlamydia  can  increase  the  risk  for  transmission  and  place  women  at  risk  for  repeat
urogenital  C.  trachomatis  infection  through  autoinoculation  from  the  anorectal  site
(816).  Doxycycline  is  also  available  in  a  delayed-release  200-mg  tablet  formulation,
which requires once-daily dosing for 7 days and is as effective as doxycycline 100 mg
twice  daily  for  7  days  for  treating  urogenital  C.  trachomatis  infection  in  men  and
women. It is more costly but also has lower frequency of gastrointestinal side effects
(817).  Levofloxacin  is  an  effective  treatment  alternative  but  is  more  expensive.
Erythromycin is no longer recommended because of the frequency of gastrointestinal
side  effects,  which  can  result  in  nonadherence.  When  nonadherence  to  doxycycline
regimen is a substantial concern, azithromycin 1 g regimen is an alternative treatment
option  but  might  require  posttreatment  evaluation  and  testing  because  it  has
demonstrated  lower  treatment  efficacy  among  persons  with  rectal  infection.  Among
persons receiving multidose regimens, medication should be dispensed with all doses
involved,  on-site  and  in  the  clinic,  and  the  first  dose  should  be  directly  observed.  To
maximize  adherence  with  recommended  therapies,  on-site,  directly  observed
single-dose therapy with azithromycin should always be available for persons for whom
adherence  with  multiday  dosing  is  a  considerable  concern.  To  minimize  disease
transmission  to  sex  partners,  persons  treated  for  chlamydia  should  be  instructed  to
abstain from sexual intercourse for 7 days after single-dose therapy or until completion
of  a  7-day  regimen  and  resolution  of  symptoms  if  present.  To  minimize  risk  for
reinfection, patients also should be instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until
all  of  their  sex  partners  have  been  treated.  Persons  who  receive  a  diagnosis  of
chlamydia should be tested for HIV, gonorrhea, and syphilis. MSM who are HIV negative
with  a  rectal  chlamydia  diagnosis  should  be  offered  HIV  PrEP.  Test  of  cure  to  detect
therapeutic failure (i.e., repeat testing 4 weeks after completing therapy) is not advised
for nonpregnant persons treated with the recommended or alternative regimens, unless
therapeutic  adherence  is  in  question,  symptoms  persist,  or  reinfection  is  suspected.
Moreover,  using  chlamydial  NAATs  at  <4  weeks  after  completion  of  therapy  is  not
recommended because the continued presence of nonviable organisms (553,818,819)
can  lead  to  false-positive  results.  A  high  prevalence  of  C.  trachomatis  infection  has
been  observed  among  women  and  men  who  were  treated  for  chlamydial  infection
during  the  preceding  months  (753,755,820–822).  The  majority  of  posttreatment
infections  do  not  result  from  treatment  failure  but  rather  from  reinfection  caused  by
failure of sex partners to receive treatment or initiation of sexual activity with a new
infected partner (823), indicating a need for improved education and treatment of sex
partners.  Repeat  infections  confer  an  elevated  risk  for  PID  and  other  complications
among  women.  Men  and  women  who  have  been  treated  for  chlamydia  should  be
retested approximately 3 months after treatment, regardless of whether they believe
their sex partners were treated; scheduling the follow-up visit at the time of treatment
is  encouraged  (753).  If  retesting  at  3  months  is  not  possible,  clinicians  should  retest
whenever  persons  next  seek  medical  care  <12  months  after  initial  treatment.  Sex
partners should be referred for evaluation, testing, and presumptive treatment if they
had sexual contact with the partner during the 60 days preceding the patient’s onset of
symptoms  or  chlamydia  diagnosis.  Although  the  exposure  intervals  defining
identification  of  sex  partners  at  risk  are  based  on  limited  data,  the  most  recent  sex
partner should be evaluated and treated, even if the time of the last sexual contact was
>60  days  before  symptom  onset  or  diagnosis.  If  health  department  partner
management  strategies  (e.g.,  disease  intervention  specialists)  are  impractical  or
unavailable for persons with chlamydia, and if a provider is concerned that sex partners
are  unable  to  promptly  access  evaluation  and  treatment  services,  EPT  should  be
considered as permitted by law (see Partner Services). Compared with standard patient
referral of partners, this approach to therapy, which involves delivering the medication
itself or a prescription by the patient or collaborating pharmacy, has been associated
with  decreased  rates  of  persistent  or  recurrent  chlamydia  among  women  (125–127).
Providers  should  provide  patients  with  written  educational  materials  to  give  to  their
partners  about  chlamydia,  which  should  include  notification  that  partners  have  been
exposed  and  information  about  the  importance  of  treatment.  These  materials  also
should  inform  partners  about  potential  therapy-related  allergies  and  adverse  effects,
along with symptoms indicative of complications (e.g., testicular pain among men and
pelvic  or  abdominal  pain  among  women).  Educational  materials  for  female  partners
should  include  information  about  the  importance  of  seeking  medical  evaluation,
especially if PID symptoms are present; undertreatment of PID among female partners
and missed opportunities for diagnosing other STIs among women are concerning. MSM
with chlamydia have a high risk for coexisting infections, especially undiagnosed HIV,
among their partners and might have partners without HIV who could benefit from HIV
PrEP.  Data  are  also  limited  regarding  effectiveness  of  EPT  in  reducing  persistent  or
recurrent chlamydia among MSM (123,133,134); thus, shared clinical decision-making
regarding  EPT  for  MSM  is  recommended.  Having  partners  accompany  patients  when
they  return  for  treatment  is  another  strategy  that  has  been  used  successfully  for
ensuring  partner  treatment  (see  Partner  Services).  To  avoid  reinfection,  sex  partners
should be instructed to abstain from condomless sexual intercourse until they and their
sex  partners  have  been  treated  (i.e.,  after  completion  of  a  7-day  regimen)  and  any
symptoms  have  resolved.  Clinical  experience  and  published  studies  indicate  that
azithromycin  is  safe  and  effective  during  pregnancy  (824–826).  Doxycycline  is
contraindicated during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy because of risk for
tooth discoloration. Human data reveal that levofloxacin presents a low risk to the fetus
during  pregnancy  but  has  potential  for  toxicity  during  breastfeeding;  however,  data
from animal studies increase concerns regarding cartilage damage to neonates (431).
Test of cure (i.e., repeat testing after completion of therapy) to document chlamydial
eradication,  preferably  by  NAAT,  at  approximately  4  weeks  after  therapy  completion
during pregnancy is recommended because severe sequelae can occur among mothers
and  neonates  if  the  infection  persists.  In  addition,  all  pregnant  women  who  have
chlamydial infection diagnosed should be retested 3 months after treatment. Detection
of C. trachomatis infection start highlightduring the third semesterend highlight is not
uncommon  among  adolescent  and  young  adult  women,  including  those  without  C.
trachomatis detected at the time of initial prenatal screening (827). Women aged <25
years and those at increased risk for chlamydia (i.e., those who have a new sex partner,
more  than  one  sex  partner,  a  sex  partner  with  concurrent  partners,  or  a  sex  partner
who has an STI) should be screened at the first prenatal visit and rescreened during the
third trimester to prevent maternal postnatal complications and chlamydial infection in
the infant (149). Because of concerns regarding chlamydia persistence after exposure
to penicillin-class antibiotics that has been demonstrated in animal and in vitro studies,
amoxicillin  is  listed  as  an  alternative  therapy  for  C.  trachomatis  for  pregnant  women
(828,829).  Erythromycin  is  no  longer  recommended  because  of  the  frequency  of
gastrointestinal  side  effects  that  can  result  in  therapy  nonadherence.  In  addition,
systematic  reviews  and  meta-analyses  have  noted  an  association  with  macrolide
antimicrobials, especially erythromycin, during pregnancy and adverse child outcomes,
indicating cautious use in pregnancy (830–831). Persons who have chlamydia and HIV
infection  should  receive  the  same  treatment  regimen  as  those  who  do  not  have  HIV.
Prenatal screening and treatment of pregnant women is the best method for preventing
chlamydial infection among neonates. C. trachomatis infection of neonates results from
perinatal  exposure  to  the  mother’s  infected  cervix.  Initial  C.  trachomatis  neonatal
infection involves the mucous membranes of the eye, oropharynx, urogenital tract, and
rectum,  although  infection  might  be  asymptomatic  in  these  locations.  Instead,  C.
trachomatis infection among neonates is most frequently recognized by conjunctivitis
that develops 5–12 days after birth. C. trachomatis also can cause a subacute, afebrile
pneumonia with onset at ages 1–3 months. Although C. trachomatis has been the most
frequent  identifiable  infectious  cause  of  ophthalmia  neonatorum,  neonatal  chlamydial
infections,  including  ophthalmia  and  pneumonia,  have  occurred  less  frequently  since
institution  of  widespread  prenatal  screening  and  treatment  of  pregnant  women.
Neonates  born  to  mothers  at  high  risk  for  chlamydial  infection,  with  untreated
chlamydia,  or  with  no  or  unconfirmed  prenatal  care,  are  at  high  risk  for  infection.
However, presumptive treatment of the neonate is not indicated because the efficacy of
such  treatment  is  unknown.  Infants  should  be  monitored  to  ensure  prompt  and
age-appropriate treatment if symptoms develop. Processes should be in place to ensure
communication between physicians and others caring for the mother and the newborn
to ensure thorough monitoring of the newborn after birth. A chlamydial etiology should
be considered for all infants aged ≤30 days who experience conjunctivitis, especially if
the  mother  has  a  history  of  chlamydial  infection.  These  infants  should  receive
evaluation  and  age-appropriate  care  and  treatment.  Neonatal  ocular  prophylaxis  with
erythromycin,  the  only  agent  available  in  the  United  States  for  this  purpose,  is
ineffective  against  chlamydial  ophthalmia  neonatorum  (or  pneumonia)  (833).  As  an
alternative,  prevention  efforts  should  focus  on  prenatal  screening  for  C.  trachomatis,
including Neonates born to mothers for whom prenatal chlamydia screening has been
confirmed and the results are negative are not at high risk for infection. Sensitive and
specific  methods  for  diagnosing  chlamydial  ophthalmia  in  the  neonate  include  both
tissue  culture  and  nonculture  tests  (e.g.,  DFA  tests  and  NAATs).  DFA  is  the  only
nonculture  FDA-cleared  test  for  detecting  chlamydia  from  conjunctival  swabs.  NAATs
are  not  cleared  by  FDA  for  detecting  chlamydia  from  conjunctival  swabs,  and  clinical
laboratories should verify the procedure according to CLIA regulations. Specimens for
culture  isolation  and  nonculture  tests  should  be  obtained  from  the  everted  eyelid  by
using a Dacron (DuPont)-tipped swab or the swab specified by the manufacturer’s test
kit; for culture and DFA, specimens must contain conjunctival cells, not exudate alone.
Ocular  specimens  from  neonates  being  evaluated  for  chlamydial  conjunctivitis  also
should  be  tested  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  (see  Ophthalmia  Neonatorum  Caused  by  N.
gonorrhoeae).  Although  data  regarding  use  of  azithromycin  for  treating  neonatal
chlamydial infection are limited, available data demonstrate that a short therapy course
might  be  effective  (834).  Topical  antibiotic  therapy  alone  is  inadequate  for  treating
ophthalmia  neonatorum  caused  by  chlamydia  and  is  unnecessary  when  systemic
treatment  is  administered.  Because  the  efficacy  of  erythromycin  treatment  for
ophthalmia  neonatorum  is  approximately  80%,  a  second  course  of  therapy  might  be
required  (834,835).  Data  regarding  the  efficacy  of  azithromycin  for  ophthalmia
neonatorum are limited. Therefore, follow-up of infants is recommended to determine
whether  the  initial  treatment  was  effective.  The  possibility  of  concomitant  chlamydial
pneumonia  should  be  considered  (see  Infant  Pneumonia  Caused  by  C.  trachomatis).
Mothers of infants who have ophthalmia caused by chlamydia and the sex partners of
these  women  should  be  evaluated  and  presumptively  treated  for  chlamydia  (see
Chlamydial  Infection  Among  Adolescents  and  Adults).  Chlamydial  pneumonia  among
infants typically occurs at age 1–3 months and is a subacute pneumonia. Characteristic
signs of chlamydial pneumonia among infants include a repetitive staccato cough with
tachypnea and hyperinflation and bilateral diffuse infiltrates on a chest radiograph. In
addition,  peripheral  eosinophilia  (≥400  cells/mm3)  occurs  frequently.  Because  clinical
presentations  differ,  all  infants  aged  1–3  months  suspected  of  having  pneumonia,
especially those whose mothers have a history of, are at risk for (e.g., aged <25 years
and those aged ≥25 years who have a new sex partner, more than one sex partner, a
sex partner with concurrent partners, or a sex partner who has an STI), or suspected of
having  a  chlamydial  infection  should  be  tested  for  C.  trachomatis  and  treated  if
infected. Specimens for chlamydial testing should be collected from the nasopharynx.
Tissue  culture  is  the  definitive  standard  diagnostic  test  for  chlamydial  pneumonia.
Nonculture  tests  (e.g.,  DFA  and  NAAT)  can  be  used.  DFA  is  the  only  nonculture
FDA-cleared  test  for  detecting  C.  trachomatis  from  nasopharyngeal  specimens;
however, DFA of nasopharyngeal specimens has a lower sensitivity and specificity than
culture.  NAATs  are  not  cleared  by  FDA  for  detecting  chlamydia  from  nasopharyngeal
specimens,  and  clinical  laboratories  should  verify  the  procedure  according  to  CLIA
regulations (553). Tracheal aspirates and lung biopsy specimens, if collected, should be
tested for C. trachomatis. Because test results for chlamydia often are unavailable at
the  time  initial  treatment  decisions  are  being  made,  treatment  for  C.  trachomatis
pneumonia frequently is based on clinical and radiologic findings, age of the infant (i.e.,
1–3  months),  and  risk  for  chlamydia  in  the  mother  (i.e.,  aged  <25  years,  history  of
chlamydial infection, multiple sex partners, a sex partner with a concurrent partner, or
a sex partner with a history of an STI). In the absence of laboratory results in a situation
with  a  high  degree  of  suspicion  of  chlamydial  infection  and  the  mother  is  unlikely  to
return with the infant for follow-up, exposed infants can be presumptively treated with
the  shorter-course  regimen  of  azithromycin  20  mg/kg  body  weight/day  orally,  1  dose
daily for 3 days. Because erythromycin effectiveness in treating pneumonia caused by
C.  trachomatis  is  approximately  80%,  a  second  course  of  therapy  might  be  required
(836). Data regarding effectiveness of azithromycin in treating chlamydial pneumonia
are limited. Follow-up of infants is recommended to determine whether the pneumonia
has  resolved,  although  certain  infants  with  chlamydial  pneumonia  continue  to  have
abnormal pulmonary function tests later during childhood. Mothers of infants who have
chlamydial  pneumonia  and  the  sex  partners  of  these  women  should  be  evaluated,
tested,  and  presumptively  treated  for  chlamydia  (see  Chlamydial  Infection  Among
Adolescents  and  Adults).  Sexual  abuse  should  be  considered  a  cause  of  chlamydial
infection among infants and children. However, perinatally transmitted C. trachomatis
infection of the nasopharynx, urogenital tract, and rectum can persist for 2–3 years (see
Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of  Children).  NAATs  can  be  used  to  test  vaginal  and  urine
specimens from girls and urine in boys (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). Data
are lacking regarding use of NAATs for specimens from extragenital sites (rectum and
pharynx)  among  boys  and  girls  (553);  other  nonculture  tests  (e.g.,  DFA)  are  not
recommended  because  of  specificity  concerns.  Although  data  regarding  NAATs  for
specimens from extragenital sites for children are more limited and performance is test
dependent  (553),  no  evidence  supports  that  NAAT  performance  for  detecting  C.
trachomatis for extragenital sites among children would differ from that among adults.
Because  of  the  implications  of  a  diagnosis  of  C.  trachomatis  infection  in  a  child,  only
CLIA-validated, FDA-cleared NAAT should be used for extragenital site specimens (837).
See  Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of  Children.  A  test  of  cure  to  detect  therapeutic  failure
ensures  treatment  effectiveness  and  should  be  obtained  at  a  follow-up  visit
approximately  4  weeks  after  treatment  is  completed.  Top  In  the  United  States,  an
estimated  1,568,000  new  N.  gonorrhoeae  infections  occur  each  year  (141,838),  and
gonorrhea  is  the  second  most  commonly  reported  bacterial  communicable  disease.
Urethral infections caused by N. gonorrhoeae can produce symptoms among men that
cause them to seek curative treatment soon enough to prevent sequelae, but often not
soon enough to prevent transmission to others. Among women, gonococcal infections
are  commonly  asymptomatic  or  might  not  produce  recognizable  symptoms  until
complications (e.g., PID) have occurred. PID can result in tubal scarring that can lead to
infertility  or  ectopic  pregnancy.  Annual  screening  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  infection  is
recommended for all sexually active women aged <25 years and for older women at
increased risk for infection (e.g., those aged ≥25 years who have a new sex partner,
more  than  one  sex  partner,  a  sex  partner  with  concurrent  partners,  or  a  sex  partner
who has an STI) (149). Additional risk factors for gonorrhea include inconsistent condom
use  among  persons  who  are  not  in  mutually  monogamous  relationships,  previous  or
coexisting STIs, and exchanging sex for money or drugs. Clinicians should consider the
communities  they  serve  and  consult  local  public  health  authorities  for  guidance
regarding  identifying  groups  at  increased  risk.  Gonococcal  infection,  in  particular,  is
concentrated  in  specific  geographic  locations  and  communities.  MSM  at  high  risk  for
gonococcal infection (e.g., those with multiple anonymous partners or substance abuse)
or those at risk for HIV acquisition should be screened at all anatomic sites of exposure
every  3–6  months  (see  Men  Who  Have  Sex  with  Men).  At  least  annual  screening  is
recommended  for  all  MSM.  Screening  for  gonorrhea  among  heterosexual  men  and
women aged >25 years who are at low risk for infection is not recommended (149). A
recent travel history with sexual contacts outside the United States should be part of
any gonorrhea evaluation. Specific microbiologic diagnosis of N. gonorrhoeae infection
should  be  performed  for  all  persons  at  risk  for  or  suspected  of  having  gonorrhea;  a
specific diagnosis can potentially reduce complications, reinfections, and transmission.
Culture, NAAT, and POC NAAT, such as GeneXpert (Cepheid), are available for detecting
genitourinary  infection  with  N.  gonorrhoeae  (149);  culture  requires  endocervical
(women)  or  urethral  (men)  swab  specimens.  Culture  is  also  available  for  detecting
rectal,  oropharyngeal,  and  conjunctival  gonococcal  infection.  NAATs  and  POC  NAATs
allow for the widest variety of FDA-cleared specimen types, including endocervical and
vaginal swabs and urine for women, urethral swabs and urine for men, and rectal swabs
and
 pharyngeal
 swabs
 for
 men
 and
 women
(www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/reviews/K121710.pdf).  However,  product  inserts
for each NAAT manufacturer should be consulted carefully because collection methods
and  specimen  types  vary.  Certain  NAATs  that  have  been  demonstrated  to  detect
commensal  Neisseria  species  might  have  comparable  low  specificity  when  testing
oropharyngeal  specimens  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  (553).  NAAT  sensitivity  for  detecting  N.
gonorrhoeae  from  urogenital  and  nongenital  anatomic  sites  is  superior  to  culture  but
varies by NAAT type (553,800–803). For urogenital infections, optimal specimen types
for gonorrhea screening using NAATs include first-void urine for men and vaginal swab
specimens  for  women  (553).  Patient-collected  samples  can  be  used  in  place  of
provider-collected samples in clinical settings when testing by NAAT for urine (men and
women),  vaginal  swabs,  rectal  swabs,  and  oropharyngeal  swabs  after  patient
instructions  have  been  provided  (209,806,839–842).  Patient-collected  specimens  are
reasonable alternatives to provider-collected swabs for gonorrhea screening by NAAT.
In cases of suspected or documented treatment failure, clinicians should perform both
culture  and  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  because  NAATs  cannot  provide
antimicrobial susceptibility results. Because N. gonorrhoeae has demanding nutritional
and  environmental  growth  requirements,  optimal  recovery  rates  are  achieved  when
specimens are inoculated directly and when the growth medium is promptly incubated
in an increased carbon dioxide (CO2) environment (553). Nonnutritive swab transport
systems are available that might maintain gonococcal viability for <48 hours in ambient
temperatures (843–845). Because of its high specificity (>99%) and sensitivity (>95%),
a Gram stain of urethral discharge or secretions that demonstrate polymorphonuclear
leukocytes with intracellular gram-negative diplococci can be considered diagnostic for
infection  with  N.  gonorrhoeae  among  symptomatic  men.  However,  because  of  lower
sensitivity,  a  negative  Gram  stain  should  not  be  considered  sufficient  for  ruling  out
infection  among  asymptomatic  men.  Infection  detection  by  using  Gram  stain  of
endocervical,  pharyngeal,  and  rectal  specimens  also  is  insensitive  and  is  not
recommended. MB or GV stain of urethral secretions is an alternative POC diagnostic
test  with  performance  characteristics  similar  to  Gram  stain.  Gonococcal  infection  is
diagnosed among symptomatic men by documenting the presence of a WBC-containing
intracellular purple diplococci in MB or GV smears. Gonorrhea treatment is complicated
by the ability of N. gonorrhoeae to develop resistance to antimicrobials (846–848). In
1986,  the  Gonococcal  Isolate  Surveillance  Project  (GISP),  a  national  sentinel
surveillance system, was established to monitor trends in antimicrobial susceptibilities
of  urethral  N.  gonorrhoeae  strains  in  the  United  States  (849).  The  epidemiology  of
antimicrobial
 resistance
 guides
 decisions
 about
 gonococcal
 treatment
recommendations  and  has  evolved  because  of  shifts  in  antimicrobial  resistance
patterns.  During  2007,  emergence  of  fluoroquinolone-resistant  N.  gonorrhoeae  in  the
United  States  prompted  CDC  to  cease  recommending  fluoroquinolones  for  gonorrhea
treatment,  leaving  cephalosporins  as  the  only  remaining  class  of  antimicrobials
available for gonorrhea treatment in the United States (850). Reflecting concern about
emerging gonococcal resistance, CDC’s 2010 STD treatment guidelines recommended
dual  therapy  for  gonorrhea  with  a  cephalosporin  plus  either  azithromycin  or
doxycycline,  even  if  NAAT  for  C.  trachomatis  was  negative  at  the  time  of  treatment
(851). However, during 2006–2011, the minimum concentrations of cefixime needed to
inhibit in vitro growth of the N. gonorrhoeae strains circulating in the United States and
other countries increased, demonstrating that cefixime effectiveness might be waning
(851).  In  addition,  treatment  failures  with  cefixime  or  other  oral  cephalosporins  were
reported  in  Asia  (852–855),  Europe  (856–860),  South  Africa  (861),  and  Canada
(862,863).  During  that  time,  case  reports  of  ceftriaxone  treatment  failures  for
pharyngeal  infections  reported  in  Australia  (864,865),  Japan  (866),  and  Europe  were
concerning (856,867). Consequently, CDC no longer recommends cefixime as a first-line
regimen for gonorrhea treatment in the United States (868). Since 2013, the proportion
of
 GISP
 isolates
 that
 demonstrate
 reduced
 susceptibility
 (minimal
 inhibitory
concentration [MIC] ≥2.0 µg/mL) to azithromycin has increased almost tenfold, to 5.1%
in 2019 (141). Unlike the appearance of ciprofloxacin resistance in the early 2000s, and
cefixime reduced-susceptibility isolates during 2010–2011, emergence of azithromycin
resistance  is  not  concentrated  among  certain  populations  (e.g.,  MSM  in  the  western
United  States).  Azithromycin  has  unique  pharmacokinetic  properties  that  might
predispose to resistance due to its prolonged half-life (869,870). With the exception of a
small  cluster  of  gonorrhea  strains  with  azithromycin  resistance  and  reduced
susceptibility  to  cefixime  and  ceftriaxone  among  seven  patients  during  2016,  all
gonorrhea strains identified by GISP are susceptible to either or both azithromycin and
ceftriaxone or cefixime. In addition, since 2013, antimicrobial stewardship has become
an  urgent  public  health  concern  in  the  United  States  as  described  in  Antimicrobial
Resistant Threats in the United States (871). Emergence of azithromycin resistance is
not  isolated  to  N.  gonorrhoeae;  it  has  also  been  demonstrated  in  M.  genitalium  and
such  enteric  pathogens  as  Shigella  and  Campylobacter  (see  Mycoplasma  genitalium;
Proctitis,  Proctocolitis,  and  Enteritis).  Finally,  concern  exists  regarding  azithromycin
treatment  efficacy  for  chlamydia  (see  Chlamydial  Infections).  Dual  therapy  for
gonococcal  infection  with  ceftriaxone  and  azithromycin  recommended  in  previous
guidance might have mitigated emergence of reduced susceptibility to ceftriaxone in N.
gonorrhoeae; however, concerns regarding potential harm to the microbiome and the
effect  on  other  pathogens  diminishes  the  benefits  of  maintaining  dual  therapy.
Consequently,  only  ceftriaxone  is  recommended  for  treating  gonorrhea  in  the  United
States (872). Clinicians remaining vigilant for treatment failures is paramount, and CDC
plans  to  continue  to  monitor  for  changing  ceftriaxone  MICs  until  additional
antimicrobials or a vaccine is available. In cases in which chlamydial infection has not
been  excluded,  patients  should  also  receive  antichlamydial  therapy.  CDC  and  state
health  departments  participate  in  CDC-supported  gonorrhea  surveillance  activities
(https://www.cdc.gov/std/gisp) and can provide the most current information regarding
gonococcal  susceptibility.  Criteria  for  resistance  to  cefixime  and  ceftriaxone  have  not
been  defined  by  the  Clinical  and  Laboratory  Standards  Institute  (CLSI).  However,
isolates  with  cefixime  or  ceftriaxone  MICs  ≥0.5  µg/mL  are  considered  to  have
decreased susceptibility (873). In the United States, the proportion of isolates in GISP
demonstrating  decreased  susceptibility  to  ceftriaxone  or  cefixime  has  remained  low;
during  2019,  <0.1%  of  isolates  with  decreased  susceptibility  (MIC  ≥0.5  µg/mL)  to
ceftriaxone  or  cefixime  were  identified  (141).  Because  increasing  MICs  might  predict
resistance emergence, GISP established lower cephalosporin MIC threshold values that
are lower than the susceptibility breakpoints set by CLSI to provide greater sensitivity in
detecting  decreasing  gonococcal  susceptibility  for  surveillance  purposes.  The
percentage  of  isolates  with  cefixime  MICs  ≥0.25  µg/mL  increased  from  0.1%  during
2006  to  1.4%  during  2011  (851,874)  and  declined  to  0.3%  during  2019  (141).  The
percentage  of  isolates  with  ceftriaxone  MICs  ≥0.125  µg/mL  increased  from  <0.1%  in
2006  to  0.4%  in  2011  and  decreased  to  0.1%  in  2019  (141).  Isolates  with  high-level
cefixime  and  ceftriaxone  MICs  (MICs  =  1.5–8.0  µg/mL  and  MICs  =  1.5–4.0  µg/mL,
respectively)  have  been  identified  in  Japan  (866),  France  (867,875),  Spain  (876,877),
the  United  Kingdom,  and  Australia  (878,879).  Decreased  susceptibility  of  N.
gonorrhoeae to cephalosporins and other antimicrobials is expected to continue; state
and  local  surveillance  for  antimicrobial  resistance  is  crucial  for  guiding  local  therapy
recommendations  (846,847).  Although  approximately  3%  of  all  U.S.  men  who  have
gonococcal  infections  are  sampled  through  GISP,  surveillance  by  clinicians  also  is
crucial.  Clinicians  who  diagnose  N.  gonorrhoeae  infection  in  a  person  with  suspected
cephalosporin  treatment  failure  should  perform  culture  and  AST  of  relevant  clinical
specimens,  consult  an  infectious  disease  specialist  or  an  STD  clinical  expert
(https://www.stdccn.org/render/Public) for guidance in clinical management, and report
the  case  to  CDC  through  state  and  local  public  health  authorities  within  24  hours.
Isolates  should  be  saved  and  sent  to  CDC  through  local  and  state  public  health
laboratory  mechanisms.  Health  departments  should  prioritize  notification  and  culture
evaluation for sexual partners of persons with N. gonorrhoeae infection thought to be
associated with cephalosporin treatment failure or persons whose isolates demonstrate
decreased susceptibility to cephalosporin. Agar dilution is the reference standard and
preferred method of antimicrobial susceptibility testing with N. gonorrhoeae. Antibiotic
gradient  strips,  such  as  Etest  (bioMérieux),  can  be  used  and  are  considered  an
acceptable  alternative  for  quantitative  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  with  N.
gonorrhoeae when manufacturer instructions are followed. Disc diffusion only provides
qualitative susceptibility results. Although clinical data confirm that a single injection of
ceftriaxone 250 mg is >99% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 97.6%–99.7%) effective in
curing anogenital gonorrhea of circulating isolates (MIC = 0.03 µg/mL), a higher dose is
likely  necessary  for  isolates  with  elevated  MICs  (880,881).  Effective  treatment  of
uncomplicated  urogenital  gonorrhea  with  ceftriaxone  requires  concentrations  higher
than the strain MIC for approximately 24 hours; although individual variability exists in
the  pharmacokinetics  of  ceftriaxone,  a  500-mg  dose  of  ceftriaxone  is  expected  to
achieve in approximately 50 hours MIC >0.03 µg/mL (880,881). The pharmacokinetics
of ceftriaxone might be different in the pharynx with longer times higher than the strain
MIC  likely  needed  to  prevent  selection  of  mutant  strains  in  the  pharynx  (882).
Single-dose  injectable  cephalosporin  regimens,  other  than  ceftriaxone,  that  are  safe
and  have  been  effective  against  uncomplicated  urogenital  and  anorectal  gonococcal
infections in the past include ceftizoxime (500 mg IM), cefoxitin (2 g IM with probenecid
1 g orally), and cefotaxime (500 mg IM). None of these injectable cephalosporins offer
any  advantage  over  ceftriaxone  250  mg  for  urogenital  infection,  and  efficacy  for
pharyngeal infection is less certain (883,884). Because the ceftriaxone dose has been
increased and the pharmacokinetics of other cephalosporins have not been evaluated,
these  dosing  regimens  might  be  at  a  disadvantage  over  ceftriaxone  500  mg.  In  one
clinical  trial,  dual  treatment  with  single  doses  of  IM  gentamicin  240  mg  plus  oral
azithromycin 2 g cured 100% of cases (lower one-sided 95% CI bound: 98.5%) and can
be  considered  an  alternative  to  ceftriaxone  for  persons  with  cephalosporin  allergy
(885). This trial was not powered enough to provide reliable estimates of the efficacy of
these regimens for treatment of rectal or pharyngeal infection; however, this regimen
cured
 the
 few
 extragenital
 infections
 among
 study
 participants.
 Notably,
gastrointestinal  adverse  events,  primarily  vomiting  <1  hour  after  dosing,  occurred
among  3%–4%  of  persons  treated  with  gentamicin  plus  azithromycin,  necessitating
retreatment with ceftriaxone and azithromycin. A similar trial that studied gentamicin
240 mg plus azithromycin 1 g determined lower cure rates at extragenital sites; 80%
(95%  CI:  72%–88%)  of  pharyngeal  and  90%  (95%  CI:  84%–95%)  of  rectal  infections
were cured with this regimen (886). Gemifloxacin plus azithromycin has been studied
and  is  no  longer  recommended  as  an  alternative  regimen  because  of  limited
availability, cost, and antimicrobial stewardship concerns (885). An 800-mg oral dose of
cefixime should be considered only as an alternative cephalosporin regimen because it
does  not  provide  as  high,  nor  as  sustained,  bactericidal  blood  levels  as  a  500-mg  IM
dose  of  ceftriaxone.  Furthermore,  it  demonstrates  limited  efficacy  for  treatment  of
pharyngeal  gonorrhea  (92.3%  cure;  95%  CI:  74.9%–99.1%);  in  older  clinical  studies,
cefixime cured 97.5% of uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections
(95% CI: 95.4%–99.8%) (883,884). The increase in the prevalence of isolates obtained
through GISP with elevated cefixime MICs might indicate early stages of development
of  clinically  significant  gonococcal  resistance  to  cephalosporins.  Changes  in  cefixime
MICs  can  result  in  decreasing  effectiveness  of  cefixime  for  treating  urogenital
gonorrhea. Furthermore, as cefixime becomes less effective, continued used of cefixime
might  hasten  the  development  of  resistance  to  ceftriaxone,  a  safe,  well-tolerated,
injectable  cephalosporin  and  the  last  antimicrobial  known  to  be  highly  effective  in  a
single  dose  for  treatment  of  gonorrhea  at  all  anatomic  infection  sites.  Other  oral
cephalosporins (e.g., cefpodoxime and cefuroxime) are not recommended because of
inferior  efficacy  and  less  favorable  pharmacodynamics  (883).  Monotherapy  with
azithromycin 2 g orally as a single dose has been demonstrated to be 99.2% effective
against  uncomplicated  urogenital  gonorrhea  (95%  CI:  97.3%–99.9%)  (883).  However,
monotherapy is not recommended because of concerns about the ease with which N.
gonorrhoeae can develop resistance to macrolides, the high proportion of isolates with
azithromycin decreased susceptibility, and documented azithromycin treatment failures
(859).  Strains  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  circulating  in  the  United  States  are  not  adequately
susceptible  to  penicillin,  tetracycline,  and  older  macrolides  (e.g.,  erythromycin),  and
thus  use  of  these  antimicrobials  cannot  be  recommended.  Spectinomycin  is  effective
(98.2% in curing uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections) but has
poor efficacy for pharyngeal infections (883,887). It is unavailable in the United States,
and the gentamicin alternative regimen has replaced the need for spectinomycin, if a
cephalosporin allergy exists, in the United States. The majority of gonococcal infections
of  the  pharynx  are  asymptomatic  and  can  be  relatively  common  among  certain
populations  (800,801,888–890).  Although  these  infections  rarely  cause  complications,
they have been reported to be a major source of community transmission and might be
a driver of antimicrobial resistance (891,892). Gonococcal infections of the pharynx are
more difficult to eradicate than infections at urogenital and anorectal sites (862). Few
antimicrobial  regimens  reliably  cure  >90%  of  gonococcal  pharyngeal  infections
(883,884). Providers should ask their patients with urogenital or rectal gonorrhea about
oral sexual exposure; if reported, pharyngeal testing should be performed. If chlamydial
infection  is  identified  when  pharyngeal  gonorrhea  testing  is  performed,  treat  for
chlamydia  with  doxycycline  100  mg  orally  2  times/day  for  7  days.  No  reliable
alternative  treatments  are  available  for  pharyngeal  gonorrhea.  For  persons  with  an
anaphylactic or other severe reaction (e.g., Stevens Johnson syndrome) to ceftriaxone,
consult  an  infectious  disease  specialist  for  an  alternative  treatment  recommendation.
To  maximize  adherence  with  recommended  therapies  and  reduce  complications  and
transmission,  medication  for  gonococcal  infection  should  be  provided  on-site  and
directly observed. If medications are unavailable when treatment is indicated, linkage
to  an  STI  treatment  facility  should  be  provided  for  same-day  treatment.  To  minimize
disease  transmission,  persons  treated  for  gonorrhea  should  be  instructed  to  abstain
from sexual activity for 7 days after treatment and until all sex partners are treated (7
days after receiving treatment and resolution of symptoms, if present). All persons who
receive a diagnosis of gonorrhea should be tested for other STIs, including chlamydia,
syphilis, and HIV. Those persons whose HIV test results are negative should be offered
HIV PrEP. A test of cure (i.e., repeat testing after completion of therapy) is unnecessary
for  persons  who  receive  a  diagnosis  of  uncomplicated  urogenital  or  rectal  gonorrhea
who are treated with any of the recommended or alternative regimens. Any person with
pharyngeal gonorrhea should return 7–14 days after initial treatment for a test of cure
by using either culture or NAAT; however, testing at 7 days might result in an increased
likelihood  of  false-positive  tests.  If  the  NAAT  is  positive,  effort  should  be  made  to
perform  a  confirmatory  culture  before  retreatment,  especially  if  a  culture  was  not
already  collected.  All  positive  cultures  for  test  of  cure  should  undergo  antimicrobial
susceptibility  testing.  Symptoms  that  persist  after  treatment  should  be  evaluated  by
culture  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  (with  or  without  simultaneous  NAAT)  and  antimicrobial
susceptibility. Persistent urethritis, cervicitis, or proctitis also might be caused by other
organisms  (see  Urethritis;  Cervicitis;  Proctitis).  A  high  prevalence  of  N.  gonorrhoeae
infection has been observed among men and women previously treated for gonorrhea
(137,753,754,893).  The  majority  of  these  infections  result  from  reinfection  caused  by
failure of sex partners to receive treatment or the initiation of sexual activity with a new
infected partner, indicating a need for improved patient education and treatment of sex
partners.  Men  or  women  who  have  been  treated  for  gonorrhea  should  be  retested  3
months  after  treatment  regardless  of  whether  they  believe  their  sex  partners  were
treated;  scheduling  the  follow-up  visit  at  the  time  of  treatment  is  encouraged.  If
retesting  at  3  months  is  not  possible,  clinicians  should  retest  whenever  persons  next
seek medical care <12 months after initial treatment. Recent sex partners (i.e., persons
having sexual contact with the infected patient <60 days preceding onset of symptoms
or  gonorrhea  diagnosis)  should  be  referred  for  evaluation,  testing,  and  presumptive
treatment. If the patient’s last potential sexual exposure was >60 days before onset of
symptoms  or  diagnosis,  the  most  recent  sex  partner  should  be  treated.  If  health
department partner-management strategies (e.g., disease intervention specialists) are
impractical or unavailable for persons with gonorrhea and partners’ access to prompt
clinical evaluation and treatment is limited, EPT can be delivered to the partner by the
patient  or  a  collaborating  pharmacy  as  permitted  by  law  (see  Partner  Services).
Treatment  of  the  sexual  partner  with  cefixime  800  mg  as  a  single  dose  is
recommended,  provided  that  concurrent  chlamydial  infection  has  been  excluded.  If  a
chlamydia  test  result  has  not  been  documented,  the  partner  may  be  treated  with  a
single  dose  of  oral  cefixime  800  mg  plus  oral  doxycycline  100  mg  2  times/day  for  7
days. If adherence with multiday dosing is a considerable concern, azithromycin 1 g can
be considered but has lower treatment efficacy among persons with rectal chlamydia
(see Chlamydial Infections). Provision of medication by EPT should be accompanied by
written materials (125,127) for educating partners about gonorrhea, their exposure to
gonorrhea,  and  the  importance  of  therapy.  These  materials  should  also  educate
partners  about  seeking  clinical  evaluation  for  adverse  reactions  or  complications  and
general follow-up when able. Educational materials for female partners should include
information  about  the  importance  of  seeking  medical  evaluation  for  PID,  especially  if
symptomatic; undertreatment of PID among female partners and missed opportunities
for diagnosing other STIs among women are of concern. MSM with gonorrhea have a
high  risk  for  coexisting  infections  (especially  undiagnosed  HIV)  among  their  partners,
and they might have partners without HIV who could benefit from PrEP. Data are also
limited regarding the effectiveness of EPT in reducing persistent or recurrent gonorrhea
among MSM (133,135); thus, shared clinical decision-making regarding EPT for MSM is
recommended  (see  Partner  Services).  To  avoid  reinfection,  sex  partners  should  be
instructed to abstain from condomless sexual intercourse for 7 days after they and their
sex partners have completed treatment and after resolution of symptoms, if present.
Cephalosporin treatment failure is the persistence of N. gonorrhoeae infection despite
recommended  cephalosporin  treatment;  such  failure  is  indicative  of  infection  with
cephalosporin-resistant  gonorrhea  among  persons  whose  partners  were  treated  and
whose risk for reinfection is low. Suspected treatment failure has been reported among
persons
 receiving
 oral
 and
 injectable
 cephalosporins
(852–855,857,859,861,863,864,867,875,894).  Treatment  failure  should  be  considered
for  persons  whose  symptoms  do  not  resolve  within  3–5  days  after  recommended
treatment and report no sexual contact during the posttreatment follow-up period and
persons with a positive test of cure (i.e., positive culture >72 hours or positive NAAT >7
days  after  receiving  recommended  treatment)  when  no  sexual  contact  is  reported
during  the  posttreatment  follow-up  period  (874).  Treatment  failure  should  also  be
considered  for  persons  who  have  a  positive  culture  on  test  of  cure,  if  obtained,  if
evidence  exists  of  decreased  susceptibility  to  cephalosporins  on  antimicrobial
susceptibility  testing,  regardless  of  whether  sexual  contact  is  reported  during  the
posttreatment  follow-up  period.  The  majority  of  suspected  treatment  failures  in  the
United  States  are  likely  to  be  reinfections  rather  than  actual  treatment  failures
(137,753,754,894).  However,  in  cases  in  which  reinfection  is  unlikely  and  treatment
failure is suspected, before retreatment, relevant clinical specimens should be obtained
for culture (preferably with simultaneous NAAT) and antimicrobial susceptibility testing
if N. gonorrhoeae is isolated. Phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility testing should be
performed by using Etest or agar dilution. All isolates of suspected treatment failures
should  be  sent  to  CDC  for  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  by  agar  dilution;  local
laboratories  should  store  isolates  for  possible  further  testing  if  needed.  Testing  or
storage  of  specimens  or  isolates  should  be  facilitated  by  the  state  or  local  health
department according to local public health protocol. Instructions for shipping isolates
to
 CDC
 are
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/std/gonorrhea/arg/specimen_shipping_instructions1-29-08.pdf.  For
persons  with  suspected  cephalosporin  treatment  failure,  the  treating  clinician  should
consult an infectious disease specialist, the National Network of STD Clinical Prevention
Training  Center  clinical  consultation  line  (https://www.stdccn.org/render/Public),  the
local  or  state  health  department  STI  program,  or  CDC  (telephone:  800-232-4636)  for
advice  about  obtaining  cultures,  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing,  and  treatment.
Suspected treatment failure should be reported to CDC through the local or state health
department  <24  hours  after  diagnosis.  Patients  with  suspected  treatment  failures
should first be retreated routinely with the initial regimen used (ceftriaxone 500 mg IM),
with the addition of doxycycline if chlamydia infection exists, because reinfections are
more  likely  than  actual  treatment  failures.  However,  in  situations  with  a  higher
likelihood  of  treatment  failure  than  reinfection,  relevant  clinical  specimens  should  be
obtained
 for
 culture
 (preferably
 with
 simultaneous
 NAAT)
 and
 antimicrobial
susceptibility  testing  before  retreatment.  Dual  treatment  with  single  doses  of  IM
gentamicin  240  mg  plus  oral  azithromycin  2  g  can  be  considered,  particularly  when
isolates  are  identified  as  having  elevated  cephalosporin  MICs  (885,886,895).  Persons
with suspected treatment failure after treatment with the alternative regimen (cefixime
or gentamicin) should be treated with ceftriaxone 500 mg as a single IM dose or as a
single dose with or without an antichlamydial agent on the basis of chlamydia infection
status.  A  test  of  cure  at  relevant  clinical  sites  should  be  obtained  7–14  days  after
retreatment; culture is the recommended test, preferably with simultaneous NAAT, and
antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  if  isolated.  Clinicians  should
ensure  that  the  patients’  sex  partners  from  the  preceding  60  days  are  evaluated
promptly with culture and presumptively treated by using the same regimen used for
the  patients.  The  risk  for  penicillin  cross-reactivity  is  highest  with  first-generation
cephalosporins but is rare (<1%) with third-generation cephalosporins (e.g., ceftriaxone
and cefixime) (631,680,896). Clinicians should first thoroughly assess a patient’s allergy
history,  including  type  of  reaction,  associated  medications,  and  previous  prescription
records.  If  IgE-mediated  penicillin  allergy  is  strongly  suspected,  dual  treatment  with
single doses of IM gentamicin 240 mg plus oral azithromycin 2 g can be administered
(885,886).  If  a  patient  is  asymptomatic  and  the  treating  facility  is  able  to  perform
gyrase  A  (gyrA)  testing  to  identify  ciprofloxacin  susceptibility  (wild  type),  oral
ciprofloxacin 500 mg in a single dose can be administered. Providers treating persons
with IgE-mediated cephalosporin or penicillin allergy should refer to the section of these
guidelines  regarding  evaluation  (see  Management  of  Persons  Who  Have  a  History  of
Penicillin Allergy). Pregnant women infected with N. gonorrhoeae should be treated with
ceftriaxone 500 mg in a single IM dose plus treatment for chlamydia if infection has not
been excluded. When cephalosporin allergy or other considerations preclude treatment
with this regimen, consultation with an infectious disease specialist or an STD clinical
expert  is  recommended  (https://www.stdccn.org/render/Public).  Gentamicin  use  is
cautioned during pregnancy because of risk for neonatal birth defects, nephrotoxicity,
or ototoxicity (897). Persons who have gonorrhea and HIV infection should receive the
same treatment regimen as those who do not have HIV. In the only published study of
the  treatment  regarding  gonococcal  conjunctivitis  among  adults,  all  12  study
participants  responded  to  a  single  1-g  IM  injection  of  ceftriaxone  (898).  Because
gonococcal  conjunctivitis  is  uncommon  and  data  regarding  treatment  of  gonococcal
conjunctivitis  among  adults  are  limited,  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease
specialist should be considered. Patients should be instructed to refer their sex partners
for evaluation and treatment (see Gonococcal Infections, Management of Sex Partners).
Infrequently,  N.  gonorrhoeae  can  cause  disseminated  infection.  Disseminated
gonococcal infection (DGI) frequently results in petechial or pustular acral skin lesions,
asymmetric  polyarthralgia,  tenosynovitis,  or  oligoarticular  septic  arthritis  (899–901).
Rarely,  DGI  is  complicated  by  perihepatitis  associated  with  gonococcal  PID,
endocarditis, or meningitis. Certain strains of N. gonorrhoeae that cause DGI can cause
minimal  genital  inflammation,  and  urogenital  or  anorectal  infections  are  often
asymptomatic  among  DGI  patients.  If  DGI  is  suspected,  start  highlightNAATs  or
cultureend  highlight  specimens  from  all  exposed  urogenital  and  extragenital  sites
should be collected and processed, in addition to disseminated sites of infection (e.g.,
skin,  synovial  fluid,  blood,  or  CSF).  All  N.  gonorrhoeae  isolates  should  be  tested  for
antimicrobial  susceptibility.  Risk  factors  for  dissemination  have  included  female  sex,
menstruation, pregnancy, and terminal complement deficiency (899); however, reports
are  increasing  among  men  (900,901).  Persons  receiving  eculizumab,  a  monoclonal
antibody that inhibits terminal complement activation, also might be at higher risk for
DGI  (902).  Hospitalization  and  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist  are
recommended  for  initial  therapy,  especially  for  persons  who  might  not  comply  with
treatment,  have  an  uncertain  diagnosis,  or  have  purulent  synovial  effusions  or  other
complications. Examination for clinical evidence of endocarditis and meningitis should
be  performed.  When  treating  for  the  arthritis-dermatitis  syndrome,  the  provider  can
switch to an oral agent guided by antimicrobial susceptibility testing 24–48 hours after
substantial  clinical  improvement,  for  a  total  treatment  course  of  start  highlight>7
daysend highlight. No recent studies have been published regarding treatment of DGI
involving the CNS or cardiovascular system. The duration of treatment for DGI in these
situations  has  not  been  systematically  studied  and  should  be  determined  in
consultation with an infectious disease specialist. Treatment for DGI should be guided
by  the  results  of  antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing.  Length  of  treatment  should  be
determined based on clinical presentation. Therapy for meningitis should be continued
with recommended parenteral therapy for 10–14 days. Parenteral antimicrobial therapy
for  endocarditis  should  be  administered  for  >4  weeks.  Treatment  of  gonococcal
perihepatitis  should  be  managed  in  accordance  with  the  recommendations  for  PID  in
these guidelines. Gonococcal infection frequently is asymptomatic among sex partners
of persons who have DGI. Providers should instruct patients to refer partners with whom
they have had sexual contact during the previous 60 days for evaluation, testing, and
presumptive  treatment  (see  Gonococcal  Infections,  Management  of  Sex  Partners).
Prenatal screening and treatment of pregnant women for gonorrhea is the best method
for preventing N. gonorrhoeae infection among neonates. Gonococcal infection among
neonates results from perinatal exposure to the mother’s infected cervix. It is usually
an  acute  illness  that  manifests  2–5  days  after  birth.  Prevalence  of  infection  among
neonates depends on the prevalence of infection among pregnant women and whether
pregnant women are screened and treated for gonorrhea during pregnancy. The most
severe  manifestations  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  infection  among  neonates  are  ophthalmia
neonatorum  and  sepsis,  which  can  include  arthritis  and  meningitis.  Less  severe
manifestations  include  rhinitis,  vaginitis,  urethritis,  and  scalp  infection  at  sites  of
previous fetal monitoring. Ocular prophylaxis and preventive gonorrhea screening and
treatment  of  infected  pregnant  women  are  especially  important  because  ophthalmia
neonatorum  can  result  in  perforation  of  the  globe  of  the  eye  and  blindness  (903).
Ocular  prophylaxis  for  gonococcal  ophthalmia  neonatorum  has  a  long  history  of
preventing  sight-threatening  gonococcal  ocular  infections.  Cases  in  the  United  States
are  uncommon,  which  is  likely  attributable  to  gonorrhea  screening  programs  for
women, including pregnant women, that have contributed substantially to reduction in
ophthalmia neonatorum (904). Neonatal ocular prophylaxis with erythromycin, the only
agent  available  in  the  United  States,  is  required  by  law  in  most  states  and  is
recommended because of safety, low cost, and ease of administration. It can contribute
to preventing gonococcal blindness because not all pregnant women are screened for
gonorrhea. The USPSTF recommends ocular prophylaxis with erythromycin ointment for
all  newborns  <24  hours  after  birth  (903).  In  addition  to  continuing  routine  ocular
prophylaxis,  prevention  should  focus  on  prenatal  screening  for  N.  gonorrhoeae,
including Erythromycin is the only ophthalmic ointment recommended for use among
neonates.  Silver  nitrate  and  tetracycline  ophthalmic  ointments  are  no  longer
manufactured  in  the  United  States,  bacitracin  is  ineffective,  and  povidone  iodine  has
not  been  studied  adequately  (905,906).  Gentamicin  ophthalmic  ointment  has  been
associated  with  severe  ocular  reactions  (907,908).  If  erythromycin  ointment  is
unavailable, infants at risk for exposure to N. gonorrhoeae, especially those born to a
mother at risk for gonococcal infection or with no prenatal care, can be administered
ceftriaxone 25–50 mg/kg body weight IV or IM, not to exceed 250 mg in a single dose.
Erythromycin  ophthalmic  ointment  should  be  instilled  into  both  eyes  of  neonates  as
soon as possible after delivery, regardless of whether they are delivered vaginally or by
cesarean  delivery.  Ideally,  ointment  should  be  applied  by  using  single-use  tubes  or
ampules rather than multiple-use tubes. If prophylaxis is delayed (i.e., not administered
in  the  delivery  room),  a  monitoring  system  should  be  established  to  ensure  that  all
newborns receive prophylaxis <24 hours after delivery. Newborns at increased risk for
gonococcal ophthalmia include those who did not receive ophthalmic prophylaxis and
whose mothers had no prenatal care, have a history of STIs during pregnancy, or have
a  history  of  substance  misuse.  Gonococcal  ophthalmia  is  strongly  suspected  when
intracellular  gram-negative  diplococci  are  identified  on  Gram  stain  of  conjunctival
exudate, justifying presumptive treatment for gonorrhea after appropriate cultures and
antimicrobial  susceptibility  testing  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  are  performed.  Presumptive
treatment  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  might  be  indicated  for  newborns  at  increased  risk  for
gonococcal ophthalmia who have increased WBCs (no GNID) in a Gram-stained smear
of  conjunctival  exudate.  Nongonococcal  causes  of  neonatal  ophthalmia  include
Moraxella  catarrhalis  and  other  Neisseria  species,  which  are  organisms  that  are
indistinguishable from N. gonorrhoeae on Gram-stained smear but can be differentiated
in  the  microbiology  laboratory.  One  dose  of  ceftriaxone  is  adequate  therapy  for
gonococcal ophthalmia. Ceftriaxone should be administered cautiously to neonates with
hyperbilirubinemia,  especially  those  born  prematurely.  Cefotaxime  100  mg/kg  body
weight  IV  or  IM  as  a  single  dose  can  be  administered  for  those  neonates  unable  to
receive  ceftriaxone  because  of  simultaneous  administration  of  IV  calcium.  Topical
antibiotic  therapy  alone  is  inadequate  and  unnecessary  if  systemic  treatment  is
administered. Chlamydial testing should be performed simultaneously from the inverted
eyelid  specimen  (see  Ophthalmia  Neonatorum  Caused  by  C.  trachomatis).  Newborns
who  have  gonococcal  ophthalmia  should  be  evaluated  for  signs  of  disseminated
infection  (e.g.,  sepsis,  arthritis,  and  meningitis).  Newborns  who  have  gonococcal
ophthalmia  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist.
Mothers of newborns with ophthalmia neonatorum caused by N. gonorrhoeae should be
evaluated,  tested,  and  presumptively  treated  for  gonorrhea,  along  with  their  sex
partners (see Gonococcal Infection Among Adolescents and Adults). DGI might present
as  sepsis,  arthritis,  or  meningitis  and  is  a  rare  complication  of  neonatal  gonococcal
infection.  Localized  gonococcal  infection  of  the  scalp  can  result  from  fetal  monitoring
through  scalp  electrodes.  Detecting  gonococcal  infection  among  neonates  who  have
sepsis, arthritis, meningitis, or scalp abscesses requires cultures of blood, CSF, or joint
aspirate. Specimens obtained from the conjunctiva, vagina, oropharynx, and rectum are
useful for identifying the primary site or sites of infection. Antimicrobial susceptibility
testing  of  all  isolates  should  be  performed.  Positive  Gram-stained  smears  of  abscess
exudate, CSF, or joint aspirate provide a presumptive basis for initiating treatment for
N.  gonorrhoeae.  Ceftriaxone  should  be  administered  cautiously  to  neonates  with
hyperbilirubinemia,  especially  those  born  prematurely.  Cefotaxime  100  mg/kg  body
weight  IV  or  IM  as  a  single  dose  can  be  administered  for  those  neonates  unable  to
receive  ceftriaxone  because  of  simultaneous  administration  of  IV  calcium.  Chlamydial
testing should be performed simultaneously among neonates with gonococcal infection
(see  Chlamydial  Infection  Among  Neonates).  Neonates  who  have  DGI  should  be
managed in consultation with an infectious disease specialist. Mothers of newborns who
have  DGI  or  scalp  abscesses  caused  by  N.  gonorrhoeae  should  be  evaluated,  tested,
and presumptively treated for gonorrhea, along with their sex partners (see Gonococcal
Infection  Among  Adolescents  and  Adults).  Neonates  born  to  mothers  who  have
untreated  gonorrhea  are  at  high  risk  for  infection.  Neonates  should  be  tested  for
gonorrhea  at  exposed  sites  (e.g.,  conjunctiva,  vagina,  rectum,  and  oropharynx)  and
treated presumptively for gonorrhea. Ceftriaxone should be administered cautiously to
neonates with hyperbilirubinemia, especially those born prematurely. Cefotaxime 100
mg/kg body weight IV or IM as a single dose can be administered for those neonates
unable  to  receive  ceftriaxone  because  of  simultaneous  administration  of  IV  calcium.
Age-appropriate  chlamydial  testing  should  be  performed  simultaneously  among
neonates  with  gonococcal  infection  (see  Chlamydial  Infection  Among  Neonates).
Follow-up  examination  is  not  required.  Mothers  who  have  gonorrhea  and  their  sex
partners  should  be  evaluated,  tested,  and  presumptively  treated  for  gonorrhea  (see
Gonococcal  Infection  Among  Adolescents  and  Adults).  Sexual  abuse  is  the  most
frequent cause of gonococcal infection among infants and children (see Sexual Assault
or  Abuse  of  Children).  For  preadolescent  girls,  vaginitis  is  the  most  common
manifestation of this infection; gonococcal-associated PID after vaginal infection can be
less  common  among  preadolescents  than  adults.  Among  sexually  abused  children,
anorectal and pharyngeal infections with N. gonorrhoeae are frequently asymptomatic.
Culture can be used to test urogenital and extragenital sites for girls and boys. NAAT
can be used to test for N. gonorrhoeae from vaginal and urine specimens from girls and
urine for boys (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). Although data regarding NAAT
from  extragenital  sites  (rectum  and  pharynx)  among  children  are  more  limited,  and
performance  is  test  dependent,  no  evidence  supports  that  performance  of  NAAT  for
detection  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  among  children  differs  from  that  among  adults  (553).
Because  of  the  implications  of  a  N.  gonorrhoeae  diagnosis  in  a  child,  only  validated
FDA-cleared  NAAT  assays  should  be  used  with  extragenital  specimens.  Consultation
with  an  expert  is  necessary  before  using  NAAT  to  minimize  the  possibility  of
cross-reaction  with  nongonococcal  Neisseria  species  and  other  commensals  (e.g.,  N.
meningitidis, Neisseria sicca, Neisseria lactamica, Neisseria cinerea, or M. catarrhalis)
and  to  ensure  correct  interpretation  of  results.  Gram  stains  are  inadequate  for
evaluating prepubertal children for gonorrhea and should not be used to diagnose or
exclude  gonorrhea.  If  evidence  of  DGI  exists,  gonorrhea  culture  and  antimicrobial
susceptibility testing should be obtained from relevant clinical sites (see Disseminated
Gonococcal
 Infection).
 Follow-up
 cultures
 are
 unnecessary.
 Only
 parenteral
cephalosporins (i.e., ceftriaxone) are recommended for use among children. All children
identified as having gonococcal infections should be tested for C. trachomatis, syphilis,
and  HIV  (see  Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of  Children).  Top  M.  genitalium  causes
symptomatic  and  asymptomatic  urethritis  among  men  and  is  the  etiology  of
approximately  15%–20%  of  NGU,  20%–25%  of  nonchlamydial  NGU,  and  40%  of
persistent  or  recurrent  urethritis  (697,909,910).  Infection  with  C.  trachomatis  is
common in selected geographic areas (911–913), although M. genitalium is often the
sole  pathogen.  Data  are  insufficient  to  implicate  M.  genitalium  infection  with  chronic
complications
 among
 men
 (e.g.,
 epididymitis,
 prostatitis,
 or
 infertility).
 The
consequences of asymptomatic infection with M. genitalium among men are unknown.
Among  women,  M.  genitalium  has  been  associated  with  cervicitis,  PID,  preterm
delivery, spontaneous abortion, and infertility, with an approximately twofold increase
in  the  risk  for  these  outcomes  among  women  infected  with  M.  genitalium  (766).  M.
genitalium  infections  among  women  are  also  frequently  asymptomatic,  and  the
consequences associated with asymptomatic M. genitalium infection are unknown. M.
genitalium  can  be  detected  among  10%–30%  of  women  with  clinical  cervicitis
(767,770,772,914–916). The existing evidence between M. genitalium and cervicitis is
mostly  supportive  of  a  causal  association.  Elevated  proinflammatory  cytokines  have
been  demonstrated  among  women  with  M.  genitalium,  with  return  to  baseline  levels
after  clearance  of  the  pathogen  (917).  M.  genitalium  is  identified  in  the  cervix  or
endometrium  of  women  with  PID  more  often  than  in  women  without  PID  (918–924).
Prevalence of M. genitalium among women with PID ranges from 4% to 22% (925,926)
and  was  reported  as  60%  in  one  study  of  women  with  postabortal  PID  (918).  The
association  with  PID  is  supported  by  early  studies  among  nonhuman  primates  that
determined  that  endosalpingitis  develops  after  inoculation  with  M.  genitalium  (927).
Recent  studies  evaluating  the  lower  and  upper  genital  tract  using  highly  sensitive  M.
genitalium  NAAT  assays  or  the  role  of  M.  genitalium  in  histologically  defined
endometritis  have  reported  significantly  elevated  risk  for  PID  (928).  However,  most
studies  of  M.  genitalium  and  PID,  even  those  that  controlled  extensively  for  other
infections  and  behavioral  and  biologic  risk,  are  cross-sectional.  The  few  prospective
studies  that  have  evaluated  the  role  of  M.  genitalium  in  establishing  subsequent  PID
demonstrated  increased  PID  risk;  however,  these  were  not  statistically  significant
associations,  often  because  of  a  lack  of  statistical  power.  No  clinical  trial  data  are
available  that  demonstrate  that  treating  M.  genitalium  cervical  infection  prevents
development  of  PID  or  endometritis.  Although  data  regarding  the  benefits  of  testing
women  with  PID  for  M.  genitalium  and  the  importance  of  directing  treatment  against
this  organism  are  limited,  the  associations  of  M.  genitalium  with  cervicitis  and  PID  in
cross-sectional studies using NAAT testing are consistent (928). Data from case-control
serologic  studies  (929–931)  and  a  meta-analysis  of  clinical  studies  (766)  indicate  a
potential  role  in  causing  infertility.  However,  seroassays  are  suboptimal  and
inconclusive. Similarly, evidence for a role for M. genitalium infection during pregnancy
as a cause of perinatal complications, including preterm delivery, spontaneous abortion,
or  low  birthweight,  are  conflicting  because  evidence  is  insufficient  to  attribute  cause
(766,932–934).  Data  are  limited  regarding  ectopic  pregnancy  and  neonatal  M.
genitalium  infection  (935,936).  Rectal  infection  with  M.  genitalium  has  been  reported
among  1%–26%  of  MSM  (937–940)  and  among  3%  of  women  (941).  Rectal  infections
often  are  asymptomatic,  although  higher  prevalence  of  M.  genitalium  has  been
reported  among  men  with  rectal  symptoms.  Similarly,  although  asymptomatic  M.
genitalium  has  been  detected  in  the  pharynx,  no  evidence  exists  of  it  causing
oropharyngeal  symptoms  or  systemic  disease.  Urogenital  M.  genitalium  infection  is
associated  with  HIV  among  both  men  and  women  (942–944);  however,  the  data  are
from case-control and cross-sectional studies. Risk for HIV infection is increased among
women with M. genitalium, and evidence indicates that HIV shedding occurs more often
among  persons  with  M.  genitalium  and  HIV  infection  who  are  not  taking  ART  than
among persons without M. genitalium (942,944). Resistance to azithromycin has been
rapidly increasing and has been confirmed in multiple studies. Prevalence of molecular
markers for macrolide resistance, which highly correlates with treatment failure, ranges
from  44%  to  90%  in  the  United  States,  Canada,  Western  Europe,  and  Australia
(697,702,945–953). Treatment with azithromycin alone has been reported to select for
resistance (705,954,955), with treatment of macrolide-susceptible infections with a 1-g
dose of azithromycin resulting in selection of resistant-strain populations in 10%–12% of
cases.  The  prevalence  of  quinolone  resistance  markers  is  much  lower  (697,956–959).
The first clinical treatment failures after moxifloxacin were associated specifically with
the S83I mutation in the parC gene (954,960). Prevalence of the S83I mutation in the
United States ranges from 0% to 15% (947); however, correlation with fluoroquinolone
treatment failure is less consistent than that with mutations associated with macrolide
resistance  (953,961,962).  Clinically  relevant  quinolone  resistance  often  is  associated
with coexistent macrolide resistance (954). M. genitalium is an extremely slow-growing
organism. Culture can take up to 6 months, and technical laboratory capacity is limited
to  research  settings.  NAAT  for  M.  genitalium  is  FDA  cleared  for  use  with  urine  and
urethral,
 penile
 meatal,
 endocervical,
 and
 vaginal
 swab
 samples
(https://www.hologic.com/package-inserts/diagnostic-products/aptima-mycoplasma-gen
italium-assay).  Molecular  tests  for  macrolide  (i.e.,  azithromycin)  or  quinolone  (i.e.,
moxifloxacin) resistance markers are not commercially available in the United States.
However,  molecular  assays  that  incorporate  detection  of  mutations  associated  with
macrolide resistance are under evaluation. Men with recurrent NGU should be tested for
M. genitalium using an FDA-cleared NAAT. If resistance testing is available, it should be
performed  and  the  results  used  to  guide  therapy.  Women  with  recurrent  cervicitis
should  be  tested  for  M.  genitalium,  and  testing  should  be  considered  among  women
with PID. Testing should be accompanied with resistance testing, if available. Screening
of asymptomatic M. genitalium infection among women and men or extragenital testing
for M. genitalium is not recommended. In clinical practice, if testing is unavailable, M.
genitalium should be suspected in cases of persistent or recurrent urethritis or cervicitis
and  considered  for  PID.  M.  genitalium  lacks  a  cell  wall,  and  thus  antibiotics  targeting
cell-wall  biosynthesis  (e.g.,  ß-lactams  including  penicillins  and  cephalosporins)  are
ineffective against this organism. Because of the high rates of macrolide resistance with
treatment failures (707) and efficient selection of additional resistance, a 1-g dose of
azithromycin  should  not  be  used.  Two-stage  therapy  approaches,  ideally  using
resistance-guided therapy, are recommended for treatment. Resistance-guided therapy
has  demonstrated  cure  rates  of  >90%  and  should  be  used  whenever  possible
(759,963); however, it requires access to macrolide-resistance testing. As part of this
approach,  doxycycline  is  provided  as  initial  empiric  therapy,  which  reduces  the
organism  load  and  facilitates  organism  clearance,  followed  by  macrolide-sensitive  M.
genitalium
 infections
 treated
 with
 high-dose
 azithromycin;
 macrolide-resistant
infections  are  treated  with  moxifloxacin  (964,965).  Although  the  majority  of  M.
genitalium  strains  are  sensitive  to  moxifloxacin,  resistance  has  been  reported,  and
adverse  side  effects  and  cost  should  be  considered  with  this  regimen.  In  settings
without  access  to  resistance  testing  and  when  moxifloxacin  cannot  be  used,  an
alternative  regimen  can  be  considered,  based  on  limited  data:  doxycycline  100  mg
orally 2 times/day for 7 days, followed by azithromycin (1 g orally on day 1 followed by
500 mg once daily for 3 days) and a test of cure 21 days after completion of therapy
(963).  Because  of  the  high  prevalence  of  macrolide  resistance  and  high  likelihood  of
treatment failure, this regimen should be used only when a test of cure is possible, and
no other alternatives exist. If symptomatic treatment failure or a positive test of cure
occurs  after  this  regimen,  expert  consultation  is  recommended.  Data  are  limited
regarding use of minocycline in instances of treatment failure (966). Recommended PID
treatment regimens are not effective against M. genitalium. Initial empiric therapy for
PID,  which  includes  doxycycline  100  mg  orally  2  times/day  for  14  days,  should  be
provided at the time of presentation for care. If M. genitalium is detected, a regimen of
moxifloxacin 400 mg orally once daily for 14 days has been effective in eradicating the
organism.  Nevertheless,  no  data  have  been  published  that  assess  the  benefits  of
testing  women  with  PID  for  M.  genitalium,  and  the  importance  of  directing  treatment
against this organism is unknown. Test of cure is not recommended for asymptomatic
persons who received treatment with a recommended regimen. In settings in which M.
genitalium  testing  is  available,  persons  with  persistent  urethritis,  cervicitis,  or  PID
accompanied by detection of M. genitalium should be treated with moxifloxacin. Recent
studies report a high concordance of M. genitalium among partners of males, females,
and  MSM;  however,  no  studies  have  determined  whether  reinfection  is  reduced  with
partner  treatment  (940,967,968).  Sex  partners  of  patients  with  symptomatic  M.
genitalium  infection  can  be  tested,  and  those  with  a  positive  test  can  be  treated  to
possibly  reduce  the  risk  for  reinfection.  If  testing  the  partner  is  not  possible,  the
antimicrobial regimen that was provided to the patient can be provided. Persons who
have  M.  genitalium  and  HIV  infection  should  receive  the  same  treatment  regimen  as
those  persons  without  HIV.  Top  The  majority  of  women  will  have  a  vaginal  infection,
characterized  by  discharge,  itching,  burning,  or  odor,  during  their  lifetime.  With  the
availability  of  complementary  and  alternative  therapies  and  over-the-counter
medications for candidiasis, symptomatic women often seek these products before or in
addition to an evaluation by a medical provider. Obtaining a medical history alone has
been  reported  to  be  insufficient  for  accurate  diagnosis  of  vaginitis  and  can  lead  to
inappropriate  administration  of  medication  (969).  Therefore,  a  careful  history,
examination, and laboratory testing to determine the etiology of any vaginal symptoms
are  warranted.  Information  regarding  sexual  behaviors  and  practices,  sex  of  sex
partners,  menses,  vaginal  hygiene  practices  (e.g.,  douching),  and  self-treatment  with
oral  and  intravaginal  medications  or  other  products  should  be  elicited.  The  infections
most  frequently  associated  with  vaginal  symptoms  are  BV  (i.e.,  replacement  of  the
vaginal flora by an overgrowth of anaerobic bacteria including G. vaginalis, Prevotella
bivia, A. vaginae, Megasphaera type 1, and numerous other fastidious or uncultivated
anaerobes),  trichomoniasis,  and  vulvovaginal  candidiasis  (VVC).  Cervicitis  can  also
cause an abnormal vaginal discharge. Although VVC is usually not sexually transmitted,
it is included in this section because it is frequently diagnosed among women who have
vaginal symptoms or are being evaluated for an STI. Multiple diagnostic methods are
available  for  identifying  the  etiology  of  vaginal  symptoms.  Clinical  laboratory  testing
can identify the vaginitis cause in the majority of women and is discussed in detail in
the  sections  of  this  report  dedicated  to  each  condition.  In  the  clinician’s  office,  the
cause  of  vaginal  symptoms  can  often  be  determined  by  pH,  a  potassium  hydroxide
(KOH)  test,  and  microscopic  examination  of  a  wet  mount  of  fresh  samples  of  vaginal
discharge. The pH of the vaginal secretions can be measured by pH paper; an elevated
pH (i.e., >4.5) is common with BV or trichomoniasis (although trichomoniasis can also
be present with a normal vaginal pH). Because pH testing is not highly specific, vaginal
discharge should be further examined microscopically by first diluting one sample in 1
or 2 drops of 0.9% normal saline solution on one slide and a second sample in 10% KOH
solution  (samples  that  emit  an  amine  odor  immediately  upon  application  of  KOH
suggest BV or trichomoniasis). Coverslips are then placed on the slides, and they are
examined  under  a  microscope  at  low  and  high  power.  The  saline-solution  specimen
might  display  motile  trichomonads  or  clue  cells  (i.e.,  epithelial  cells  with  borders
obscured  by  small  anaerobic  bacteria),  which  are  characteristic  of  BV.  The  KOH
specimen typically is used to identify hyphae or blastospores observed with candidiasis.
However, absence of trichomonads in saline or fungal elements in KOH samples does
not  rule  out  these  infections  because  the  sensitivity  of  microscopy  is  approximately
50% compared with NAAT (trichomoniasis) or culture (yeast) (670). Presence of WBCs
without evidence of trichomonads or yeast might also indicate cervicitis (see Cervicitis).
In  settings  where  pH  paper,  KOH,  and  microscopy  are  unavailable,  a  broad  range  of
clinical  laboratory  tests,  described  in  the  diagnosis  section  for  each  disease,  can  be
used.  Presence  of  objective  signs  of  vulvovaginal  inflammation  in  the  absence  of
vaginal  pathogens  after  laboratory  testing  indicates  the  possibility  of  mechanical,
chemical, allergic, or other noninfectious causes of vulvovaginal signs or symptoms. For
women with persistent symptoms and no clear etiology, referral to a specialist should
be considered. BV is a vaginal dysbiosis resulting from replacement of normal hydrogen
peroxide  and  lactic-acid–producing  Lactobacillus  species  in  the  vagina  with  high
concentrations  of  anaerobic  bacteria,  including  G.  vaginalis,  Prevotella  species,
Mobiluncus species, A. vaginae, and other BV-associated bacteria. A notable feature is
the  appearance  of  a  polymicrobial  biofilm  on  vaginal  epithelial  cells  (970).  Certain
women  experience  transient  vaginal  microbial  changes,  whereas  others  experience
them  for  longer  intervals  (971).  BV  is  a  highly  prevalent  condition  and  the  most
common  cause  of  vaginal  discharge  worldwide  (972).  However,  in  a  nationally
representative survey, the majority of women with BV were asymptomatic (310). BV is
associated  with  having  multiple  male  sex  partners,  female  partners,  sexual
relationships with more than one person (973), a new sex partner, lack of condom use
(974),  douching  (975,976),  and  HSV-2  seropositivity  (977).  Male  circumcision  reduces
the  risk  for  BV  among  women  (978).  In  addition,  BV  prevalence  increases  during
menses  (979,980).  Women  who  have  never  been  sexually  active  are  rarely  affected
(981). The cause of the microbial alteration that precipitates BV is not fully understood,
and  whether  BV  results  from  acquisition  of  a  single  sexually  transmitted  pathogen  is
unknown.  BV  prevalence  has  been  reported  to  increase  among  women  with
copper-containing  IUDs  (972,982).  Hormonal  contraception  does  not  increase  risk  for
BV  (983)  and  might  protect  against  BV  development  (983,984).  Vitamin  D  deficiency
has not been reported to be a risk factor for BV (985). Women with BV are at increased
risk for STI acquisition, such as HIV, N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, T. vaginalis (977),
M.  genitalium  (986),  HPV  (987),  and  HSV-2  (988);  complications  after  gynecologic
surgery;  complications  of  pregnancy;  and  recurrence  of  BV  (971,989–991).  BV  also
increases  HIV  infection  acquisition  (992)  because  specific  BV-associated  bacteria  can
increase susceptibility to HIV (993,994) and the risk for HIV transmission to male sex
partners  (187).  Evaluation  of  short-term  valacyclovir  suppression  among  women  with
HSV-2 did not decrease the risk for BV, despite effective suppression of HSV-2 (995).
Although  BV-associated  bacteria  can  be  identified  on  male  genitalia  (996,997),
treatment of male sex partners has not been beneficial in preventing the recurrence of
BV (998). Among WSW, a high level of BV concordance occurs between sex partners
(292); however, no studies have evaluated treatment of female sex partners of WSW to
prevent  BV  recurrence.  BV  can  be  diagnosed  by  using  clinical  criteria  (i.e.,  Amsel’s
diagnostic criteria) (999) or by determining the Nugent score from a vaginal Gram stain
(1000).  Vaginal  Gram stain,  considered  the reference standard  laboratory  method  for
diagnosing BV, is used to determine the relative concentration of lactobacilli (i.e., long
gram-positive  rods),  small  gram-negative  and  gram-variable  rods  (i.e.,  G.  vaginalis  or
Bacteroides), and curved gram-negative rods (i.e., Mobiluncus) characteristic of BV. A
Nugent score of 0–3 is consistent with a Lactobacillus-predominant vaginal microbiota,
4–6  with  intermediate  microbiota  (emergence  of  G.  vaginalis),  and  7–10  with  BV.
Clinical  diagnosis  of  BV  by  Amsel  criteria  requires  at  least  three  of  the  following  four
symptoms or signs: Detection of at least three Amsel criteria has been correlated with
results  by  Gram  stain  (1001).  The  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  the  Amsel  criteria  are
37%–70%  and  94%–99%,  respectively,  compared  with  the  Nugent  score  (1002).  In
addition  to  the  Amsel  criteria,  multiple  POC  tests  are  available  for  BV  diagnosis.  The
Osom BV Blue test (Sekisui Diagnostics) detects vaginal sialidase activity (1003,1004).
The Affirm VP III (Becton Dickinson) is an oligonucleotide probe test that detects high
concentrations of G. vaginalis nucleic acids (>5 x 105 CFU of G. vaginalis/mL of vaginal
fluid) for diagnosing BV, Candida species, and T. vaginalis. This test has been reported
to be most useful for symptomatic women in conjunction with vaginal pH measurement
and  presence  of  amine  odor  (sensitivity  of  97%);  specificity  is  81%  compared  with
Nugent.  Finally,  the  FemExam  Test  Card  (Cooper  Surgical)  measures  vaginal  pH,
presence  of  trimethylamine  (a  metabolic  by-product  of  G.  vaginalis),  and  proline
aminopeptidase  (1005).  Sensitivity  is  91%  and  specificity  is  61%,  compared  with
Nugent.  This  test  has  primarily  been  studied  in  resource-poor  settings  (1005),  and
although it has been reported to be beneficial compared with syndromic management,
it  is  not  a  preferred  diagnostic  method  for  BV  diagnosis.  Multiple  BV  NAATs  are
available for BV diagnosis among symptomatic women (1002). These tests are based
on detection of specific bacterial nucleic acids and have high sensitivity and specificity
for BV (i.e., G. vaginalis, A. vaginae, BVAB2, or Megasphaera type 1) (1006) and certain
lactobacilli  (i.e.,  Lactobacillus  crispatus,  Lactobacillus  jensenii,  and  Lactobacillus
gasseri). They can be performed on either clinician- or self-collected vaginal specimens
with  results  available  in  <24  hours,  depending  on  the  availability  of  the  molecular
diagnostic platform (1002). Five quantitative multiplex PCR assays are available: Max
Vaginal  Panel  (Becton  Dickinson)  (1007),  Aptima  BV  (Hologic),  NuSwab  VG  (LabCorp)
(1008), OneSwab BV Panel PCR with Lactobacillus Profiling by qPCR (Medical Diagnostic
Laboratories)  (1009),  and  SureSwab  BV  (Quest  Diagnostics).  Two  of  these  assays  are
FDA  cleared  (BD  Max  Vaginal  Panel  and  Aptima  BV),  and  the  other  three  are
laboratory-developed  tests.  The  Max  Vaginal  Panel  provides  results  by  an  algorithmic
analysis  of  molecular  DNA  detection  of  Lactobacillus  species  (L.  crispatus  and  L.
jensenii) in addition to G. vaginalis, A. vaginae, BVAB2, and Megasphaera type 1. This
test has 90.5% sensitivity and 85.8% specificity for BV diagnosis, compared with Amsel
criteria and Nugent score. It also provides results for Candida species and T. vaginalis.
The  Aptima  BV  detects  G.  vaginalis,  A.  vaginae,  and  certain  Lactobacillus  species
including L. crispatus, L. jensenii, and L. gasseri, with sensitivity and specificity ranging
from  95.0%  to  97.3%  and  85.8%  to  89.6%,  respectively  (using  either  clinician-  or
patient-collected  vaginal  swabs).  The  three  laboratory-developed  tests  (NuSwab  VG,
OneSwab BV Panel PCR with Lactobacillus Profiling by qPCR, and SureSwab BV) have to
be  internally  validated  before  use  for  patient  care  yet  have  good  sensitivity  and
specificity,  similar  to  FDA-cleared  assays.  BV  NAATs  should  be  used  among
symptomatic women only (e.g., women with vaginal discharge, odor, or itch) because
their accuracy is not well defined for asymptomatic women. Despite the availability of
BV  NAATs,  traditional  methods  of  BV  diagnosis,  including  the  Amsel  criteria,  Nugent
score,  and  the  Affirm  VP  III  assay,  remain  useful  for  diagnosing  symptomatic  BV
because  of  their  lower  cost  and  ability  to  provide  a  rapid  diagnosis.  Culture  of  G.
vaginalis is not recommended as a diagnostic tool because it is not specific. Cervical
Pap tests have no clinical utility for diagnosing BV because of their low sensitivity and
specificity. Treatment for BV is recommended for women with symptoms. Established
benefits  of  therapy  among  nonpregnant women  are to  relieve vaginal  symptoms  and
signs of infection. Other potential benefits of treatment include reduction in the risk for
acquiring  C.  trachomatis,  N.  gonorrhoeae,  T.  vaginalis,  M.  genitalium,  HIV,  HPV,  and
HSV-2  (971,986–988,990,1010).  No  data  are  available  that  directly  compare  the
efficacy  of  oral  and  topical  medications  for  treating  BV.  A  review  regarding  alcohol
consumption  during  metronidazole  treatment  reported  no  in  vitro  studies,  animal
models, reports of adverse effects, or clinical studies providing convincing evidence of a
disulfiram-like  interaction  between  alcohol  and  metronidazole  (1011).  The  previous
warning  against  simultaneous  use  of  alcohol  and  metronidazole  was  based  on
laboratory  experiments  and  individual  case  histories  in  which  the  reported  reactions
were  equally  likely  to  have  been  caused  by  alcohol  alone  or  by  adverse  effects  of
metronidazole. Metronidazole does not inhibit acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, as occurs
with  disulfiram.  Ethanol  alone  or  ethanol-independent  side  effects  of  metronidazole
might explain the suspicion of disulfiram-like effects. Thus, refraining from alcohol use
while  taking  metronidazole  (or  tinidazole)  is  unnecessary.  Clindamycin  cream  is  oil
based and might weaken latex condoms and diaphragms for 5 days after use (refer to
clindamycin product labeling for additional information). Women should be advised to
refrain from sexual activity or to use condoms consistently and correctly during the BV
treatment regimen. Douching might increase the risk for relapse, and no data support
use  of  douching  for  treatment  or  symptom  relief.  Alternative  regimens  include
secnidazole  oral  granules  (1012–1014),  multiple  oral  tinidazole  regimens  (1015),  or
clindamycin (oral or intravaginal) (1016). In a phase 3 clinical trial of secnidazole 2 g
oral  granules  versus  placebo,  BV  clinical  cure  rates  at  days  21–30  were  53%  in  the
secnidazole arm compared with 19% in the placebo arm (p<0.001) (1013). Secnidazole
is  listed  as  an  alternative  regimen,  due  to  its  higher  cost  and  lack  of  long-term
outcomes  compared  with  recommended  BV  treatments.  A  patient  savings  card  for
secnidazole  is  available  at  https://www.solosec.com/savings-card.  Additional  BV
treatment  regimens  include  metronidazole  1.3%  vaginal  gel  in  a  single  dose
(1017,1018) and clindamycin phosphate (Clindesse) 2% vaginal cream in a single dose
(1019). In a phase 3 clinical trial of metronidazole 1.3% vaginal gel versus placebo, BV
clinical  cure  rates  at  day  21  were  37.2%  in  the  metronidazole  1.3%  vaginal  gel  arm,
compared with 26.6% in the placebo arm (p = 0.01) (1018). A patient savings card for
metronidazole
 1.3%
 vaginal
 gel
 is
 available
 at
https://nuvessa.com/nuvessa_files/19_Nuvessa_WEB_Card_032819.pdf. In a multicenter,
randomized,  single-blind,  parallel-group  study  of  Clindesse  2%  vaginal  cream  single
dose versus clindamycin 2% vaginal cream at bedtime for 7 days among 540 women
with BV, no statistically significant difference existed between groups in clinical cure at
days  21–30  (64.3%  versus  63.2%;  p  =  0.95)  (1019);  however,  this  study  had
methodologic  problems.  A  patient  savings  card  for  Clindesse  2%  vaginal  cream  is
available  at  https://www.clindesse.com/pdf/CLINDESSE_SavingsCard.pdf.  BV  biofilm
disrupting agents (i.e., TOL-463) (1020) are being investigated to determine their role
in  enhancing  the  likelihood  of  BV  cure  relative  to  approved  therapies.  Studies  have
evaluated the clinical and microbiologic efficacy of intravaginal Lactobacillus and other
probiotic formulations to treat BV and restore normal vaginal microbiota (1021–1025);
overall, no studies support these products as an adjunctive or replacement therapy for
women with BV. All women with BV should be tested for HIV and other STIs. Follow-up
visits  are  unnecessary  if  symptoms  resolve.  Because  persistent  or  recurrent  BV  is
common, women should be advised to return for evaluation if symptoms recur. Limited
data are available regarding optimal management strategies for women with persistent
or recurrent BV. Using a different recommended treatment regimen can be considered
for women who have a recurrence; however, retreatment with the same recommended
regimen is an acceptable approach for treating persistent or recurrent BV after the first
occurrence  (1026).  For  women  with  multiple  recurrences  after  completion  of  a
recommended  regimen,  either  0.75%  metronidazole  gel  or  750  mg  metronidazole
vaginal  suppository  twice  weekly  for  >3  months  has  been  reported  to  reduce
recurrences,  although  this  benefit  does  not  persist  when  suppressive  therapy  is
discontinued  (1027,1028).  Limited  data  indicate  that  for  women  with  multiple
recurrences, an oral nitroimidazole (metronidazole or tinidazole 500 mg 2 times/day for
7 days), followed by intravaginal boric acid 600 mg daily for 21 days and suppressive
0.75% metronidazole gel twice weekly for 4–6 months, might be an option for women
with recurrent BV (1029). Monthly oral metronidazole 2 g administered with fluconazole
150 mg has also been evaluated as suppressive therapy; this regimen reduced the BV
incidence  and  promoted  colonization  with  normal  vaginal  microbiota  (1030).  A
randomized  controlled  trial  of  a  dendrimer-based  microbicide  1%  vaginal  gel
(Astodrimer)  also  reported  favorable  results  in  prolonging  the  time  to  BV  recurrence,
compared  with  placebo  (1031).  In  addition,  a  clinical  trial  of  L.  crispatus  CTV-05
(Lactin-V),  administered  vaginally  in  4  consecutive  daily  doses  for  4  days  in  week  1
followed  by  twice  weekly  doses  for  10  weeks  (after  initial  treatment  with  5  days  of
0.75%  vaginal  metronidazole  gel),  reported  a  substantially  lower  incidence  of  BV
recurrence at 12 weeks in the Lactin-V arm, compared with placebo (1032); however
this medication is not yet FDA cleared or commercially available. High-dose Vitamin D
supplementation  has  not  been  determined  to  decrease  BV  recurrence  in  randomized
controlled  trials  (1033)  and  is  not  recommended.  Data  from  earlier  clinical  trials
indicate that a woman’s response to therapy and the likelihood of relapse or recurrence
are not affected by treatment of her sex partner (998). Therefore, routine treatment of
sex partners is not recommended. However, a pilot study reported that male partner
treatment  (i.e.,  metronidazole  400  mg  orally  2  times/day  in  conjunction  with  2%
clindamycin cream applied topically to the penile skin 2 times/day for 7 days) of women
with  recurrent  BV  had  an  immediate  and  sustained  effect  on  the  composition  of  the
vaginal  microbiota,  with  an  overall  decrease  in  bacterial  diversity  at  day  28  (1034).
Male partner treatment also had an immediate effect on the composition of the penile
microbiota; however, this was not as pronounced at day 28, compared with that among
women. A phase 3 multicenter randomized double-blinded trial evaluating the efficacy
of  a  7-day  oral  metronidazole  regimen  versus  placebo  for  treatment  of  male  sex
partners of women with recurrent BV did not find that male partner treatment reduced
BV  recurrence  in  female  partners,  although  women  whose  male  partners  adhered  to
multidose  metronidazole  were  less  likely  to  experience  treatment  failure  (1035).
Intravaginal  clindamycin  cream  is  preferred  in  case  of  allergy  or  intolerance  to
metronidazole  or  tinidazole.  Intravaginal  metronidazole  gel  can  be  considered  for
women who are not allergic to metronidazole but do not tolerate oral metronidazole. BV
treatment is recommended for all symptomatic pregnant women because symptomatic
BV  has  been  associated  with  adverse  pregnancy  outcomes,  including  premature
rupture  of  membranes,  preterm  birth,  intra-amniotic  infection,  and  postpartum
endometritis (989,991,1036). Studies have been undertaken to determine the efficacy
of  BV  treatment  among  this  population,  including  two  trials  demonstrating  that  oral
metronidazole  was  efficacious  during  pregnancy  by  using  the  250  mg  3  times/day
regimen  (1037,1038);  however,  oral  metronidazole  administered  as  a  500  mg  2
times/day  regimen  can  also  be  used.  One  trial  involving  a  limited  number  of
participants revealed treatment with oral metronidazole 500 mg 2 times/day for 7 days
to be equally effective as metronidazole gel 0.75% for 5 days, with cure rates of 70% by
using  Amsel  criteria  to  define  cure  (1039).  Another  trial  demonstrated  a  cure  rate  of
85%  by  using  Gram-stain  criteria  after  treatment  with  oral  clindamycin  300  mg  2
times/day  for  7  days  (1040–1043).  Although  older  studies  indicated  a  possible  link
between  using  vaginal  clindamycin  during  pregnancy  and  adverse  outcomes  for  the
newborn,  newer  data  demonstrate  that  this  treatment  approach  is  safe  for  pregnant
women  (1044).  Although  metronidazole  crosses  the  placenta,  no  evidence  of
teratogenicity  or  mutagenic  effects  among  infants  has  been  reported  in  multiple
cross-sectional,  case-control,  and  cohort  studies  of  pregnant  women  (1041–1043).
These data indicate that metronidazole therapy poses low risk during pregnancy. Data
from human studies are limited regarding the use of tinidazole in pregnancy; however,
animal  data  demonstrate  that  such  therapy  poses  moderate  risk.  Thus,  tinidazole
should be avoided during pregnancy (431). Data are insufficient regarding efficacy and
adverse  effects  of  secnidazole,  Clindesse  2%  vaginal  cream,  metronidazole  1.3%
vaginal  gel,  and  750-mg  vaginal  metronidazole  tablets  during  pregnancy;  thus,  their
use  should  be  avoided.  Oral  therapy  has  not  been  reported  to  be  superior  to  topical
therapy for treating symptomatic BV in effecting cure or preventing adverse outcomes
of pregnancy. Pregnant women can be treated with any of the recommended regimens
for nonpregnant women, in addition to the alternative regimens of oral clindamycin and
clindamycin  ovules.  Treatment  of  asymptomatic  BV  among  pregnant  women  at  high
risk for preterm delivery (i.e., those with a previous preterm birth or late miscarriage)
has been evaluated by multiple studies, which have yielded mixed results. Seven trials
have  evaluated  treatment  of  pregnant  women  with  asymptomatic  BV  at  high  risk  for
preterm delivery: one revealed harm (1045), two reported no benefit (1046,1047), and
four  demonstrated  benefit  (1037,1038,1048,1049).  Treatment  of  asymptomatic  BV
among  pregnant  women  at  low  risk  for  preterm  delivery  has  not  been  reported  to
reduce  adverse  outcomes  of  pregnancy  in  a  large  multicenter  randomized  controlled
trial (1050). Therefore, routine screening for BV among asymptomatic pregnant women
at  high  or  low  risk  for  preterm  delivery  for  preventing  preterm  birth  is  not
recommended.  Metronidazole  is  secreted  in  breast  milk.  With  maternal  oral  therapy,
breastfed infants receive metronidazole in doses that are less than those used to treat
infections  among  infants,  although  the  active  metabolite  adds  to  the  total  infant
exposure.  Plasma  levels  of  the  drug  and  metabolite  are  measurable  but  remain  less
than
 maternal
 plasma
 levels
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922/?report=classic).
 Although
 multiple
reported case series identified no evidence of metronidazole-associated adverse effects
for  breastfed  infants,  certain  clinicians  recommend  deferring  breastfeeding  for  12–24
hours after maternal treatment with a single 2-g dose of metronidazole (1051). Lower
doses produce a lower concentration in breast milk and are considered compatible with
breastfeeding (1052,1053). BV appears to recur with higher frequency among women
who  have  HIV  infection  (1054).  Women  with  HIV  infection  and  BV  should  receive  the
same treatment regimen as those who do not have HIV. Trichomoniasis is estimated to
be the most prevalent nonviral STI worldwide, affecting start highlightapproximately 3.7
millionend highlight persons in the United States (838,1055). Because trichomoniasis is
not  a  reportable  disease  (1056),  and  no  recommendations  are  available  for  general
screening  for  T.  vaginalis,  the  epidemiology  of  trichomoniasis  has  largely  come  from
population-based  and  clinic-based  surveillance  studies.  The  U.S.  population-based  T.
vaginalis prevalence is 2.1% among females and 0.5% among males, with the highest
rates among Black females (9.6%) and Black males (3.6%), compared with non-Hispanic
White  women  (0.8%)  and  Hispanic  women  (1.4%)  (1057,1058).  Unlike  chlamydia  and
gonorrhea, T. vaginalis prevalence rates are as high among women aged >24 years as
they  are  for  women  aged  <24  years  (1057).  Among  persons  attending  nine
geographically  diverse  STD  clinics,  the  trichomonas  prevalence  was  14.6%  among
women (1059), and a study of STD clinic attendees in Birmingham, Alabama, identified
a prevalence of 27% among women and 9.8% among men (1060). Symptomatic women
have  a  four  times  higher  rate  of  infection  than  asymptomatic  women  (26%  versus
6.5%)  (1061).  Rates  are  also  high  among  incarcerated  persons  of  both  sexes  at
9%–32% of incarcerated women (386,387,391,392,1062) and 3.2%–8% of incarcerated
men (388). Women with a history of incarceration are two to five times more likely to
have T. vaginalis (387,388,1063,1064). Other risk factors for T. vaginalis include having
two  or  more  sex  partners  during  the  previous  year,  having  less  than  a  high  school
education, and living below the national poverty level (1065). Women with BV are at
higher  risk  for  T.  vaginalis  (1066).  Male  partners  of  women  with  trichomoniasis  are
likely to have infection (1067), although the prevalence of trichomoniasis among MSM
is low (179,1068). The majority of persons who have trichomoniasis (70%–85%) either
have minimal or no genital symptoms, and untreated infections might last from months
to  years  (137,1069,1070).  Men  with  trichomoniasis  sometimes  have  symptoms  of
urethritis, epididymitis, or prostatitis, and women with trichomoniasis sometimes have
vaginal  discharge,  which  can  be  diffuse,  malodorous,  or  yellow-green  with  or  without
vulvar irritation, and might have a strawberry-appearing cervix, which is observed more
often  on  colposcopy  than  on  physical  examination  (1071).  Although  many  persons
might be unaware of their infection, it is readily passed between sex partners during
penile-vaginal sex start highlight(1072)end highlight or through transmission of infected
vaginal fluids or fomites among women who have sex with women (275,294). Among
persons  who  are  sexually  active,  the  best  way  to  prevent  genital  trichomoniasis  is
through consistent and correct use of condoms (external or internal) (18). Partners of
men who have been circumcised might have a somewhat reduced risk for T. vaginalis
infection (1072,1073). Douching is not recommended because it might increase the risk
for vaginal infections, including trichomoniasis (1074). T. vaginalis causes reproductive
morbidity and has been reported to be associated with a 1.4-times greater likelihood of
preterm  birth,  premature  rupture  of  membranes,  and  infants  who  are  small  for
gestational  age  (1075).  T.  vaginalis  was  also  determined  to  be  associated  with  a
2.1-fold  increased  risk  for  cervical  cancer  in  a  meta-analysis  (1076).  Another
meta-analysis of six studies reported a slightly elevated but not statistically significant
association  between  T.  vaginalis  and  prostate  cancer  (1077).  T.  vaginalis  infection  is
associated with a 1.5-fold increased risk for HIV acquisition and is associated with an
increase in HIV vaginal shedding, which is reduced with T. vaginalis treatment among
women  without  viral  suppression  (1078,1079).  Among  women  with  HIV  infection,  T.
vaginalis  infection  is  associated  with  increased  risk  for  PID  (1080–1082).  Diagnostic
testing  for  T.  vaginalis  should  be  performed  for  women  seeking  care  for  vaginal
discharge.  Annual  screening  might  be  considered  for  persons  receiving  care  in
high-prevalence  settings  (e.g.,  STD  clinics  and  correctional  facilities)  and  for
asymptomatic  women  at  high  risk  for  infection  (e.g.,  multiple  sex  partners,
transactional sex, drug misuse, or a history of STIs or incarceration). However, data are
lacking regarding whether screening and treatment for asymptomatic trichomoniasis in
high-prevalence settings for women at high risk can reduce any adverse health events
and health disparities or reduce community infection burden. Decisions about screening
can be guided by local epidemiology of T. vaginalis infection. Routine annual screening
for  T.  vaginalis  among  asymptomatic  women  with  HIV  infection  is  recommended
because  of  these  adverse  events  associated  with  trichomoniasis  and  HIV  infection.
Extragenital  T.  vaginalis  is  possible  but  highly  uncommon  compared  with  genital
infections.  A  study  of  500  men  in  San  Francisco,  California,  reported  a  0.6%  rate  of
rectal T. vaginalis (1083); however, this might reflect deposition of T. vaginalis DNA and
not necessarily active infection. Few studies of extragenital T. vaginalis among women
have  been  published.  The  efficacy,  benefit,  and  cost-effectiveness  of  extragenital
screening are unknown, and no tests are FDA cleared for extragenital testing; therefore,
rectal  and  oral  testing  for  T.  vaginalis  is  not  recommended.  Wet-mount  microscopy
traditionally  has  been  used  as  the  preferred  diagnostic  test  for  T.  vaginalis  among
women because it is inexpensive and can be performed at the POC; however, it has low
sensitivity  (44%–68%)  compared  with  culture  (1084–1086).  To  improve  detection,
clinicians  using  wet  mounts  should  attempt  to  evaluate  slides  immediately  after
specimen  collection  because  sensitivity  decreases  quickly  to  20%  within  1  hour  after
collection  (1087).  More  highly  sensitive  and  specific  molecular  diagnostic  options  are
available,  which  should  be  used  in  conjunction  with  a  negative  wet  mount  when
possible.  NAATs  are  highly  sensitive,  detecting  more  T.  vaginalis  infections  than
wet-mount  microscopy  among  women  (1060).  start  highlightThe  Aptima  T.  vaginalis
assayend highlight (Beckton Dickinson) is FDA cleared for detection of T. vaginalis from
symptomatic  or  asymptomatic  women.  Reliable  samples  include  clinician-collected
endocervical  swabs,  clinician-collected  vaginal  swabs,  female  urine  specimens,  and
liquid Pap smear specimens collected in PreservCyt Solution (Hologic) (698,1088). This
assay  detects  RNA  by  transcription-mediated  amplification  with  a  sensitivity  of
95.3%–100%  and  specificity  of  95.2%–100%,  compared  with  wet  mount  and  culture
(1088,1089).  Among  women,  vaginal  swabs  and  urine  specimens  have  <100%
concordance  (1084).  This  assay  has  not  been  FDA  cleared  for  use  among  men  and
should be internally validated in accordance with CLIA regulations before use with urine
or  urethral  swabs  from  men.  The  Probe  Tec  TV  Qx  Amplified  DNA  Assay  (Becton
Dickinson) is FDA cleared for detection of T. vaginalis from vaginal (patient-collected or
clinician-collected) swabs, endocervical swabs, or urine specimens from women and has
sensitivity  of  98.3%  and  specificity  of  99.6%,  compared  with  wet  mount  and  culture
(1090). Similar to the Aptima T. vaginalis assay, this test is only FDA cleared for use
among women and should be internally validated for use with men. The Max CTGCTV2
assay  (Becton  Dickinson)  is  also  FDA  cleared  for  detection  of  T.  vaginalis  in
patient-collected  or  clinician-collected  vaginal  swab  specimens  and  male  and  female
urine  specimens,  with  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  96.2%–100%  and  99.1%–100%,
respectively, depending on the specimen type, compared with wet mount and culture
(1091).  GeneXpert  TV  (Cepheid)  is  a  moderately  complex  rapid  test  that  can  be
performed in ≤1 hour and can be used at the POC (1092). It has been FDA cleared for
use
 with
 female
 urine
 specimens,
 endocervical
 swabs,
 patient-collected
 or
clinician-collected  vaginal  specimens,  and  male  urine  specimens,  with  sensitivity  and
specificity of 99.5%–100% and 99.4%–99.9% (1007), respectively, compared with wet
mount  and  culture.  Multiple  FDA-cleared  rapid  tests  are  available  for  detecting  T.
vaginalis  with  improved  sensitivities  and  specificities,  compared  with  wet  mount.  The
Osom  trichomonas  rapid  test  (Sekisui  Diagnostics)  is  an  antigen-detection  test  that
uses immunochromatographic capillary flow dipstick technology that can be performed
at  the  POC  by  using  clinician-obtained  vaginal  specimens.  Results  are  available  in
approximately  10–15  minutes,  with  sensitivities  of  82%–95%  and  specificity  of
97%–100%,
 compared
 with
 wet
 mount,
 culture,
 and
 transcription-mediated
amplification (1089,1093,1094). A study of 209 women aged 14–22 years reported that
>99%  could  correctly  perform  and  interpret  a  vaginal  self-test  by  using  the  Osom
assay, with a high correlation with clinician interpretation (96% agreement; κ = 0.87)
(1094).  The  Osom  test  should  not  be  used  with  men  because  of  low  sensitivity  (38%
compared with Aptima) (1095). The Solana trichomonas assay (Quidel) is another rapid
test for the qualitative detection of T. vaginalis DNA and can yield results <40 minutes
after  specimen  collection.  This  assay  is  FDA  cleared  for  diagnosing  T.  vaginalis  from
female vaginal and urine specimens from asymptomatic and symptomatic women with
sensitivity  >98%,  compared  with  NAAT  for  vaginal  specimens,  and  >92%  for  urine
specimens  (1096).  The  Amplivue  trichomonas  assay  (Quidel)  is  another  rapid  test
providing  qualitative  detection  of  T.  vaginalis  that  has  been  FDA  cleared  for  vaginal
specimens from symptomatic and asymptomatic women, with sensitivity of 90.7% and
specificity  of  98.9%,  compared  with  NAAT  (1097).  Neither  the  Osom  assay  nor  the
Affirm VP III test is FDA cleared for use with specimens from men. Culture, such as the
InPouch  system  (BioMed  Diagnostics),  was  considered  the  most  sensitive  method  for
diagnosing T. vaginalis infection before molecular detection methods became available.
Culture  has  sensitivity  of  44%–75%  and  specificity  of  <100%  (698,1086,1098).  For
women, vaginal secretions are the preferred specimen type for culture because urine
culture is less sensitive (698,1099,1100). For men, culture specimens require a urethral
swab, urine sediment, or semen. To improve diagnostic yield, multiple specimens from
men can be used to inoculate a single culture. Cultures require an incubator and are
necessary for T. vaginalis drug susceptibility testing. The InPouch specimen should be
examined  daily  for  5  days  over  a  7-day  period  to  reduce  the  possibility  of  false
negatives  (1101).  Although  T.  vaginalis  might  be  an  incidental  finding  on  a  Pap  test,
neither  conventional  nor  liquid-based  Pap  smears  are  considered  diagnostic  tests  for
trichomoniasis; however, women with T. vaginalis identified on a Pap smear should be
retested  with  sensitive  diagnostic  tests  and  treated  if  infection  is  confirmed
(1102,1103). Treatment reduces symptoms and signs of T. vaginalis infection and might
reduce  transmission.  Treatment  recommendations  for  women  are  based  on  a
meta-analysis  (1104)  and  a  multicenter,  randomized  trial  of  mostly  symptomatic
women  without  HIV  infection  (1105).  The  study  demonstrated  that  multidose
metronidazole (500 mg orally 2 times/day for 7 days) reduced the proportion of women
retesting  positive  at  a  1-month  test  of  cure  visit  by  half,  compared  with  women  who
received  the  2-g  single  dose.   No  published  randomized  trials  are  available  that
compare these doses among men. The nitroimidazoles are the only class of medications
with clinically demonstrated efficacy against T. vaginalis infections. Tinidazole is usually
more  expensive,  reaches  higher  levels  in  serum  and  the  genitourinary  tract,  has  a
longer  half-life  than  metronidazole  (12.5  hours  versus  7.3  hours),  and  has  fewer
gastrointestinal  side  effects  (1106,1107).  In  randomized  clinical  trials,  recommended
metronidazole regimens have resulted in cure rates of approximately 84%–98% (1108),
and the recommended tinidazole regimen has resulted in cure rates of approximately
92%–100%  (1108–1112).  Randomized  controlled  trials  comparing  single  2-g  doses  of
metronidazole  and  tinidazole  indicated  that  tinidazole  is  equivalent  or  superior  to
metronidazole
 in
 achieving
 parasitologic
 cure
 and
 symptom
 resolution
(1110,1113,1114). Metronidazole gel does not reach therapeutic levels in the urethra
and perivaginal glands. Because it is less efficacious than oral metronidazole, it is not
recommended. Providers should advise persons with T. vaginalis infections to abstain
from  sex  until  they  and  their  sex  partners  are  treated  (i.e.,  when  therapy  has  been
completed  and  any  symptoms  have  resolved).  Testing  for  other  STIs,  including  HIV,
syphilis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia, should be performed for persons with T. vaginalis.
Because  of  the  high  rate  of  reinfection  among  women  treated  for  trichomoniasis,
retesting  for  T.  vaginalis  is  recommended  for  all  sexually  active  women  start
highlight<3  monthsend  highlight  after  initial  treatment  regardless  of  whether  they
believe  their  sex  partners  were  treated  (137,1115).  If  retesting  at  3  months  is  not
possible, clinicians should retest whenever persons next seek medical care <12 months
after initial treatment. Data are insufficient to support retesting men after treatment.
Concurrent  treatment  of  all  sex  partners  is  vital  for  preventing  reinfections.  Current
partners should be referred for presumptive therapy. Partners also should be advised to
abstain from intercourse until they and their sex partners have been treated and any
symptoms  have  resolved.  EPT  might  have  a  role  in  partner  management  for
trichomoniasis  (129,1116)  and  can  be  used  in  states  where  permissible  by  law
(https://www.cdc.gov/std/ept/legal/default.htm);  however,  no  partner  management
intervention  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  superior  in  reducing  reinfection  rates
(129,130). Although no definitive data exist to guide treatment for partners of persons
with persistent or recurrent trichomoniasis among whom nonadherence and reinfection
are unlikely, partners might benefit from being evaluated and receiving treatment (see
Recurrent  Trichomoniasis).  A  recurrent  infection  can  result  from  treatment  failure
(antimicrobial-resistant  T.  vaginalis  or  host-related  problems),  lack  of  adherence,  or
reinfection from an untreated sex partner. In the case of a recurrent infection, the origin
of  the  repeat  infection  should  be  assessed  because  most  recurrent  infections  likely
result from reinfection. Retesting can be considered in cases of persistent or recurrent
trichomoniasis  with  culture,  the  preferred  test.  If  NAAT  is  used,  it  should  not  be
conducted before 3 weeks after treatment completion because of possible detection of
residual nucleic acid that is not clinically relevant (1117). The nitroimidazoles are the
only  class  of  antimicrobials  known  to  be  effective  against  trichomonas  infection.
Metronidazole  resistance  occurs  in  4%–10%  of  cases  of  vaginal  trichomoniasis
(1116,1118).  Tinidazole  resistance  is  less  well  studied  but  was  present  in  1%  of
infections  in  one  study  (1116).  Overall,  more  T.  vaginalis  isolates  have  reported
susceptibility to tinidazole than metronidazole (1119). Multidose oral metronidazole is
more  effective  than  single-dose  treatment,  particularly  for  women  who  are
symptomatic  or  have  a  history  of  T.  vaginalis  (1120).  Nitroimidazole-resistant
trichomoniasis  is  concerning  because  few  alternatives  to  standard  therapy  exist.  If
treatment failure occurs in a woman after completing a regimen of metronidazole 500
mg  2  times/day  for  7  days  and  she  has  been  reexposed  to  an  untreated  partner,  a
repeat  course  of  the  same  regimen  is  recommended.  If  no  reexposure  has  occurred,
she should be treated with metronidazole or tinidazole 2 g once daily for 7 days. If a
man has persistent T. vaginalis after a single 2-g dose of metronidazole and has been
reexposed  to  an  untreated  partner,  he  should  be  retreated  with  a  single  2-g  dose  of
metronidazole.  If  he  has  not  been  reexposed,  he  should  be  administered  a  course  of
metronidazole  500  mg  2  times/day  for  7  days.  For  persons  who  are  experiencing
persistent infection not attributable to reexposure, clinicians should request a kit from
CDC
 to
 perform
 drug-resistance
 testing
(https://www.cdc.gov/laboratory/specimen-submission/detail.html?CDCTestCode=CDC-
10239).  CDC  is  experienced  with  susceptibility  testing  for  nitroimidazole-resistant  T.
vaginalis and can provide guidance regarding treatment in cases of drug resistance. On
the  basis  of  drug  resistance  testing,  an  alternative  treatment  regimen  might  be
recommended. Treatments for infections demonstrating in vitro resistance can include
metronidazole or tinidazole 2 g daily for 7 days. If a patient has treatment failure after
the  7-day  regimen  of  high-dose  oral  metronidazole  or  tinidazole,  two  additional
treatment  options  have  been  determined  to  have  successful  results  for  women.  The
first  is  high-dose  oral  tinidazole  2  g  daily  plus  intravaginal  tinidazole  500  mg  2
times/day  for  14  days  (1121).  If  this  regimen  fails,  high-dose  oral  tinidazole  (1  g  3
times/day)  plus  intravaginal  paromomycin  (4  g  of  6.25%  intravaginal  paromomycin
cream nightly) for 14 days should be considered (1122). Alternative regimens might be
effective  but  have  not  been  systemically  evaluated;  therefore,  consultation  with  an
infectious disease specialist is recommended. Clinical improvement has been reported
with  intravaginal  boric  acid  (1123,1124)  but  not  with  nitazoxanide  (1123–1125).  The
following  topically  applied  agents  have  minimal  success  (<50%)  and  are  not
recommended:  intravaginal  betadine  (povidone-iodine),  clotrimazole,  acetic  acid,
furazolidone, GV, nonoxynol-9, and potassium permanganate (1126). No other topical
microbicide  has  been  reported  to  be  effective  against  trichomoniasis.  Metronidazole
and
 tinidazole
 are
 both
 nitroimidazoles.
 Patients
 with
 an
 IgE-mediated-type
hypersensitivity  reaction  to  5-nitroimidazole  antimicrobials  should  be  managed  by
metronidazole  desensitization  according  to  published  regimens  (1127,1128)  and  in
consultation  with  an  allergy  specialist.  The  optimal  treatment  for  patients  with  T.
vaginalis who are unable to be desensitized has not been systematically investigated
and is based on case reports, some of which report using paromomycin or boric acid for
treating  T.  vaginalis  (1123,1129).  T.  vaginalis  infection  among  pregnant  women  is
associated  with  adverse  pregnancy  outcomes,  particularly  premature  rupture  of
membranes, preterm delivery, and delivery of infants who are small for gestational age
(1075).  One  randomized  trial  of  pregnant  women  with  asymptomatic  trichomoniasis
reported  no  substantial  difference  in  preterm  birth  after  treatment  with  2  g  of
metronidazole 48 hours apart during 16–23 and 24–29 weeks’ gestation, compared with
placebo (1130). However, that trial had multiple limitations, including use of an atypical
metronidazole  regimen.  Another  multicenter  observational  study  of  asymptomatic
pregnant  women  in  start  highlightsub-Sahara  Africanend  highlight,  the  majority  with
HIV infection, reported neither trichomoniasis nor its treatment appeared to influence
the  risk  for  preterm  birth  or  a  low-birthweight  infant  (1131).  Although  metronidazole
crosses  the  placenta,  data  indicate  that  it  poses  a  low  risk  to  the  developing  fetus
(1040,1042,1132).  No  evidence  of  teratogenicity  or  mutagenic  effects  among  infants
has been found in multiple cross-sectional and cohort studies among pregnant women
examining single-dose (2 g) and multidose metronidazole regimens (1040,1131–1135).
Symptomatic  pregnant  women,  regardless  of  pregnancy  stage,  should  be  tested  and
treated. Treatment of T. vaginalis infection can relieve symptoms of vaginal discharge
for  pregnant  women  and  reduce  sexual  transmission  to  partners.  Although  perinatal
transmission of trichomoniasis is uncommon, treatment might also prevent respiratory
or genital infection in the newborn (1136,1137). Clinicians should counsel symptomatic
pregnant women with trichomoniasis about the potential risks and benefits of treatment
and about the importance of partner treatment and condom use in the prevention of
sexual transmission. The benefit of routine screening for T. vaginalis in asymptomatic
pregnant  women  has  not  been  established.  Metronidazole  is  secreted  in  breast  milk.
With maternal oral therapy, breastfed infants receive metronidazole in doses that are
lower than those used to treat infections among infants, although the active metabolite
adds  to  the  total  infant  exposure.  Plasma  levels  of  the  drug  and  metabolite  are
measurable
 but
 remain
 less
 than
 maternal
 plasma
 levels
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922).  Although  multiple  reported  case
series studies demonstrated no evidence of adverse effects among infants exposed to
metronidazole  in  breast  milk,  clinicians  sometimes  advise  deferring  breastfeeding  for
12–24  hours  after  maternal  treatment  with  metronidazole  (1051).  In  one  study,
maternal  treatment  with  metronidazole  (400  mg  3  times/day  for  7  days)  produced  a
lower concentration in breast milk and was considered compatible with breastfeeding
over  longer  periods  (1052).  Data  from  studies  involving  human  subjects  are  limited
regarding  tinidazole  use  during  pregnancy;  however,  animal  data  indicate  this  drug
poses  moderate  risk.  Thus,  tinidazole  should  be  avoided  for  pregnant  women,  and
breastfeeding should be deferred for 72 hours after a single 2-g oral dose of tinidazole
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922). Up to 53% of women with HIV have
T.  vaginalis  infection  (1115,1138).  T.  vaginalis  infection  among  these  women  is
substantially associated with pelvic inflammatory disease (1082). Among women who
are not virally suppressed, treatment of trichomoniasis is associated with decreases in
genital  tract  HIV  viral  load  and  viral  shedding  (1079,1139);  however,  no  difference
might  occur  among  women  who  are  virally  suppressed  (1140).  Because  of  the  high
prevalence  of  T.  vaginalis  among  women  with  HIV  and  the  potential  for  adverse
reproductive  health,  poor  birth  outcomes,  and  possibly  amplified  HIV  transmission,
routine  screening  and  prompt  treatment  are  recommended  for  all  women  with  HIV
infection; screening should occur at entry to care and then at least annually thereafter.
A  randomized  clinical  trial  involving  women  with  HIV  and  T.  vaginalis  infection
demonstrated that a single dose of metronidazole 2 g orally was less effective than 500
mg  2  times/day  for  7  days  (1105).  Factors  that  might  interfere  with  standard
single-dose treatment for trichomoniasis among women with HIV include high rates of
asymptomatic  BV  infection,  ART  use,  changes  in  vaginal  ecology,  and  impaired
immunity (1141). Thus, to improve cure rates, women with HIV who receive a diagnosis
of T. vaginalis infection should be treated with metronidazole 500 mg orally 2 times/day
for  7  days.  For  pregnant  women  with  HIV,  screening  at  the  first  prenatal  visit  and
prompt treatment, as needed, are recommended because T. vaginalis infection is a risk
factor for vertical transmission of HIV (1142). Treatment reduces symptoms and signs
of T. vaginalis infection, cures infection, and might reduce transmission. Likelihood of
adverse  outcomes  among  women  with  HIV  infection  is  also  reduced  with  T.  vaginalis
therapy.  If  a  woman  with  HIV  infection  experiences  treatment  failure,  the  protocol
outlined
 is
 recommended
 (see
 Recurrent
 Trichomonas).
 Other
 management
considerations, follow-up, and management of sex partners should be performed as for
women  without  HIV  infection.  Treatment  of  men  with  HIV  infection  should  follow  the
same guidelines as for men without HIV. For women with HIV who receive a diagnosis of
T.  vaginalis  infection,  retesting  is  recommended  3  months  after  treatment;  NAAT  is
encouraged because of higher sensitivity of these tests. Data are insufficient to support
retesting of men with trichomonas and HIV infection. VVC usually is caused by Candida
albicans  but  can  occasionally  be  caused  by  other  Candida  species  or  yeasts.  Typical
symptoms of VVC include pruritus, vaginal soreness, dyspareunia, external dysuria, and
abnormal vaginal discharge. None of these symptoms is specific for VVC. An estimated
75% of women will have at least one episode of VVC, and 40%–45% will have two or
more  episodes.  On  the  basis  of  clinical  presentation,  microbiology,  host  factors,  and
response to therapy, VVC can be classified as either uncomplicated or complicated (Box
4).  Approximately  10%–20%  of  women  will  have  complicated  VVC,  requiring  special
diagnostic and therapeutic considerations. A diagnosis of Candida vaginitis is clinically
indicated by the presence of external dysuria and vulvar pruritus, pain, swelling, and
redness.  Signs  include  vulvar  edema,  fissures,  excoriations,  and  thick  curdy  vaginal
discharge.  Most  healthy  women  with  uncomplicated  VVC  have  no  identifiable
precipitating  factors.  The  diagnosis  can  be  made  in  a  woman  who  has  signs  and
symptoms  of  vaginitis  when  either  a  wet  preparation  (saline,  10%  KOH)  of  vaginal
discharge  demonstrates  budding  yeasts,  hyphae,  or  pseudohyphae,  or  a  culture  or
other  test  yields  a  positive  result  for  a  yeast  species.  Candida  vaginitis  is  associated
with  normal  vaginal  pH  (<4.5).  Use  of  10%  KOH  in  wet  preparations  improves  the
visualization of yeast and mycelia by disrupting cellular material that might obscure the
yeast or pseudohyphae. Examination of a wet mount with KOH preparation should be
performed for all women with symptoms or signs of VVC, and women with a positive
result  should  be  treated.  For  those  with  negative  wet  mounts  but  existing  signs  or
symptoms,  vaginal  cultures  for  Candida  should  be  considered.  If  Candida  cultures
cannot  be  performed  for  these  women,  empiric  treatment  can  be  considered.
Identifying Candida by culture in the absence of symptoms or signs is not an indication
for treatment because approximately 10%–20% of women harbor Candida species and
other yeasts in the vagina. The majority of PCR tests for yeast are not FDA cleared, and
providers who use these tests should be familiar with the performance characteristics
of the specific test used. Yeast culture, which can identify a broad group of pathogenic
yeasts, remains the reference standard for diagnosis. Short-course topical formulations
(i.e.,  single  dose  and  regimens  of  1–3  days)  effectively  treat  uncomplicated  VVC.
Treatment with azoles results in relief of symptoms and negative cultures in 80%–90%
of patients who complete therapy. The creams and suppositories in these regimens are
oil based and might weaken latex condoms and diaphragms. Patients should refer to
condom  product  labeling  for  further  information.  Even  women  who  have  previously
received a diagnosis of VVC by a clinician are not necessarily more likely to be able to
diagnose  themselves;  therefore,  any  woman  whose  symptoms  persist  after  using  an
over-the-counter  preparation  or  who  has  a  recurrence  of  symptoms  <2  months  after
treatment  for  VVC  should  be  evaluated  clinically  and  tested.  Unnecessary  or
unapproved use of over-the-counter preparations is common and can lead to a delay in
treatment of other vulvovaginitis etiologies, which can result in adverse outcomes. No
substantial evidence exists to support using probiotics or homeopathic medications for
treating  VVC.  Follow-up  typically  is  not  required.  However,  women  with  persistent  or
recurrent symptoms after treatment should be instructed to return for follow-up visits.
Uncomplicated VVC is not usually acquired through sexual intercourse, and data do not
support  treatment  of  sex  partners.  A  minority  of  male  sex  partners  have  balanitis,
characterized  by  erythematous  areas  on  the  glans  of  the  penis  in  conjunction  with
pruritus or irritation. These men benefit from treatment with topical antifungal agents
to relieve symptoms. Topical agents usually cause no systemic side effects, although
local  burning  or  irritation  might  occur.  Oral  azoles  occasionally  cause  nausea,
abdominal pain, and headache. Therapy with the oral azoles has rarely been associated
with abnormal elevations of liver enzymes. Clinically important interactions can occur
when  oral  azoles  are  administered  with  other  drugs  (1141).  Vaginal  culture  or  PCR
should be obtained from women with complicated VVC to confirm clinical diagnosis and
identify  non–albicans  Candida.  Candida  glabrata  does  not  form  pseudohyphae  or
hyphae  and  is  not  easily  recognized  on  microscopy.  C.  albicans  azole  resistance  is
becoming more common in vaginal isolates (1144,1145), and non–albicans Candida is
intrinsically  resistant  to  azoles;  therefore,  culture  and  susceptibility  testing  should  be
considered  for  patients  who  remain  symptomatic.  Recurrent  VVC,  usually  defined  as
three  or  more  episodes  of  symptomatic  VVC  in  <1  year,  affects  <5%  of  women  but
carries a substantial economic burden (1146). Recurrent VVC can be either idiopathic or
secondary  (related  to  frequent  antibiotic  use,  diabetes,  or  other  underlying  host
factors). The pathogenesis of recurrent VVC is poorly understood, and the majority of
women with recurrent VVC have no apparent predisposing or underlying conditions. C.
glabrata and other non–albicans Candida species are observed in 10%–20% of women
with  recurrent  VVC.  Conventional  antimycotic  therapies  are  not  as  effective  against
these  non–albicans  yeasts  as  against  C.  albicans.  Most  episodes  of  recurrent  VVC
caused  by  C.  albicans  respond  well  to  short-duration  oral  or  topical  azole  therapy.
However, to maintain clinical and mycologic control, a longer duration of initial therapy
(e.g.,  7–14  days  of  topical  therapy  or  a  100-mg,  150-mg,  or  200-mg  oral  dose  of
fluconazole every third day for a total of 3 doses [days 1, 4, and 7]) is recommended, to
attempt mycologic remission, before initiating a maintenance antifungal regimen. Oral
fluconazole  (i.e.,  a  100-mg,  150-mg,  or  200-mg  dose)  weekly  for  6  months  is  the
indicated maintenance regimen. If this regimen is not feasible, topical treatments used
intermittently can also be considered. Suppressive maintenance therapies are effective
at  controlling  recurrent  VVC  but  are  rarely  curative  long-term  (1147).  Because  C.
albicans azole resistance is becoming more common, susceptibility tests, if available,
should be obtained among symptomatic patients who remain culture positive despite
maintenance  therapy.  These  women  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  a
specialist. Severe VVC (i.e., extensive vulvar erythema, edema, excoriation, and fissure
formation) is associated with lower clinical response rates among patients treated with
short courses of topical or oral therapy. Either 7–14 days of topical azole or 150 mg of
fluconazole  in  two  sequential  oral  doses  (second  dose  72  hours  after  initial  dose)  is
recommended.  Because  approximately  50%  of  women  with  a  positive  culture  for
non–albicans  Candida  might  be  minimally  symptomatic  or  have  no  symptoms,  and
because  successful  treatment  is  often  difficult,  clinicians  should  make  every  effort  to
exclude other causes of vaginal symptoms for women with non–albicans yeast (1148).
The  optimal  treatment  of  non–albicans  VVC  remains  unknown;  however,  a  longer
duration of therapy (7–14 days) with a nonfluconazole azole regimen (oral or topical) is
recommended.  If  recurrence  occurs,  600  mg  of  boric  acid  in  a  gelatin  capsule
administered vaginally once daily for 3 weeks is indicated. This regimen has clinical and
mycologic eradication rates of approximately 70% (1149). If symptoms recur, referral to
a specialist is advised. No data exist to support treating sex partners of patients with
complicated VVC. Therefore, no recommendation can be made. Women with underlying
immunodeficiency, those with poorly controlled diabetes or other immunocompromising
conditions  (e.g.,  HIV),  and  those  receiving  immunosuppression  therapy  (e.g.,
corticosteroid treatment) might not respond as well to short-term therapies. Efforts to
correct  modifiable  conditions  should  be  made,  and  more  prolonged  (i.e.,  7–14  days)
conventional  treatment  is  necessary.  VVC  occurs  frequently  during  pregnancy.  Only
topical azole therapies, applied for 7 days, are recommended for use among pregnant
women.  Epidemiologic  studies  indicate  a  single  150-mg  dose  of  fluconazole  might  be
associated  with  spontaneous  abortion  (1150)  and  congenital  anomalies;  therefore,  it
should not be used (1151). Vaginal Candida colonization rates among women with HIV
infection are higher than among women without HIV with similar demographic and risk
behavior characteristics, and the colonization rates correlate with increasing severity of
immunosuppression  (1152).  Symptomatic  VVC  is  also  more  frequent  among  women
with HIV infection and similarly correlates with severity of immunodeficiency (1153). In
addition, among women with HIV, systemic azole exposure is associated with isolation
of  non–albicans  Candida  species  from  the  vagina.  Treatment  for  uncomplicated  and
complicated  VVC  among  women  with  HIV  infection  should  not  differ  from  that  for
women who do not have HIV. Although long-term prophylactic therapy with fluconazole
200 mg weekly has been effective in reducing C. albicans colonization and symptomatic
VVC  (1154),  this  regimen  is  not  recommended  for  women  with  HIV  infection  in  the
absence  of  complicated  VVC  (98).  Although  VVC  is  associated  with  increased  HIV
seroconversion  among  HIV-negative  women  and  increased  HIV  cervicovaginal  levels
among women with HIV infection, the effect of treatment for VVC on HIV acquisition and
transmission  remains  unknown.  Top  PID  comprises  a  spectrum  of  inflammatory
disorders of the upper female genital tract, including any combination of endometritis,
salpingitis,  tubo-ovarian  abscess,  and  pelvic  peritonitis  (1155–1157).  Sexually
transmitted  organisms,  especially  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis,  often  are
implicated.  Recent  studies  report  that  the  proportion  of  PID  cases  attributable  to  N.
gonorrhoeae  or  C.  trachomatis  is  decreasing;  of  women  who  received  a  diagnosis  of
acute  PID,  approximately  50%  have  a  positive  test  for  either  of  those  organisms
(1158–1160).  Micro-organisms  that  comprise  the  vaginal  flora,  such  as  strict  and
facultative  anaerobes  (1160)  and  G.  vaginalis,  H.  influenzae,  enteric  gram-negative
rods, and Streptococcus agalactiae, have been associated with PID (1161). In addition,
cytomegalovirus  (CMV),  T.  vaginalis,  M.  hominis,  and  U.  urealyticum  might  be
associated with certain PID cases (1072). Data also indicate that M. genitalium might
have  a  role  in  PID  pathogenesis  (765,928)  and  might  be  associated  with  milder
symptoms  (919,923,928),  although  one  study  failed  to  demonstrate  a  substantial
increase  in  PID  after  detection  of  M.  genitalium  in  the  lower  genital  tract  (925).
Screening  and  treating  sexually  active  women  for  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  reduces
their  risk  for  PID  (1162,1163).  Although  BV  is  associated  with  PID,  whether  PID
incidence can be reduced by identifying and treating women with BV is unclear (1161).
Whether screening young women for M. genitalium is associated with a reduction in PID
is unknown. Acute PID is difficult to diagnose because of the considerable variation in
symptoms and signs associated with this condition. Women with PID often have subtle
or  nonspecific  symptoms  or  are  asymptomatic.  Delay  in  diagnosis  and  treatment
probably contributes to inflammatory sequelae in the upper genital tract. Laparoscopy
can  be  used  to  obtain  a  more  accurate  diagnosis  of  salpingitis  and  a  more  complete
bacteriologic diagnosis. However, this diagnostic tool frequently is not readily available,
and  its  use  is  not  easily  justifiable  when  symptoms  are  mild  or  vague.  Moreover,
laparoscopy  will  not  detect  endometritis  and  might  not  detect  subtle  inflammation  of
the fallopian tubes. Consequently, a PID diagnosis usually is based on imprecise clinical
findings (1164–1166). Data indicate that a clinical diagnosis of symptomatic PID has a
positive  predictive  value  for  salpingitis  of  65%–90%,  compared  with  laparoscopy
(1167–1170). The positive predictive value of a clinical diagnosis of acute PID depends
on  the  epidemiologic  characteristics  of  the  population,  with  higher  positive  predictive
values  among  sexually  active  young  women  (particularly  adolescents),  women
attending STD clinics, and those who live in communities with high rates of gonorrhea
or chlamydia. Regardless of positive predictive value, no single historical, physical, or
laboratory  finding  is  both  sensitive  and  specific  for  the  diagnosis  of  acute  PID.
Combinations  of  diagnostic  findings  that  improve  either  sensitivity  (i.e.,  detect  more
women who have PID) or specificity (i.e., exclude more women who do not have PID) do
so  only  at  the  expense  of  the  other.  For  example,  requiring  two  or  more  findings
excludes more women who do not have PID and reduces the number of women with PID
who are identified. Episodes of PID often go unrecognized. Although certain cases are
asymptomatic,  others  are  not  diagnosed  because  the  patient  or  the  health  care
provider  do  not  recognize  the  implications  of  mild  or  nonspecific  symptoms  or  signs
(e.g., abnormal bleeding, dyspareunia, and vaginal discharge). Even women with mild
or asymptomatic PID might be at risk for infertility (1157). Because of the difficulty of
diagnosis  and  the  potential  for  damage  to  the  reproductive  health  of  women,  health
care providers should maintain a low threshold for the clinical diagnosis of PID (1158).
The recommendations for diagnosing PID are intended to assist health care providers to
recognize  when  PID  should  be  suspected  and  when  additional  information  should  be
obtained to increase diagnostic certainty. Diagnosis and management of other causes
of  lower  abdominal  pain  (e.g.,  ectopic  pregnancy,  acute  appendicitis,  ovarian  cyst,
ovarian torsion, or functional pain) are unlikely to be impaired by initiating antimicrobial
therapy for PID. Presumptive treatment for PID should be initiated for sexually active
young women and other women at risk for STIs if they are experiencing pelvic or lower
abdominal pain, if no cause for the illness other than PID can be identified, or if one or
more of the following three minimum clinical criteria are present on pelvic examination:
cervical  motion  tenderness,  uterine  tenderness,  or  adnexal  tenderness.  More  specific
criteria for diagnosing PID include endometrial biopsy with histopathologic evidence of
endometritis;  transvaginal  sonography  or  magnetic  resonance  imaging  techniques
demonstrating  thickened,  fluid-filled  tubes  with  or  without  free  pelvic  fluid  or
tubo-ovarian  complex,  or  Doppler  studies  indicating  pelvic  infection  (e.g.,  tubal
hyperemia); and laparoscopic findings consistent with PID. A diagnostic evaluation that
includes some of these more extensive procedures might be warranted in certain cases.
Endometrial biopsy is warranted for women undergoing laparoscopy who do not have
visual  evidence  of  salpingitis  because  endometritis  is  the  only  sign  of  PID  for  certain
women.  Requiring  that  all  three  minimum  criteria  be  present  before  the  initiation  of
empiric treatment can result in insufficient sensitivity for a PID diagnosis. After deciding
whether to initiate empiric treatment, clinicians should also consider the risk profile for
STIs.  More  elaborate  diagnostic  evaluation  frequently  is  needed  because  incorrect
diagnosis  and  management  of  PID  might  cause  unnecessary  morbidity.  For  example,
the presence of signs of lower genital tract inflammation (predominance of leukocytes
in vaginal secretions, cervical discharge, or cervical friability), in addition to one of the
three minimum criteria, increases the specificity of the diagnosis. One or more of the
following  additional  criteria  can  be  used  to  enhance  the  specificity  of  the  minimum
clinical criteria and support a PID diagnosis: The majority of women with PID have either
mucopurulent cervical discharge or evidence of WBCs on a microscopic evaluation of a
saline  preparation  of  vaginal  fluid  (i.e.,  wet  prep).  If  the  cervical  discharge  appears
normal and no WBCs are observed on the wet prep of vaginal fluid, a PID diagnosis is
unlikely,  and  alternative  causes  of  pain  should  be  considered.  A  wet  prep  of  vaginal
fluid also can detect the presence of concomitant infections (e.g., BV or trichomoniasis).
PID  treatment  regimens  should  provide  empiric,  broad-spectrum  coverage  of  likely
pathogens. Multiple parenteral and oral antimicrobial regimens have been effective in
achieving  clinical  and  microbiologic  cure  in  randomized  clinical  trials  with  short-term
follow-up (1171–1173). However, only a limited number of studies have assessed and
compared these regimens with regard to infection elimination in the endometrium and
fallopian  tubes  or  determined  the  incidence  of  long-term  complications  (e.g.,  tubal
infertility  and  ectopic  pregnancy)  after  antimicrobial  regimens  (1159,1164,1174).  The
optimal treatment regimen and long-term outcome of early treatment of women with
subclinical  PID  are  unknown.  All  regimens  used  to  treat  PID  should  also  be  effective
against  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  because  negative  endocervical  screening
for these organisms does not rule out upper genital tract infection. Anaerobic bacteria
have been isolated from the upper genital tract of women who have PID, and data from
in  vitro  studies  have  revealed  that  some  anaerobes  (e.g.,  Bacteroides  fragilis)  can
cause tubal and epithelial destruction. BV is often present among women who have PID
(22,1160,1161,1175).  Addition  of  metronidazole  to  IM  or  oral  PID  regimens  more
effectively  eradicates  anaerobic  organisms  from  the  upper  genital  tract  (1160).  Until
treatment regimens that do not cover anaerobic microbes have been demonstrated to
prevent long-term sequelae (e.g., infertility and ectopic pregnancy) as successfully as
the regimens that are effective against these microbes, using regimens with anaerobic
activity  should  be  considered.  Treatment  should  be  initiated  as  soon  as  the
presumptive  diagnosis  has  been  made  because  prevention  of  long-term  sequelae  is
dependent on early administration of recommended antimicrobials. For women with PID
of  mild  or  moderate  clinical  severity,  parenteral  and  oral  regimens  appear  to  have
similar efficacy. The decision of whether hospitalization is necessary should be based
on provider judgment and whether the woman meets any of the following criteria: No
evidence  is  available  to  indicate  that  adolescents  have  improved  outcomes  from
hospitalization for treatment of PID, and the clinical response to outpatient treatment is
similar among younger and older women. The decision to hospitalize adolescents with
acute  PID  should  be  based  on  the  same  criteria  used  for  older  women.  Randomized
trials  have  demonstrated  the  efficacy  of  parenteral  regimens  (1160,1171,1172,1176).
Clinical  experience  should  guide  decisions  regarding  transition  to  oral  therapy,  which
usually  can  be  initiated  within  24–48  hours  of  clinical  improvement.  For  women  with
tubo-ovarian abscesses, >24 hours of inpatient observation is recommended. Because
of the pain associated with IV infusion, doxycycline should be administered orally when
possible.  Oral  and  IV  administration  of  doxycycline  and  metronidazole  provide  similar
bioavailability. Oral metronidazole is well absorbed and can be considered instead of IV
for women without severe illness or tubo-ovarian abscess when possible. After clinical
improvement with parenteral therapy, transition to oral therapy with doxycycline 100
mg 2 times/day and metronidazole 500 mg 2 times/day is recommended to complete
14 days of antimicrobial therapy. Only limited data are available to support using other
parenteral
 second-
 or
 third-
 generation
 cephalosporins
 (e.g.,
 ceftizoxime
 or
cefotaxime). Because these cephalosporins are less active than cefotetan or cefoxitin
against  anaerobic  bacteria,  the  addition  of  metronidazole  should  be  considered.
Ampicillin-sulbactam plus doxycycline has been investigated in at least one clinical trial
and  has  broad-spectrum  coverage  (1177).  Ampicillin-sulbactam  plus  doxycycline  is
effective  against  C.  trachomatis,  N.  gonorrhoeae,  and  anaerobes  for  women  with
tubo-ovarian  abscess.  Another  trial  demonstrated  short-term  clinical  cure  rates  with
azithromycin  monotherapy  or  combined  with  metronidazole  (1178).  When  using  the
clindamycin  and  gentamicin  alternative  parenteral  regimen,  women  with  clinical
improvement  start  highlightafter  24–28  hoursend  highlight  can  be  transitioned  to
clindamycin (450 mg orally 4 times/day) or doxycycline (100 mg orally 2 times/day) to
complete  the  14-day  therapy.  However,  when  tubo-ovarian  abscess  is  present,
clindamycin (450 mg orally 4 times/day) or metronidazole (500 mg orally 2 times/day)
should be used to complete 14 days of therapy with oral doxycycline to provide more
effective  anaerobic  coverage.  IM  or  oral  therapy  can  be  considered  for  women  with
mild-to-moderate acute PID because the clinical outcomes among women treated with
these regimens are similar to those treated with IV therapy (1158). Women who do not
respond  to  IM  or  oral  therapy  within  72  hours  should  be  reevaluated  to  confirm  the
diagnosis  and  be  administered  therapy  IV.  These  regimens  provide  coverage  against
frequent  etiologic  agents  of  PID;  however,  the  optimal  choice  of  a  cephalosporin  is
unclear.  Cefoxitin,  a  second-generation  cephalosporin,  has  better  anaerobic  coverage
than  ceftriaxone,  and,  in  combination  with  probenecid  and  doxycycline,  has  been
effective in short-term clinical response among women with PID. Ceftriaxone has better
coverage  against  N.  gonorrhoeae.  The  addition  of  metronidazole  to  these  regimens
provides extended coverage against anaerobic organisms and will also effectively treat
BV, which is frequently associated with PID. No data have been published regarding use
of  oral  cephalosporins  for  treating  PID.  As  a  result  of  the  emergence  of
quinolone-resistant  N.  gonorrhoeae,  regimens  that  include  a  quinolone  agent  are  not
recommended  for  PID  treatment.  start  highlightHowever,  if  the  patient  has
cephalosporin allergy, the community prevalence and individual risk for gonorrhea are
low,  and  follow-up  is  likely,  alternative  therapy  can  be  considered.  Use  of  either
levofloxacin  500  mg  orally  once  daily  or  moxifloxacin  400  mg  orally  once  daily  with
metronidazole 500 mg orally 2 times/day for 14 days (1179–1181) or azithromycin 500
mg  IV  daily  for  1–2  doses,  followed  by  250  mg  orally  daily  in  combination  with
metronidazole  500  mg  2  times/day  for  12–14  days  (1178),end  highlight  can  be
considered.  Moxifloxacin  is  the  preferred  quinolone  antimicrobial  for  M.  genitalium
infections;  however,  the  importance  of  providing  coverage  for  M.  genitalium  is
unknown.  Diagnostic  tests  for  gonorrhea  should  be  obtained  before  starting  therapy,
and persons should be managed as follows: To minimize disease transmission, women
should  be  instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  therapy  is  complete,
symptoms  have  resolved,  and  sex  partners  have  been  treated  (see  Chlamydial
Infections; Gonococcal Infections). All women who receive a diagnosis of PID should be
tested for gonorrhea, chlamydia, HIV, and syphilis. The value of testing women with PID
for M. genitalium is unknown (see Mycoplasma genitalium). All contraceptive methods
can be continued during treatment. Women should demonstrate clinical improvement
(e.g.,  defervescence;  reduction  in  direct  or  rebound  abdominal  tenderness;  and
reduction  in  uterine,  adnexal,  and  cervical  motion  tenderness)  <3  days  after  therapy
initiation. If no clinical improvement has occurred <72 hours after outpatient IM or oral
therapy, then hospitalization, assessment of the antimicrobial regimen, and additional
diagnostics, including consideration of diagnostic laparoscopy for alternative diagnoses,
are  recommended.  All  women  who  have  received  a  diagnosis  of  chlamydial  or
gonococcal  PID  should  be  retested  3  months  after  treatment,  regardless  of  whether
their  sex  partners  have  been  treated  (753).  If  retesting  at  3  months  is  not  possible,
these women should be retested whenever they next seek medical care <12 months
after treatment. Persons who have had sexual contact with a partner with PID during
the 60 days preceding symptom onset should be evaluated, tested, and presumptively
treated  for  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea,  regardless  of  the  PID  etiology  or  pathogens
isolated.  If  the  last  sexual  intercourse  was  >60  days  before  symptom  onset  or
diagnosis, the most recent sex partner should be treated. Sex partners of persons who
have  PID  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  or  N.  gonorrhoeae  frequently  are  asymptomatic.
Arrangements  should  be  made  to  link  sex  partners  to  care.  If  linkage  is  delayed  or
unlikely, EPT is an alternative approach to treating sex partners who have chlamydial or
gonococcal infection (125,126) (see Partner Services). Partners should be instructed to
abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  sex  partners  have  been  treated
(i.e., until therapy is completed and symptoms have resolved, if originally present). The
risk  for  penicillin  cross-reactivity  is  highest  with  first-generation  cephalosporins  but  is
negligible  between  the  majority  of  second-generation  (e.g.,  cefoxitin)  and  all
third-generation (e.g., ceftriaxone) cephalosporins (619,631,653,656) (see Management
of  Persons  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy).  Pregnant  women  suspected  of
having PID are at high risk for maternal morbidity and preterm delivery. These women
should  be  hospitalized  and  treated  with  IV  antimicrobials  in  consultation  with  an
infectious  disease  specialist.  Differences  in  PID  clinical  manifestations  among  women
with  HIV  infection  and  those  without  have  not  been  well  delineated  (1182).  In  early
observational  studies,  women  with  HIV  infection  and  PID  were  more  likely  to  require
surgical  intervention.  More  comprehensive  observational  and  controlled  studies  have
demonstrated that women with HIV infection and PID have similar symptoms, compared
with  women  without  HIV  (1183–1185),  except  they  are  more  likely  to  have  a
tubo-ovarian  abscess.  Women  with  HIV  responded  equally  well  to  recommended
parenteral and IM or oral antibiotic regimens as women without HIV. The microbiologic
findings for women with HIV and women without HIV were similar, except women with
HIV  had  higher  rates  of  concomitant  M.  hominis  and  streptococcal  infections.  These
data are insufficient for determining whether women with HIV infection and PID require
more aggressive management (e.g., hospitalization or IV antimicrobial regimens). IUDs
are  one  of  the  most  effective  contraceptive  methods.  Copper-containing  and
levonorgestrel-releasing  IUDs  are  available  in  the  United  States.  The  risk  for  PID
associated  with  IUD  use  is  primarily  confined  to  the  first  3  weeks  after  insertion
(1186–1188). If an IUD user receives a diagnosis of PID, the IUD does not need to be
removed (59,1189). However, the woman should receive treatment according to these
recommendations and should have close clinical follow-up. If no clinical improvement
occurs within 48–72 hours of initiating treatment, providers should consider removing
the IUD. A systematic review of evidence demonstrated that treatment outcomes did
not differ between women with PID who retained the IUD and those who had the IUD
removed  (1190).  These  studies  primarily  included  women  using  copper-containing  or
other  nonhormonal  IUDs.  No  studies  are  available  regarding  treatment  outcomes
among women using levonorgestrel-releasing IUDs. Top Acute epididymitis is a clinical
syndrome  causing  pain,  swelling,  and  inflammation  of  the  epididymis  and  lasting  <6
weeks  (1191).  Sometimes  a  testicle  is  also  involved,  a  condition  referred  to  as
epididymo-orchitis.  A  high  index  of  suspicion  for  spermatic  cord  (testicular)  torsion
should be maintained among men who have a sudden onset of symptoms associated
with  epididymitis  because  this  condition  is  a  surgical  emergency.  Acute  epididymitis
can  be  caused  by  STIs  (e.g.,  C.  trachomatis,  N.  gonorrhoeae,  or  M.  genitalium)  or
enteric organisms (i.e., Escherichia coli) (1192). Acute epididymitis caused by an STI is
usually  accompanied  by  urethritis,  which  is  frequently  asymptomatic.  Acute
epididymitis caused by sexually transmitted enteric organisms might also occur among
men  who  are  the  insertive  partner  during  anal  sex.  Nonsexually  transmitted  acute
epididymitis  caused  by  genitourinary  pathogens  typically  occurs  with  bacteriuria
secondary  to  bladder  outlet  obstruction  (e.g.,  benign  prostatic  hyperplasia)  (1193).
Among  older  men,  nonsexually  transmitted  acute  epididymitis  is  also  associated  with
prostate  biopsy,  urinary  tract  instrumentation  or  surgery,  systemic  disease,  or
immunosuppression.  Uncommon  infectious  causes  of  nonsexually  transmitted  acute
epididymitis  (e.g.,  Fournier’s  gangrene)  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  a
urologist.  Chronic  epididymitis  is  characterized  by  a  ≥6-week  history  of  symptoms  of
discomfort  or  pain  in  the  scrotum,  testicle,  or  epididymis.  Chronic  infectious
epididymitis  is  most  frequently  observed  with  conditions  associated  with  a
granulomatous  reaction.  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  (TB)  is  the  most  common
granulomatous  disease  affecting  the  epididymis  and  should  be  suspected,  especially
among men with a known history of or recent exposure to TB. The differential diagnosis
of chronic noninfectious epididymitis, sometimes termed orchialgia or epididymalgia, is
broad (e.g., trauma, cancer, autoimmune conditions, or idiopathic conditions). Men with
this  diagnosis  should  be  referred  to  a  urologist  for  clinical  management  (1191,1192).
Men  who  have  acute  epididymitis  typically  have  unilateral  testicular  pain  and
tenderness, hydrocele, and palpable swelling of the epididymis. Although inflammation
and swelling usually begin in the tail of the epididymis, it can spread to the rest of the
epididymis  and  testicle.  The  spermatic  cord  is  usually  tender  and  swollen.  Spermatic
cord  (testicular)  torsion,  a  surgical  emergency,  should  be  considered  in  all  cases;
however,  it  occurs  more  frequently  among  adolescents  and  men  without  evidence  of
inflammation or infection. For men with severe unilateral pain with sudden onset, those
whose test results do not support a diagnosis of urethritis or urinary tract infection, or
for  whom  diagnosis  of  acute  epididymitis  is  questionable,  immediate  referral  to  a
urologist for evaluation for testicular torsion is vital because testicular viability might be
compromised.  Bilateral  symptoms  should  increase  suspicion  of  other  causes  of
testicular pain. Radionuclide scanning of the scrotum is the most accurate method for
diagnosing  epididymitis  but  it  is  not  routinely  available.  Ultrasound  should  be  used
primarily for ruling out torsion of the spermatic cord in cases of acute, unilateral, painful
scrotal  swelling.  However,  because  partial  spermatic  cord  torsion  can  mimic
epididymitis on scrotal ultrasound, differentiation between spermatic cord torsion and
epididymitis when torsion is not ruled out by ultrasound should be made on the basis of
clinical  evaluation.  Although  ultrasound  can  demonstrate  epididymal  hyperemia  and
swelling associated with epididymitis, it provides minimal diagnostic usefulness for men
with a clinical presentation consistent with epididymitis. A negative ultrasound does not
rule out epididymitis and thus does not alter clinical management. Ultrasound should be
reserved for men if torsion of the spermatic cord is suspected or for those with scrotal
pain  who  cannot  receive  an  accurate  diagnosis  by  history,  physical  examination,  and
objective  laboratory  findings.  All  suspected  cases  of  acute  epididymitis  should  be
evaluated for objective evidence of inflammation by one of the following POC tests: All
suspected  cases  of  acute  epididymitis  should  be  tested  for  C.  trachomatis  and  N.
gonorrhoeae by NAAT. Urine is the preferred specimen for NAAT for men (553). Urine
cultures  for  chlamydial  and  gonococcal  epididymitis  are  insensitive  and  are  not
recommended.  Urine  bacterial  cultures  should  also  be  performed  for  all  men  to
evaluate  for  the  presence  of  genitourinary  organisms  and  to  determine  antibiotic
susceptibility. To prevent complications and transmission of STIs, presumptive therapy
for all sexually active men is indicated at the time of the visit before all laboratory test
results are available. Selection of presumptive therapy is based on risk for chlamydial
and gonococcal infections or enteric organisms. Treatment goals for acute epididymitis
are  1)  microbiologic  infection  cure,  2)  improvement  of  signs  and  symptoms,  3)
prevention  of  transmission  of  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  to  others,  and  4)  decreased
potential  for  chlamydial  or  gonococcal  epididymitis  complications  (e.g.,  infertility  or
chronic pain). Although the majority of men with acute epididymitis can be treated on
an  outpatient  basis,  referral  to  a  specialist  and  hospitalization  should  be  considered
when severe pain or fever indicates other diagnoses (e.g., torsion, testicular infarction,
abscess,  or  necrotizing  fasciitis)  or  when  men  are  unable  to  comply  with  an
antimicrobial regimen. Age, history of diabetes, fever, and elevated C-reactive protein
can  indicate  more  severe  disease  requiring  hospitalization  (1193).  Levofloxacin
monotherapy  should  be  considered  if  the  infection  is  most  likely  caused  by  enteric
organisms  only,  and  gonorrhea  has  been  ruled  out  by  Gram,  MB,  or  GV  stain.  This
includes men who have undergone prostate biopsy, vasectomy, and other urinary tract
instrumentation  procedures.  Treatment  should  be  guided  by  bacterial  cultures  and
antimicrobial susceptibilities. As an adjunct to therapy, bed rest, scrotal elevation, and
nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  are  recommended  until  fever  and  local
inflammation have subsided. Complete resolution of discomfort might not occur for a
few weeks after completion of the antibiotic regimen. Men who have acute epididymitis
confirmed  or  suspected  to  be  caused  by  N.  gonorrhoeae  or  C.  trachomatis  should  be
advised  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  partners  have  been
treated and symptoms have resolved. All men with acute epididymitis should be tested
for HIV and syphilis. Men should be instructed to return to their health care providers if
their  symptoms  do  not  improve  <72  hours  after  treatment.  Signs  and  symptoms  of
epididymitis that do not subside in <3 days require reevaluation of the diagnosis and
therapy. Men who experience swelling and tenderness that persist after completion of
antimicrobial  therapy  should  be  evaluated  for  alternative  diagnoses,  including  tumor,
abscess, infarction, testicular cancer, TB, and fungal epididymitis. Men who have acute
sexually  transmitted  epididymitis  confirmed  or  suspected  to  be  caused  by  N.
gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis should be instructed to refer all sex partners during the
previous  60  days  before  symptom  onset  for  evaluation,  testing,  and  presumptive
treatment  (see  Chlamydial  Infections;  Gonococcal  Infections).  If  the  last  sexual
intercourse was >60 days before onset of symptoms or diagnosis, the most recent sex
partner  should  be  evaluated  and  treated.  Arrangements  should  be  made  to  link  sex
partners to care. EPT is an effective strategy for treating sex partners of men who have
or  are  suspected  of  having  chlamydia  or  gonorrhea  for  whom  linkage  to  care  is
anticipated  to  be  delayed  (125,126)  (see  Partner  Services).  Partners  should  be
instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  sex  partners  are
treated and symptoms have resolved. The risk for penicillin cross-reactivity is negligible
between  all  third-generation  cephalosporins  (e.g.,  ceftriaxone)  (658,681)  (see
Management of Persons Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy). Alternative regimens
have  not  been  studied;  therefore,  clinicians  should  consult  an  infectious  disease
specialist  if  such  regimens  are  required.  Men  with  HIV  infection  who  have
uncomplicated acute epididymitis should receive the same treatment regimen as those
who do not have HIV. Other etiologic agents have been implicated in acute epididymitis
among  men  with  HIV,  including  CMV,  salmonella,  toxoplasmosis,  U.  urealyticum,
Corynebacterium  species,  Mycoplasma  species,  and  Mima  polymorpha  (1192).   Top
Approximately 150 types of HPV have been identified, at least 40 of which infect the
genital  area  (1194).  The  majority  of  HPV  infections  are  self-limited  and  are
asymptomatic  or  unrecognized.  Sexually  active  persons  are  usually  exposed  to  HPV
during  their  lifetime  (838,1195,1196).  Oncogenic,  high-risk  HPV  infection  (e.g.,  HPV
types  16  and  18)  causes  the  majority  of  cervical,  penile,  vulvar,  vaginal,  anal,  and
oropharyngeal cancers and precancers (1197), whereas other HPV infection (e.g., HPV
types  6  and  11)  causes  genital  warts  and  recurrent  respiratory  papillomatosis.
Persistent  oncogenic  HPV  infection  is  the  strongest  risk  factor  for  development  of
HPV-attributable  precancers  and  cancers.  A  substantial  proportion  of  cancers  and
anogenital warts are attributable to HPV in the United States. An estimated 34,800 new
HPV-attributable  cancers  occurred  every  year  during  2012–2016  (1198).  Before  HPV
vaccines  were  introduced,  approximately  355,000  new  cases  of  anogenital  warts
occurred  every  year  (1199).  Three  HPV  vaccines  are  licensed  in  the  United  States:
Ceravrix,  a  2-valent  vaccine  (2vHPV)  that  targets  HPV  types  16  and  18;  Gardasil,  a
4-valent vaccine (4vHPV) that targets HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18; and Gardasil 9, a
9-valent vaccine (9vHPV) that targets HPV types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58.
Types 16 and 18 account for 66% of all cervical cancers, whereas the five additional
types targeted by the 9-valent vaccine account for 15%. Types 6 and 11 cause >90% of
genital  warts.  Only  9vHPV  vaccine  is  available  in  the  United  States.  ACIP
recommendations
 for
 HPV
 vaccination
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/hpv.html)
 include
 the
following:  HPV  vaccines  are  not  recommended  for  use  in  pregnant  women.  HPV
vaccines can be administered regardless of history of anogenital warts, abnormal Pap
test  or  HPV  test,  or  anogenital  precancer.  Women  who  have  received  HPV  vaccine
should continue routine cervical cancer screening (see Cervical Cancer). HPV vaccine is
available for eligible children and adolescents aged <19 years through the Vaccines for
Children
 (VFC)
 program
 (additional
 information
 is
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/index.html
 or
 by
 calling
 CDC
 INFO
800-232-4636).  For  uninsured  persons  aged  <19  years,  patient  assistance  programs
are  available  from  the  vaccine  manufacturers.  Prelicensure  and  postlicensure  safety
evaluations have determined that the vaccine is well tolerated. With >120 million doses
of  HPV  vaccines  distributed  in  the  United  States,  robust  data  demonstrate  that  HPV
vaccines are safe (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety). Impact-monitoring studies in the
United States have demonstrated reductions of genital warts as well as the HPV types
contained  within  the  quadrivalent  vaccine  (1200–1203).  Settings  that  provide  STI
services should either administer the vaccine to eligible clients within the routine and
catch-up  age  groups  through  age  26  years  who  have  not  started  or  completed  the
vaccine series, or link these persons to another facility equipped to provide the vaccine.
Clinicians  providing  services  to  children,  adolescents,  and  young  adults  should  be
knowledgeable
 about
 HPV
 and
 the
 vaccine
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/who/teens/for-hcp/hpv-resources.html).  HPV  vaccination
has  not  been  associated  with  initiation  of  sexual  activity  or  sexual  risk  behaviors
(1204,1205). Abstaining from sexual activity is the most reliable method for preventing
genital  HPV  infection.  Persons  can  decrease  their  chances  of  infection  by  practicing
consistent and correct condom use and limiting their number of sex partners. Although
these interventions might not fully protect against HPV, they can decrease the chances
of  HPV  acquisition  and  transmission.  HPV  tests  are  available  for  detecting  oncogenic
types  of  HPV  infection  and  are  used  in  the  context  of  cervical  cancer  screening  and
management  or  follow-up  of  abnormal  cervical  cytology  or  histology  (see  Cervical
Cancer).  These  tests  should  not  be  used  for  male  partners  of  women  with  HPV  or
women  aged  <25  years,  for  diagnosis  of  genital  warts,  or  as  a  general  STI  test.
Application of 3%–5% acetic acid, which might cause affected areas to turn white, has
been used by certain providers to detect genital mucosa infected with HPV. The routine
use  of  this  procedure  to  detect  mucosal  changes  attributed  to  HPV  infection  is  not
recommended because the results do not influence clinical management. Treatment is
directed  to  the  macroscopic  (e.g.,  genital  warts)  or  pathologic  precancerous  lesions
caused  by  HPV.  Subclinical  genital  HPV  infection  typically  clears  spontaneously;
therefore,  specific  antiviral  therapy  is  not  recommended  to  eradicate  HPV  infection.
Precancerous  lesions  are  detected  through  cervical  cancer  screening;  HPV-related
precancer should be managed on the basis of existing guidance (see Cervical Cancer).
When counseling persons with anogenital HPV infection, the provider should discuss the
following:  Anogenital  warts  are  a  common  disease,  and  90%  are  caused  by
nononcogenic HPV types 6 or 11. These types can be commonly identified before or at
the same time anogenital warts are detected (1206). HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, and 35
also are occasionally identified in anogenital warts (usually as infections with HPV 6 or
11)  and  can  be  associated  with  foci  of  high-grade  squamous  intraepithelial  lesion
(HSIL),  particularly  among  persons  who  have  HIV  infection.  In  addition  to  anogenital
warts,  HPV  types  6  and  11  have  been  associated  with  conjunctival,  nasal,  oral,  and
laryngeal  warts.  Anogenital  warts  are  usually  asymptomatic;  however,  depending  on
the  size  and  anatomic  location,  they  can  be  painful  or  pruritic.  They  are  usually  flat,
papular,  or  pedunculated  growths  on  the  genital  mucosa.  Anogenital  warts  occur
commonly at certain anatomic sites, including around the vaginal introitus, under the
foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and on the shaft of the circumcised penis. Warts
can  also  occur  at  multiple  sites  in  the  anogenital  epithelium  or  within  the  anogenital
tract  (e.g.,  cervix,  vagina,  urethra,  perineum,  perianal  skin,  anus,  or  scrotum).
Intra-anal warts are observed predominantly in persons who have had receptive anal
intercourse; however, they also can occur among men and women who have not had a
history  of  anal  sexual  contact.  Anogenital  warts  have  decreased  among  adolescents,
young women, and heterosexual men with use of HPV vaccination in multiple countries,
including the United States (1203,1207–1216). Diagnosis of anogenital warts is usually
made by visual inspection but can be confirmed by biopsy, which is indicated if lesions
are  atypical  (e.g.,  pigmented,  indurated,  affixed  to  underlying  tissue,  bleeding,  or
ulcerated  lesions).  Biopsy  might  also  be  indicated  in  the  following  circumstances,
particularly if the patient is immunocompromised (including those with HIV infection):
the  diagnosis  is  uncertain,  the  lesions  do  not  respond  to  standard  therapy,  or  the
disease worsens during therapy. HPV testing is not recommended for anogenital wart
diagnosis  because  test  results  are  not  confirmatory  and  do  not  guide  genital  wart
management.  Some  anogenital  lesions  can  resemble  anogenital  warts  (condyloma
accuminata),  but  do  not  respond  to  anogenital  wart  treatment.  Condyloma  lata,  a
manifestation  of  secondary  syphilis,  can  be  diagnosed  by  serologic  tests  or  through
direct  detection  from  serous  fluid  from  the  lesions  (see  Syphilis,  Diagnostic
Considerations).  The  aim  of  treatment  is  removal  of  the  warts  and  amelioration  of
symptoms,  if  present.  The  appearance  of  warts  also  can  result  in  considerable
psychosocial  distress,  and  removal  can  relieve  cosmetic  concerns.  For  most  patients,
treatment  results  in  resolution  of  the  warts.  If  left  untreated,  anogenital  warts  can
resolve  spontaneously,  remain  unchanged,  or  increase  in  size  or  number.  Because
warts  might  spontaneously  resolve  in  <1  year,  an  acceptable  alternative  for  certain
persons is to forego treatment and wait for spontaneous resolution. Available therapies
for  anogenital  warts  might  reduce,  but  probably  do  not  eradicate,  HPV  infectivity.
Whether  reduction  in  HPV  viral  DNA  resulting  from  treatment  reduces  future
transmission  remains  unknown.  Treatment  of  anogenital  warts  should  be  guided  by
wart  size,  number,  and  anatomic  site;  patient  preference;  cost  of  treatment;
convenience; adverse effects; and provider experience. No definitive evidence indicates
that any one recommended treatment is superior to another, and no single treatment is
ideal for all patients or all warts. Shared clinical decision-making between a patient and
a provider regarding treatment algorithms has been associated with improved clinical
outcomes  and  should  be  encouraged.  Because  all  available  treatments  have
shortcomings,
 clinicians
 sometimes
 use
 combination
 therapy
 (e.g.,
provider-administered  cryotherapy  with  patient-applied  topical  therapy  between  visits
to  the  provider).  However,  limited  data  exist  regarding  the  efficacy  or  risk  for
complications associated with combination therapy. Treatment regimens are classified
as either patient-applied or provider-administered modalities. Patient-applied modalities
are  preferred  by  certain  persons  because  they  can  be  administered  in  the  privacy  of
their home. To ensure that patient-applied modalities are effective, instructions should
be provided to patients while in the clinic, and all anogenital warts should be accessible
and  identified  during  the  clinic  visit.  Follow-up  visits  after  weeks  of  therapy  enable
providers  to  answer  any  questions  about  use  of  the  medication,  address  any  side
effects experienced, and facilitate assessment of the response to treatment. Imiquimod
is  a  patient-applied,  topically  active  immune  enhancer  that  stimulates  production  of
interferon  and  other  cytokines.  Imiquimod  5%  cream  should  be  applied  once  at
bedtime,  3  times/week  for  start  highlight<16  weeksend  highlight  (1217).  Similarly,
imiquimod  3.75%  cream  should  be  applied  once  at  bedtime  every  night  for  start
highlight<8  weeksend  highlight  (1218).  With  either  formulation,  the  treatment  area
should  be  washed  with  soap  and  water  6–10  hours  after  the  application.  Local
inflammatory  reactions,  including  redness,  irritation,  induration,  ulceration  or  erosion,
and vesicles might occur with using imiquimod, and hypopigmentation has also been
described (1219). Limited case reports demonstrate an association between treatment
with imiquimod cream and worsened inflammatory or autoimmune skin diseases (e.g.,
psoriasis,  vitiligo,  or  lichenoid  dermatoses)  (1220–1222).  Data  from  studies  of  human
participants are limited regarding use of imiquimod during pregnancy; however, animal
data  indicate  that  this  therapy  poses  low  risk  (431).  Podofilox  (podophyllotoxin)  is  a
patient-applied antimitotic drug that causes wart necrosis. Podofilox solution (using a
cotton swab) or podofilox gel (using a finger) should be applied to anogenital warts 2
times/day for 3 days, followed by 4 days of no therapy. This cycle can be repeated, as
necessary, for up to four cycles. The total wart area treated should not exceed 10 cm2,
and the total volume of podofilox should be limited to 0.5 mL/day. If possible, the health
care  provider  should  apply  the  initial  treatment  to  demonstrate  proper  application
technique  and  identify  which  warts  should  be  treated.  Mild  to  moderate  pain  or  local
irritation  might  develop  after  treatment.  After  each  treatment,  the  gel  or  solution
should  be  allowed  to  dry.  Patients  should  wash  their  hands  before  and  after  each
application.  Podofilox  is  contraindicated  during  pregnancy  (431).  Sinecatechins  is  a
patient-applied,  green-tea  extract  with  an  active  product  (catechins).  Sinecatechins
15% ointment should be applied 3 times/day (0.5-cm strand of ointment to each wart)
by  using  a  finger  to  ensure  coverage  with  a  thin  layer  of  ointment  until  complete
clearance  of  warts  is  achieved.  This  product  should  not  be  continued  for  >16  weeks
(1223–1225). The medication should not be washed off after use. Genital, anal, and oral
sexual contact should be avoided while the ointment is on the skin. The most common
side effects of sinecatechins are erythema, pruritus or burning, pain, ulceration, edema,
induration,  and  vesicular  rash.  This  medication  is  not  recommended  for  persons  with
HIV  infection,  other  immunocompromised  conditions,  or  genital  herpes  because  the
safety  and  efficacy  of  therapy  has  not  been  evaluated.  The  safety  of  sinecatechins
during  pregnancy  is  unknown.  Cryotherapy  is  a  provider-administered  therapy  that
destroys warts by thermal-induced cytolysis. Health care providers should be trained on
the correct use of this therapy because overtreatment or undertreatment can result in
complications or low efficacy. Pain during and after application of the liquid nitrogen,
followed by necrosis and sometimes blistering, is common. Local anesthesia (topical or
injected) might facilitate therapy if warts are present in many areas or if the area of
warts is large. Surgical therapy has the advantage of eliminating the majority of warts
at a single visit, although recurrence can occur. Surgical removal requires substantial
clinical training, additional equipment, and sometimes a longer office visit. After local
anesthesia is applied, anogenital warts can be physically destroyed by electrocautery,
in which case no additional hemostasis is required. Care should be taken to control the
depth  of  electrocautery  to  prevent  scarring.  Alternatively,  the  warts  can  be  removed
either by tangential excision with a pair of fine scissors or a scalpel, by CO2 laser, or by
curettage. Because most warts are exophytic, this procedure can be accomplished with
a resulting wound that only extends into the upper dermis. Hemostasis can be achieved
with an electrocautery unit or, in cases of minor bleeding, a chemical styptic (e.g., an
aluminum chloride solution). Suturing is neither required nor indicated in the majority of
cases. For patients with large or extensive warts, surgical therapy, including CO2 laser,
might  be  most  beneficial;  such  therapy  might  also  be  useful  for  intraurethral  warts,
particularly  for  those  persons  whose  warts  have  not  responded  to  other  treatments.
Treatment  of  anogenital  and  oral  warts  should  be  performed  in  a  ventilated  room  by
using
 standard
 precautions
(https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/guidelines/isolation/index.html/Isolation2007.pdf#
page)  and  local  exhaust  ventilation  (e.g.,  a  smoke  evacuator)  (1226).  Trichloroacetic
acid (TCA) and bichloroacetic acid (BCA) are provider-administered caustic agents that
destroy  warts  by  chemical  coagulation  of  proteins.  Although  these  preparations  are
widely  used,  they  have  not  been  investigated  thoroughly.  TCA  solution  has  a  low
viscosity, comparable with that of water, and can spread rapidly and damage adjacent
tissues if applied excessively. A small amount should be applied only to the warts and
allowed to dry (i.e., develop white frost on tissue) before the patient sits or stands. If
pain is intense or an excess amount of acid is applied, the area can be covered with
sodium  bicarbonate  (i.e.,  baking  soda),  washed  with  liquid  soap  preparations,  or  be
powdered  with  talc  to  neutralize  the  acid  or  remove  unreacted  acid.  TCA  or  BCA
treatment can be repeated weekly if necessary. Fewer data are available regarding the
efficacy of alternative regimens for treating anogenital warts, which include podophyllin
resin,  intralesional  interferon,  photodynamic  therapy,  and  topical  cidofovir.  Shared
clinical decision-making between the patient and provider regarding benefits and risks
of  these  regimens  should  be  provided.  In  addition,  alternative  regimens  might  be
associated  with  more  side  effects.  Podophyllin  resin  is  no  longer  a  recommended
regimen  because  of  the  number  of  safer  regimens  available,  and  severe  systemic
toxicity has been reported when podophyllin resin was applied to large areas of friable
tissue and was not washed off within 4 hours (1227–1229). Podophyllin resin 10%–25%
in  a  compound  tincture  of  benzoin  might  be  considered  for  provider-administered
treatment under conditions of strict adherence to recommendations. Podophyllin should
be applied to each wart and then allowed to air dry before the treated area comes into
contact with clothing. Overapplication or failure to air dry can result in local irritation
caused  by  spread  of  the  compound  to  adjacent  areas  and  possible  systemic  toxicity.
The  treatment  can  be  repeated  weekly,  if  necessary.  To  avoid  the  possibility  of
complications  associated  with  systemic  absorption  and  toxicity,  application  should  be
limited to <0.5 mL of podophyllin or an area of <10 cm2 of warts per session; the area
to  which  treatment  is  administered  should  not  contain  any  open  lesions,  wounds,  or
friable  tissue;  and  the  preparation  should  be  thoroughly  washed  off  1–4  hours  after
application.  Podophyllin  resin  preparations  differ  in  the  concentration  of  active
components and contaminants. Shelf life and stability of podophyllin preparations are
unknown.  The  safety  of  podophyllin  during  pregnancy  has  not  been  established.
Anogenital warts typically respond within 3 months of therapy. Factors that might affect
response  to  therapy  include  immunosuppression  and  treatment  compliance.  Warts
located on moist surfaces or in intertriginous areas respond best to topical treatment. A
new  treatment  modality  should  be  selected  when  no  substantial  improvement  is
observed after a complete course of treatment or in the event of severe side effects;
treatment  response  and  therapy-associated  side  effects  should  be  evaluated
throughout  the  therapy  course.  Complications  occur  rarely  when  treatment  is
administered  correctly.  Persistent  hypopigmentation  or  hyperpigmentation  can  occur
with  ablative  modalities  (e.g.,  cryotherapy  and  electrocautery)  and  have  been
described  with  immune  modulating  therapies  (e.g.,  imiquimod  cream).  Depressed  or
hypertrophic scars are uncommon but can occur, especially if patients have insufficient
time  to  heal  between  treatments.  Rarely,  treatment  can  result  in  chronic  pain
syndromes (e.g., vulvodynia and hyperesthesia of the treatment site) or, in the case of
anal  warts,  painful  defecation  or  fistulas.  When  counseling  persons  with  anogenital
warts, the provider should discuss the following: Persons should inform current partners
about having genital warts because the types of HPV that cause warts can be passed on
to partners. Partners should be counseled that they might already have HPV despite no
visible  signs  of  warts;  therefore,  HPV  testing  of  sex  partners  of  persons  with  genital
warts  is  not  recommended.  Partners  might  benefit  from  a  physical  examination  to
detect  genital  warts  and  tests  for  other  STIs.  No  recommendations  can  be  made
regarding informing future sex partners about a diagnosis of genital warts because the
duration  of  viral  persistence  after  warts  have  resolved  is  unknown.  Podofilox,
podophyllin,  and  sinecatechins  should  not  be  used  during  pregnancy.  Imiquimod
appears  to  pose  low  risk  but  should  be  avoided  until  more  data  are  available.
Anogenital  warts  can  proliferate  and  become  friable  during  pregnancy.  Although
removal of warts during pregnancy can be considered, resolution might be incomplete
or poor until pregnancy is complete. Rarely, HPV types 6 and 11 can cause respiratory
papillomatosis  among  infants  and  children,  although  the  route  of  transmission  (i.e.,
transplacental, perinatal, or postnatal) is not completely understood. Whether cesarean
delivery prevents respiratory papillomatosis among infants and children also is unclear
(1230);  therefore,  cesarean  delivery  should  not  be  performed  solely  to  prevent
transmission of HPV infection to the newborn. Cesarean delivery is indicated for women
with anogenital warts if the pelvic outlet is obstructed or if vaginal delivery would result
in  excessive  bleeding.  Pregnant  women  with  anogenital  warts  should  be  counseled
about  the  low  risk  for  warts  on  the  larynx  of  their  infants  or  children  (recurrent
respiratory  papillomatosis).  Persons  with  HIV  infection  or  who  are  otherwise
immunosuppressed are more likely to develop anogenital warts than those who do not
have HIV (1231). Moreover, such persons can have larger or more numerous lesions,
might not respond to therapy as well as those who are immunocompetent, and might
have  more  frequent  recurrences  after  treatment  (1231,1232–1234).  Despite  these
factors,  data  do  not  support  altered  approaches  to  treatment  for  persons  with  HIV
infection.  Squamous  cell  carcinomas  arising  in  or  resembling  anogenital  warts  might
occur  more  frequently  among  immunosuppressed  persons,  therefore  requiring  biopsy
for  confirmation  of  diagnosis  for  suspicious  cases  (1235–1237).  Biopsy  of  an  atypical
wart might reveal HSIL or cancer of the anogenital tract. In this instance, referral to a
specialist for treatment is recommended. Persistent infection with high-risk (oncogenic)
types  of  HPV  has  a  causal  role  in  approximately  all  cervical  cancers  and  in  certain
vulvar,  vaginal,  penile,  anal,  and  oropharyngeal  cancers  (1238).  However,  cervical
cancer is the only HPV-associated cancer for which routine screening is recommended.
Recommendations  for  cervical  cancer  screening  in  the  United  States  are  based  on
systematic  evidence  reviews  by  major  medical  and  advocacy  organizations,  including
USPSTF (174), ACS (177), and ACOG (175). Over time, general alignment across these
organizations  has  emerged  as  to  when  to  start  and  end  cervical  cancer  screening  as
well  as  the  periodicity  of  screening.  Although  no  single  guideline  universally  guides
screening practices in the United States, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
required  Medicaid  and  new  private  health  insurance  plans  to  provide  coverage  for
preventive services graded A or B by USPSTF, which includes cervical cancer screening.
In addition, the National Center for Quality Assurance provides a set of measures (the
Healthcare  Effectiveness  Data  and  Information  Set  [HEDIS])  for  up-to-date  cervical
cancer
 screening
 that
 aligns
 with
 USPSTF
 recommendations
(https://www.ncqa.org/hedis/measures/cervical-cancer-screening).
 The
 Center
 for
Medicaid and Medicare Services uses the same measure as HEDIS to measure cervical
cancer  screening  performance.  USPSTF  screening  recommendations  apply  to  persons
with  a  cervix  at  average  risk,  defined  as  those  with  no  previous  cervical  cancer  or
high-grade precancer, not currently under close follow-up for a recent abnormal result,
not  immunocompromised  (e.g.,  persons  with  HIV),  and  who  had  no  exposure  to
diethylstilbestrol  in  utero.  Among  these  persons,  screening  should  be  performed
starting at age 21 years and continue through age 65 years. Testing can be performed
using  either  conventional  or  liquid-based  cytologic  tests  (i.e.,  Pap  tests).  For  persons
aged ≥30 years, screening can include FDA-cleared tests for high-risk, oncogenic types
of  HPV.  For  cytopathologic  testing,  clinics  should  use  CLIA-certified  laboratories  using
acceptable  terminology  (Bethesda  2001  or  LAST  terminology)  (1239).  Annual  cervical
cancer  screening  is  not  recommended  for  persons  at  average  risk.  Instead,  cytology
testing is recommended every 3 years for persons aged 21–29 years. For persons aged
30–65  years,  a  cytology  test  every  3  years,  an  HPV  test  alone  every  5  years,  or  a
cytology test plus an HPV test (cotest) every 5 years is recommended. Cotesting can be
done by either collecting one sample for the cytology test and another for the HPV test
or by using the remaining liquid cytology material for the HPV test. Cervical screening
programs should screen those who have received HPV vaccination in the same manner
as  those  that  are  unvaccinated.  Screening  is  not  recommended  before  age  21  years
among those at average risk. For those aged 30–65 years, cytology alone or primary
HPV testing is preferred by USPSTF; however, cotesting can be used as an alternative
approach.  ACOG  (1240),  ACS  (177),  and  USPSTF  (174)  each  have  screening
recommendations (1241) (Table 1). Clinics should weigh the benefits of each screening
strategy as well as their resources, such as time and cost, in deciding on which of the
three  possible  screening  strategies  to  implement.  Decision  analytic  models  (1242)
estimating the benefits, harms, and costs (1243) of several different strategies might
be  useful  in  making  this  determination  (174,1244,1245).  Adopting  recommended
screening  and  follow-up  procedures,  including  screening  methods,  results  provision,
and follow-up, can lead to success in implementing cervical cancer screening in clinics
(1246).  Patients  should  be  provided  a  copy  of  their  test  results;  those  with  normal
results  should  be  provided  information  on  follow-up  visits  and  the  importance  of
continued cervical cancer screening, if applicable. Those with abnormal screening tests
should  be  managed  per  published  guidelines.  National  consensus  guidelines  are
available for the management of abnormal cervical cancer screening tests (1247). HPV
testing  or  cotesting  is  preferred  to  cytology  alone  for  surveillance  after  an  abnormal
screening  test  result.  These  guidelines  base  management  recommendations  on
case-by-case assessment of risk considering past screening history and current results
(see Follow-Up). Patients with abnormal cervical cancer screening test results should be
counseled  about  those  results  (see  Counseling  Messages).  The  following  additional
management  considerations  are  associated  with  performing  Pap  tests  and  HPV  tests:
Persons might believe the cytology (Pap test) or HPV test screens for conditions other
than  cervical  cancer,  or  they  might  be  confused  by  abnormal  results  (1252–1254).
Health  care  providers,  as  trusted  sources  of  information  about  HPV  infections  and
abnormal cytology test results, have an important role in educating persons about HPV
and  can  moderate  the  psychosocial  impact  of  abnormal  results  (1255,1256).  Persons
should be counseled on the risks, uncertainties, and benefits of screening (174,1257).
An abnormal cytology test or a positive HPV test can cause short-term anxiety, stress,
fear,  and  confusion,  possibly  decreasing  the  patient’s  ability  to  absorb  and  retain
information and acting as a barrier to follow-up care (1258–1261). A positive HPV test
might  elicit  concerns  about  partners,  worries  about  disclosure,  and  feelings  of  guilt,
anger,  and  stigmatization  (1260).  Providers  should  frame  HPV  positivity  in  a  neutral,
nonstigmatizing  context  and  emphasize  its  common,  asymptomatic,  and  transient
nature. Providers also should emphasize that HPV infections often are shared between
partners but it is often not possible to know the origin of an HPV infection; HPV tests
might become positive many years after initial exposure due to reactivation of latent
infections in both male and female partners. Having an HPV infection should not raise
concerns  about  a  male  partner’s  health  (1262).  Providers  should  communicate  the
meaning of both the cytology and HPV test results to patients at screening. Providers
also
 should
 screen
 for
 tobacco
 use
 and
 perform
 cessation
 counseling
(www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/committee-opinion/articles/2011/09/tobacco-us
e-and-womens-health). Smoking contributes to the progression of CIN, with both active
and passive smoking associated with squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix in women
with  HPV  16  or  18  infection  (1263–1266).  Clinics  can  use  the  evidence-based
interventions in the Community Preventive Services Task Force guidelines to promote
cervical
 cancer
 screening
 in
 their
 communities
(https://www.thecommunityguide.org/findings/cancer-screening-multicomponent-interv
entions-cervical-cancer). Implementing interventions that increase community demand
for screening (1266) (e.g., client reminders, client incentives, media, group education,
or  one-on-one  education)  together  with  those  that  increase  community  access  to
screening (e.g., reducing structural barriers and reducing client out-of-pocket costs) is
effective  in  increasing  cervical  cancer  screening  coverage.  These  interventions  are
more effective if they are implemented with interventions to increase provider delivery
of screening services (e.g., provider assessment and feedback, provider incentives, and
provider
 reminders).
 Print
 materials
 and
 online
 resources
 are
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/cervical/basic_info/screening.htm
 and
https://www.cdc.gov/std/hpv/facts-brochures.htm. Patient navigators can be effective in
improving both screening and follow-up after abnormal results (1267). When counseling
persons about cervical cancer screening, the provider should discuss the following: The
benefit of disclosing a positive HPV test to current and future sex partners is unclear.
The  following  counseling  messages  can  be  communicated  to  sex  partners:  Additional
messages for partners include the messages for persons with HPV (see Cervical Cancer
Screening; Counseling Messages). Persons who are pregnant should be screened at the
same intervals as those who are not. A swab, Ayre’s spatula, or cytobrush can be used
for  obtaining  cytology  test  samples  during  pregnancy  (1268–1270).  Several  studies
have documented an increased risk for cervical precancers and cancers in individuals
with HIV infection (1271–1273). Adolescents with HIV should be screened 1 year after
onset of sexual activity but no later than age 21 years. Sexually active persons should
be  screened  at  the  time  of  the  initial  HIV  diagnosis.  Conventional  or  liquid-based
cytology (Pap test) should be used as primary HPV testing and is not recommended in
individuals with HIV. Cotesting (cytology and HPV test) can be done in individuals aged
≥30 years with HIV. Annual screening is recommended for persons with HIV infection;
after 3 years of consecutive normal cytology results or normal cotest (normal cytology
and  negative  HPV  test),  the  screening  interval  can  be  increased  to  every  3  years.
Lifelong screening is recommended among persons with HIV infection. Providers should
defer  to  existing  Guidelines  for  the  Prevention  and  Treatment  of  Opportunistic
Infections in Adults and Adolescents with HIV for guidance on cervical cancer screening
and management of results in persons with HIV (98). Prevalence of HPV infection is high
among  those  aged  <21  years  (174);  however,  HPV  infections  and  squamous
intraepithelial  lesions  caused  by  HPV  in  adolescents  are  more  likely  to  regress  than
those  in  older  persons.  For  these  reasons,  cervical  cancer  screening  and  HPV  testing
are not recommended in immunocompetent adolescents. However, for adolescents with
HIV infection, providers should screen 1 year after onset of sexual activity, regardless of
age  or  mode  of  HIV  acquisition  (e.g.,  perinatally  acquired  or  sexually  acquired)  (98);
such  screening  is  warranted  because  of  the  reported  high  rate  of  progression  of
abnormal  cytology  in  adolescents  with  HIV.  Clinical  tests  for  HPV  are  used  for  the
following: cervical cancer screening as a primary test, cervical cancer screening with a
cytology  test,  triage  of  some  abnormal  cervical  cytology  results,  follow-up  after
abnormal screening test results, follow-up after a colposcopy in which no CIN 2 or CIN 3
is found, and follow-up after treatment of cervical precancers. These tests are only FDA
cleared  for  use  with  cervical  specimens,  not  oral  or  anal  specimens.  Testing  for
nononcogenic
 HPV
 types
 (e.g.,
 types
 6
 and
 11)
 is
 not
 recommended
(https://www.asccp.org/guidelines).  FDA-cleared  HPV  tests  detect  viral  DNA  or
messenger RNA. Several FDA-cleared tests for HPV are available for use in the United
States. The Cobas 4800 HPV test (Roche Molecular Diagnostics) and the Onclarity HPV
test (Becton Dickinson) can detect the presence of 14 oncogenic HPV types (types 16,
18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68), as well as individual types 16 and
18, and are cleared for primary cervical cancer screening. Other HPV tests are cleared
for use in conjunction with a cytology test or to triage some abnormal cervical cytology
results; they should not be used for primary HPV testing because they are not cleared
for  this  purpose.  These  tests  include  the  Hybrid  Capture  2  High-Risk  HPV  DNA  test
(Qiagen), the Cervista HPV High-Risk DNA and HPV 16/18 DNA tests (Hologics), and the
APTIMA HR HPV (Gen Probe) test. All HPV assays should be FDA cleared and used only
for  the  appropriate  indications  (https://www.fda.gov/media/122799/download)  (158).
HPV  testing  should  not  be  performed  in  the  following  situations:  Unlike  cytology,
samples for HPV testing have the potential to be collected by the patient and mailed to
health programs for analysis, thus self-collection might be one strategy for increasing
screening  rates  among  populations  where  screening  rates  are  low.  Self-collection  for
HPV testing is not cleared by FDA or recommended by U.S. medical organizations (174).
If the result of the cytology (Pap test) is abnormal, follow-up care should be provided
according  to  the  2019  ASCCP  Risk-Based  Management  Consensus  Guidelines  for
Abnormal  Cervical  Cancer  Screening  Tests  and  Cancer  Precursors  (158).  Clinics  that
serve clients who might have difficulty adhering to follow-up recommendations and for
whom  linkage  to  care  is  unlikely  should  consider  offering  in-house  colposcopy  and
biopsy  services.  Consensus  guidelines  for  management  of  abnormal  cervical  cancer
screening  tests  combine  patient-level  risk  data  with  clinical  action  thresholds  to
generate personalized management recommendations (Table 2). This framework allows
management on the basis of risk for CIN 3, not specific test results. The guidelines were
designed  to  identify  persons  at  high  risk  who  require  colposcopy  or  expedited
treatment and persons at low risk who might be able to safely defer invasive diagnostic
procedures.  The  risk-based  framework  was  designed  to  easily  incorporate  future
revisions,  such  as  the  inclusion  of  new  technologies  for  screening  and  management.
Use  of  the  guidelines  can  be  facilitated  by  electronic  technology  that  is  continually
updated,
 such
 as
 a
 smartphone
 application
 or
 the
 website
(https://www.asccp.org/Default.aspx).
 The
 following
 are
 highlights
 of
 the
 new
management guidelines: Anal cancer is rare in the general population (1–2 cases per
100,000  person-years);  however,  incidence  is  substantially  higher  among  specific
populations, including MSM with HIV infection (80–131 cases per 100,000 person-years),
men  with  HIV  infection  (40–60  cases  per  100,000  person-years),  women  with  HIV
infection (20–30 cases per 100,000 person-years), and MSM without HIV infection (14
cases per 100,000 person-years) (1275–1279). Incidence is variable among women with
previous  HPV-related  gynecologic  dysplasia  and  cancer  (6–63  cases  per  100,000
person-years)  (1280,1281).  Persistent  HPV  infection  might  be  a  risk  factor  for
preventable
 HPV-associated
 second
 primary
 cancers
 among
 survivors
 of
HPV-associated cancers (1282). Data are insufficient to recommend routine anal cancer
screening with anal cytology in persons with HIV infection, MSM without HIV infection,
and the general population. An annual digital anorectal examination (DARE) might be
useful to detect masses on palpation in persons with HIV infection and possibly in MSM
without HIV with a history of receptive anal intercourse (98). More evidence is needed
concerning  the  natural  history  of  anal  intraepithelial  neoplasia,  the  best  screening
methods  and  target  populations,  the  safety  and  response  to  treatments,  and  other
programmatic  considerations  before  screening  can  be  routinely  recommended.
Providers should discuss anal cancer risk with their patients among specific populations
to guide management. According to the HIV Opportunistic Infection guidelines and the
International Anal Neoplasia Society, a DARE should be performed to detect early anal
cancer in persons with HIV infection and MSM without HIV with a history of receptive
anal  intercourse  (98,1283).  DARE  is  acceptable  to  patients  and  has  a  low  risk  for
adverse  outcomes  (1284,1285).  Data  are  insufficient  to  guide  initiation  of  DARE  at  a
defined age or optimal intervals for examination. Whereas anal HSIL is observed among
young adults, cancer incidence begins to increase after the early 30s and continues to
increase as a function of age. Data are insufficient to recommend routine anal cancer
screening with anal cytology among populations at risk for anal cancer. Certain clinical
centers perform anal cytology to screen for anal cancer among populations at high risk
(e.g.,  persons  with  HIV  infection,  MSM,  and  those  having  receptive  anal  intercourse),
followed  by  high-resolution  anoscopy  (HRA)  for  those  with  abnormal  cytologic  results
(e.g., ACS-US, LSIL, or HSIL). Sensitivity and specificity of anal cytology to detect HSIL
are limited (sensitivity 55%–89% and specificity 40%–67%) (1286–1291). Health centers
that initiate a cytology-based screening program should only do so if referrals to HRA
and biopsy are available. HRA can be used for diagnosis of HSIL, to monitor response to
therapy,  or  to  conduct  surveillance  of  HSIL  for  evidence  of  progression.  HRA  is  the
primary  method  used  for  diagnosis  of  superficially  invasive  squamous  carcinoma,  a
very  early  form  of  anal  cancer  that  is  not  palpable  on  DARE.  However,  data  are
insufficient to conclude whether use of HRA leads to reductions in anal cancer incidence
or  improves  anal  cancer  morbidity  and  mortality.  An  ongoing  clinical  trial  is
investigating whether treatment of HSIL is effective in reducing the incidence of anal
cancer  among  persons  with  HIV  infection  (NCT02135419).  HPV  tests  (using  high-risk
HPV  types)  are  not  clinically  useful  for  anal  cancer  screening  because  of  a  high
prevalence  of  anal  HPV  infection  among  populations  at  high  risk,  particularly  MSM
(1278,1289,1290). No standard HPV-based algorithms exist for anal cancer screening,
due  to  the  high  prevalence  of  high-risk  HPV  infection  among  groups  at  risk.  Multiple
office-based  treatments  exist  for  anal  HSIL,  including  ablative  methods  (e.g.,  laser,
electrocautery,  or  infrared  coagulation)  and  topical  patient-applied  therapies  (e.g.,
imiquimod).
 Recurrence
 rates
 with
 both
 provider-applied
 and
 patient-applied
treatments are high, ranging from approximately 50% at 1 year to 77% after 3 years
(1289,1292,1293). In addition, evidence exists that HSIL might spontaneously regress
without treatment (1294,1295). Shared decision-making about treatment for anal HSIL
is recommended because of limited data on the natural history of anal HSIL, including
factors  related  to  progression  or  regression  of  lesions.  Top  HAV  infection  has  an
incubation period of approximately 28 days (range: 15–50 days) (1296). HAV replicates
in the liver and is shed in high concentrations in feces from 2–3 weeks before to 1 week
after the onset of clinical illness. HAV infection produces a self-limited disease that does
not result in chronic infection or chronic liver disease. However, approximately 10% of
patients  experience  a  relapse  of  symptoms  during  the  6  months  after  acute  illness.
Acute liver failure from hepatitis A is rare (overall case-fatality rate: 0.5%). The risk for
symptomatic  infection  is  directly  related  to  age,  with  approximately  70%  of  adults
having  symptoms  compatible  with  acute  viral  hepatitis  and  the  majority  of  children
having either asymptomatic or unrecognized infection. Antibody produced in response
to HAV infection persists for life and confers protection against reinfection (1297). HAV
infection  is  primarily  transmitted  by  the  fecal-oral  route,  by  either  person-to-person
contact or through consumption of contaminated food or water (1298). Transmission of
HAV  during  sexual  activity  probably  results  from  fecal-oral  contact.  Although  viremia
occurs  early  during  infection  and  can  persist  for  weeks  after  symptom  onset,
bloodborne transmission of HAV is uncommon (1299). Transmission by saliva has not
been demonstrated. In the United States, of the hepatitis A cases accompanied by risk
information, a particular risk was identified among only 23.8% (13,372). Among cases
with  a  risk  factor  identified,  a  recognized  foodborne  or  waterborne  outbreak  was  the
most commonly identified risk (49.6%). Other infection sources identified in the United
States include MSM; persons who use injecting drugs; sexual and household contacts;
those experiencing homelessness; international travelers; those with children attending
a  nursery,  childcare,  or  preschool;  and  persons  working  in  such  settings  (13,372).
Diagnosis  of  HAV  infection  cannot  be  made  on  a  clinical  basis  alone  but  requires
serologic testing. Presence of IgM antibody to HAV is diagnostic of acute HAV infection.
A  positive  test  for  total  anti-HAV  indicates  immunity  to  HAV  infection  but  does  not
differentiate current from previous HAV infection. Although usually not sensitive enough
to  detect  the  low  level  of  protective  antibody  after  vaccination,  anti-HAV  tests  also
might be positive after hepatitis A vaccination. Patients with acute HAV infection usually
require  only  supportive  care,  with  no  restrictions  in  diet  or  activity.  Hospitalization
might  be  necessary  for  patients  who  become  dehydrated  because  of  nausea  and
vomiting  and  is  crucial  for  patients  with  signs  or  symptoms  of  acute  liver  failure.
Medications that might cause liver damage or are metabolized by the liver should be
used with caution among persons with HAV infection. Vaccination is the most effective
means of preventing HAV transmission among persons at risk for infection (e.g., MSM,
injecting  drug  users,  and  persons  with  chronic  liver  disease)  who  did  not  receive
hepatitis  A  vaccination  during  childhood.  Hepatitis  A  vaccines  are  prepared  from
formalin-inactivated,  cell-culture–derived  HAV.  Two  monovalent  vaccines  (Havrix  and
Vaqta are approved by FDA for persons aged ≥12 months (Table 3). These vaccines are
available  for  eligible  children  and  adolescents  aged  <19  years  through  the  VFC
program (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/index.html). Administered IM in a
2-dose  series  at  0  and  6–12  months,  hepatitis  A  vaccines  induce  protective  antibody
levels among virtually all adults. By 1 month after the first dose, 94%–100% of adults
have  protective  antibody  levels,  and  after  a  second  dose,  100%  achieve  protective
levels  (1297,1300,1301).  Kinetic  models  of  antibody  decrease  among  adults  indicate
that  protective  levels  persist  for  >40  years  (1302–1304).  A  study  of  Alaska  Natives
demonstrated that seropositivity for hepatitis A persists for >20 years after completing
2-dose vaccination at age 12–21 months (1302). Anti-HAV persistence of >20 years was
demonstrated  among  immunocompetent  adults  vaccinated  with  a  2-dose  hepatitis  A
schedule  as  adults  (1303,1305).  A  combined  hepatitis  A  and  hepatitis  B  vaccine
(Twinrix) has been developed and licensed for use as a 3-dose series for adults aged
≥18  years  at  risk  for  HAV  or  HBV  infections.  When  administered  IM  on  a  0-,  1-,  and
6-month  schedule,  the  vaccine  has  equivalent  immunogenicity  to  that  of  the
monovalent hepatitis A vaccines. Persons at risk for HAV infection (Box 5) (1297) should
be offered vaccine (Table 3). If persons are at risk for both HAV and HBV, the combined
vaccine can be considered. Among U.S.-born adults aged >20 years, HAV susceptibility
prevalence
 (i.e.,
 total
 antibody
 to
 HAV
 was
 negative)
 was
 74.1%
 (95%
CI:  72.9%–75.3%)  during  2007–2016  (1306).Prevaccination  serologic  testing  for  HAV
immunity  before  vaccination  is  not  routinely  recommended;  however,  it  can  be
considered  in  specific  settings  to  reduce  costs  by  not  vaccinating  persons  who  are
already immune. Prevaccination serologic testing should not be a barrier to vaccination
of  susceptible  persons,  especially  for  populations  that  are  difficult  to  access.  If
prevaccination testing is performed, commercially available tests for total anti-HAV or
IgG anti-HAV should be used (1297). Persons for whom prevaccination testing will likely
be  most  cost-effective  include  adults  who  were  either  born  in  or  lived  for  extensive
periods  in  geographic  areas  where  HAV  endemicity  is  high  or  intermediate  (1297).
Prevaccination  serologic  testing  of  children  is  not  indicated  because  of  the  low
prevalence  of  infection  among  that  age  group.  For  populations  who  are  expected  to
have high rates of previous HAV infection, vaccination history should be obtained when
feasible  before  testing  or  vaccination.  Vaccination  should  not  be  postponed  if
vaccination  history  cannot  be  obtained,  records  are  unavailable,  or  prevaccination
testing  is  infeasible.  Vaccinating  persons  immune  from  natural  infection  carries  no
known risk, nor does giving extra doses of hepatitis A vaccine (1307). Vaccination of a
person who is already immune is not harmful. Persons who have a documented history
of ≥2 doses of hepatitis A vaccine do not need further vaccination or serologic testing.
Serologic  testing  for  immunity  is  unnecessary  after  routine  vaccination  of  infants,
children,  or  adults  (1297).  Testing  for  anti-HAV  antibody  after  vaccination  is
recommended  for  persons  whose  subsequent  clinical  management  depends  on
knowledge  of  their  immune  status  and  persons  for  whom  revaccination  might  be
indicated (e.g., persons with HIV infection and other immunocompromising conditions).
Persons who recently have been exposed to HAV and who previously have not received
hepatitis  A  vaccine  should  be  administered  a  single  dose  of  monovalent  hepatitis  A
vaccine or immunoglobulin (IG) (0.1 mL/kg body weight) as soon as possible, ideally <2
weeks  after  exposure  because  the  efficacy  of  vaccine  or  IG  when  administered  >2
weeks  after  exposure  has  not  been  established  (1297).  In  most  cases,  monovalent
hepatitis A vaccine at the age-appropriate dose is preferred over IG for PEP. Advantages
of  hepatitis  A  vaccine  for  PEP  include  induction  of  active  immunity,  longer-term
protection, ease of administration, and better acceptability and availability. Decisions to
use vaccine versus IG should be guided by patient characteristics associated with more
severe  manifestations  of  HAV  infection  (e.g.,  older  age,  immunocompromising
conditions,  and  chronic  liver  disease)  and  the  magnitude  of  the  risk  for  HAV
transmission resulting from the exposure (1297). IG should be used for children aged
<6  months,  immunocompromised  persons,  persons  with  chronic  liver  disease,  and
persons for whom vaccine is contraindicated. IG can be administered to persons aged
>40 years, in addition to hepatitis A vaccine (1297). IG administered IM can provide PEP
against  HAV  (Table  4).  IG  is  a  sterile  solution  of  concentrated  immunoglobulins
prepared  from  pooled  human  plasma  processed  by  cold  ethanol  fractionation.  In  the
United  States,  IG  is  produced  only  from  plasma  that  has  tested  negative  for  HBsAg,
antibodies  to  HIV  and  HCV,  and  HIV  and  HCV  RNA.  In  addition,  the  process  used  to
manufacture IG inactivates viruses (e.g., HBV, HCV, and HIV). When administered IM <2
weeks after exposure to HAV, IG is >85% effective in preventing HAV infection (1308).
If IG is administered to persons for whom hepatitis A vaccine also is recommended, a
dose of vaccine should be provided simultaneously with IG in different anatomic sites
(e.g.,  different  limbs)  as  soon  as  possible,  and  the  second  vaccine  dose  should  be
administered according to the licensed schedule to complete the series. The combined
vaccine can be considered for persons among whom both hepatitis A and hepatitis B
vaccine is recommended (13,1297,1302–1304). For persons with HIV infection, antibody
response can be directly related to CD4+ T-cell levels. Although persons with HIV who
have  lower  CD4+  T-cell  counts  or  percentages  might  have  a  weaker  response  to  the
vaccine,  vaccination  should  not  be  delayed  for  the  CD4+  T-cell  count  to  exceed  a
certain  threshold  because  of  the  prolonged  risk  for  HAV  exposure  created  by  missed
opportunities  to  vaccinate.  The  incubation  period  for  HBV  infection  from  time  of
exposure  to  symptom  onset  ranges  from  6  weeks  to  6  months.  The  highest
concentrations  of  HBV  are  located  in  blood,  with  lower  concentrations  in  other  body
fluids  including  wound  exudates,  semen,  vaginal  secretions,  and  saliva  (1309,1310).
HBV  is  more  infectious  and  more  stable  in  the  environment  than  other  bloodborne
pathogens (e.g., HCV or HIV). HBV infection can be either self-limited or chronic. Among
adults,  approximately  half  of  newly  acquired  HBV  infections  are  symptomatic,  and
approximately 1% of reported cases result in acute liver failure and death (1311). Risk
for  chronic  infection  is  inversely  related  to  age  at  acquisition;  approximately  90%  of
infected  infants  and  30%  of  infected  children  aged  <5  years  become  chronically
infected,  compared  with  2%–6%  of  persons  who  become  infected  as  adults  (1312).
Among persons with chronic HBV infection, the risk for premature death from cirrhosis
or  hepatocellular  carcinoma  is  15%–25%  (1313).  HBV  is  efficiently  transmitted  by
percutaneous or mucous membrane exposure to HBV-infected blood or body fluids that
contain HBV. The primary risk factors associated with infection among adolescents and
adults  are  unprotected  sex  with  an  infected  partner,  having  multiple  partners,  men
having  sex  with  men,  having  history  of  other  STIs,  and  injecting  drug  use  (233).  In
addition,  studies  have  demonstrated  other  modes  of  HBV  transmission,  including
premastication and lapses in health care infection control procedures, as less common
sources  of  transmission  (1314–1317).  CDC’s  national  strategy  for  eliminating
transmission of HBV infection includes prevention of perinatal infection through routine
screening of all pregnant women for HBsAg and immunoprophylaxis of infants born to
mothers  with  HBsAg  or  mothers  whose  HBsAg  status  is  unknown,  routine  infant
vaccination,  vaccination  of  previously  unvaccinated  children  and  adolescents  through
age 18 years, and vaccination of previously unvaccinated adults at increased risk for
infection (12). High vaccination coverage rates with subsequent decreases in acute HBV
infection  incidence  have  been  achieved  among  infants  and  adolescents  (1318).  The
vaccination  of  persons  as  children  and  adolescents  likely  has  led  to  improved
vaccination  coverage  among  adults  aged  <30  years  (1319)  and  corresponding  lower
rates of acute HBV infection among this group. In contrast, vaccination coverage among
the  majority  of  adult  populations  at  high  risk  aged  ≥30  years  (e.g.,  persons  with
multiple sex partners, MSM, and injecting drug users) has remained low (1320,1321);
these  groups  account  for  the  highest  rates  of  preventable  acute  infections
(12,1319,1322).  STD  clinics  and  other  health  care  settings  providing  STI  services  to
adults at high risk for infection should administer hepatitis B vaccine to those who are
unvaccinated.  Diagnosis  of  acute  or  chronic  HBV  infection  requires  serologic  testing
(Table 5). Because HBsAg is present in both acute and chronic infection, presence of
IgM antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (IgM anti-HBc) is diagnostic of acute or recently
acquired  HBV  infection.  Antibody  to  HBsAg  (anti-HBs)  is  produced  after  a  resolved
infection and is the only HBV antibody marker present after vaccination. The presence
of  HBsAg  and  anti-HBc,  with  a  negative  test  for  IgM  anti-HBc,  indicates  chronic  HBV
infection.  The  presence  of  total  anti-HBc  alone  might  indicate  acute,  resolved,  or
chronic infection or a false-positive result. No specific therapy is available for persons
with acute HBV infection; treatment is supportive. Persons with chronic HBV infection
should  be  referred  for  evaluation  to  a  provider  experienced  in  managing  such
infections. Therapeutic agents approved by FDA for treatment of chronic HBV infection
can  achieve  sustained  suppression  of  HBV  replication  and  remission  of  liver  disease
(1323).  Two  products  have  been  approved  for  HBV  prevention:  hepatitis  B  immune
globulin (HBIG) for PEP and hepatitis B vaccine (12). HBIG provides temporary (i.e., 3–6
months)  protection  from  HBV  infection  and  is  typically  used  as  PEP  as  an  adjunct  to
hepatitis B vaccination for previously unvaccinated persons or for persons who have not
responded  to  vaccination.  HBIG  is  prepared  from  plasma  known  to  contain  high
concentrations of anti-HBs. The recommended dose of HBIG is 0.06 mL/kg body weight.
Hepatitis B vaccine contains HBsAg produced in yeast by recombinant DNA technology
and  provides  protection  from  HBV  infection  when  used  for  both  pre-exposure
vaccination and PEP. The three available monovalent hepatitis B vaccines for use in the
United States are Recombivax HB, Engerix-B, and Heplisav-B. A combination hepatitis A
and  hepatitis  B  vaccine  for  use  among  persons  aged  ≥18  years,  Twinrix,  also  is
available.  When  selecting  a  hepatitis  B  vaccination  schedule,  health  care  providers
should  consider  the  need  to  achieve  completion  of  the  vaccine  series.  The
recommended HBV dose and schedule varies by product and age of recipient (Table 6).
Three  different  3-dose  schedules  for  adolescents  and  adults  have  been  approved  for
both  monovalent  hepatitis  B  vaccines  (i.e.,  Engerix-B  and  Recombivax  HB);  these
vaccines can be administered at 0, 1, and 6 months; 0, 1, and 4 months; or 0, 2, and 4
months. A 4-dose schedule of Engerix-B at 0, 1, 2, and 12 months is licensed for all age
groups. A 2-dose schedule of Recombivax HB adult formulation (10 µg) is licensed for
adolescents aged 11–15 years, with a 4-month minimal interval between doses. When
scheduled  to  receive  the  second  dose,  adolescents  aged  16–19  years  should  be
switched to a 3-dose series, with doses 2 and 3 consisting of the pediatric formulation
(5  µg)  administered  on  a  recommended  schedule.  Heplisav-B  is  a  new  single-antigen
recombinant  hepatitis  B  vaccine  with  a  novel  cytosine-phosphate-guanine  1018
oligodeoxynucleotide  adjuvant  for  prevention  of  HBV  infection  among  persons  aged
≥18 years, administered as a 2-dose series at 0 and 1 month (>4 weeks apart) (156).
Twinrix is a 3-dose schedule administered at 0, 1, and 6 months to persons aged ≥18
years  at  risk  for  both  HAV  and  HBV  infections.  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  should  be
administered  IM  in  the  deltoid  muscle  and  can  be  administered  simultaneously  with
other  vaccines.  If  the  vaccine  series  is  interrupted  after  the  first  or  second  dose  of
vaccine, the missed dose should be administered as soon as possible. The series does
not need to be restarted after a missed dose. HBV vaccination is available for eligible
children
 and
 adolescents
 aged
 <19
 years
 through
 the
 VFC
 program
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/contacts-state.html).  When  feasible,  the
same  manufacturer’s  vaccines  should  be  used  to  complete  the  series;  however,
vaccination  should  not  be  deferred  when  the  manufacturer  of  the  previously
administered vaccine is unknown or when the vaccine from the same manufacturer is
unavailable  (1324).  Among  adolescents  and  healthy  adults  aged  <40  years,
approximately  30%–55%  achieve  a  protective  antibody  response  (i.e.,  anti-HBs  ≥10
mIU/mL) after the first single-antigen vaccine dose, 75% after the second, and >90%
after the third. Recent clinical trials reported a protective antibody response achieved
among  approximately  90%  of  participants  receiving  Heplisav-B,  compared  with
70.5%–90.2%  of  participants  receiving  Engerix-B  (12).  Vaccine-induced  immune
memory has been demonstrated to persist for >30 years (1325–1327). Periodic testing
to  determine  antibody  levels  after  routine  vaccination  among  immunocompetent
persons is unnecessary, and booster doses of vaccine are not recommended. Hepatitis
B vaccination is usually well tolerated by the majority of recipients. Pain at the injection
site  and  low-grade  fever  are  reported  by  a  minority  of  recipients.  For  children  and
adolescents, a causal association exists between receipt of hepatitis B vaccination and
anaphylaxis.  For  each  1.1  million  doses  of  vaccine  administered,  approximately  one
recipient  will  experience  this  type  of  reaction  (1328);  however,  no  deaths  have  been
reported among these patients (1318,1328). Vaccine is contraindicated for persons with
a history of anaphylaxis after a previous dose of hepatitis B vaccine and persons with a
known  anaphylactic  reaction  to  any  vaccine  component  (1329).  No  other  adverse
events after administration of hepatitis B vaccine have been demonstrated. Hepatitis B
vaccination  is  recommended  for  all  unvaccinated  children  and  adolescents;  all
unvaccinated  adults  at  risk  for  HBV  infection,  especially  injecting  drug  users;  MSM;
adults with multiple sex partners; sex partners, needle-sharing contacts, or household
contacts of persons with chronic hepatitis B; and persons with diabetes and all adults
seeking protection from HBV infection (1318). For adults, acknowledgment of a specific
risk factor is not a requirement for vaccination. Hepatitis B vaccine should be routinely
offered  to  all  unvaccinated  persons  attending  STD  clinics  and  to  all  unvaccinated
persons  seeking  evaluation  or  treatment  for  STIs  in  other  settings,  especially
correctional  facilities,  facilities  providing  substance  misuse  treatment  and  prevention
services,  Federally  Qualified  Health  Centers,  and  settings  serving  MSM  (e.g.,  HIV
infection  care  and  prevention  settings).  If  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is  unavailable  at  a
particular facility, persons should be linked to a setting where they can receive vaccine.
Persons with a reliable vaccination history (i.e., a written, dated record of each dose of
a  complete  series)  or  reliable  history  of  hepatitis  B  infection  (i.e.,  a  written  record  of
infection and serologic results providing evidence of previous infection) do not require
vaccination.  In  all  settings,  vaccination  should  be  initiated  at  the  initial  visit,  even  if
concerns  about  completion  of  the  vaccine  series  exist.  Conducting  prevaccination
serologic  testing  for  susceptibility  just  before  the  initial  vaccine  dose  is  administered
can be considered for identifying persons with chronic HBV infection and, potentially,
reducing the cost of completing the vaccination series for adult populations that have
an expected high prevalence (20%–30%) of HBV infection (e.g., injecting drug users and
MSM, especially those among older age groups, or persons born where HBV endemicity
is  moderate  to  high).  In  addition,  prevaccination  testing  for  susceptibility  is
recommended  for  unvaccinated  household,  sexual,  and  needle-sharing  contacts  of
HBsAg-positive persons (1318). Serologic testing should not be a barrier to vaccination.
The first vaccine dose should be administered immediately after collection of the blood
sample for serologic testing. Vaccination of persons who are immune to HBV infection
because  of  current  or  previous  infection  or  vaccination  is  not  harmful  and  does  not
increase the risk for adverse events. Prevaccination testing should be performed with
HBsAg, anti-HBs, and total anti-HBc to define patients’ HBV clinical status and deliver
recommended care (1330). Persons who test HBsAg positive should receive prevention
counseling and evaluation for antiviral treatment (see Management of Persons Who Are
HBsAg Positive). Persons who test total anti-HBc positive and anti-HBs positive should
be  counseled  that  they  have  had  previous  HBV  infection  and  are  immune.  Those
persons  with  isolated  anti-HBc  (i.e.,  negative  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs)  need  further
assessment to rule out occult HBV infection, and they are at higher risk for reactivation
if  exposed  to  immunosuppressants.  Persons  who  test  negative  to  all  three  HBV
seromarkers should receive the complete vaccination series, with the first vaccine dose
administered
 immediately.
 Postvaccination
 serologic
 testing
 for
 immunity
 is
unnecessary after routine vaccination of adolescents or adults. However, such testing is
recommended  for  persons  whose  subsequent  clinical  management  depends  on
knowledge  of  their  immune  status.  Persons  recommended  to  receive  postvaccination
serologic testing include health care personnel and public safety workers, persons with
HIV infection, sex and needle-sharing partners of HBsAg-positive persons, hemodialysis
patients  and  others  who  might  require  outpatient  hemodialysis  (e.g.,  predialysis,
peritoneal  dialysis,  or  home  dialysis),  and  other  immunocompromised  persons  (e.g.,
hematopoietic  stem-cell  transplant  recipients  or  persons  receiving  chemotherapy)
(1318).  If  indicated,  anti-HBs  testing  should  be  performed  1–2  months  after
administration  of  the  last  dose  of  the  vaccine  series.  Persons  determined  to  have
anti-HBs levels of <10 mIU/mL after the primary vaccine series should be revaccinated
with  a  3-dose  series  and  tested  again  for  anti-HBs  1–2  months  after  the  third  dose.
Persons who do not respond to revaccination should be tested for HBsAg and HBc. If
HBsAg positive, persons should receive recommended management (see Management
of Persons Who Are HBsAg Positive). If HBsAg negative, persons should be considered
susceptible  to  HBV  infection  and  counseled  about  precautions  for  preventing  HBV
infection  and  the  need  for  HBIG  PEP  for  any  known  exposure.  If  isolated  anti-HBc
positive  (i.e.,  negative  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs),  persons  will  need  further  assessment  to
rule  out  occult  HBV  infection  and  are  at  higher  risk  for  reactivation  if  exposed  to
immunosuppressants.  Both  passive  and  active  PEP  (simultaneous  administration  of
HBIG [i.e., 0.06 mL/kg body weight] and hepatitis B vaccine at separate anatomic sites)
and  active  PEP  (administration  of  hepatitis  B  vaccination  alone)  have  been
demonstrated to be highly effective in preventing transmission after exposure to HBV
(12).  HBIG  alone  also  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  effective  in  preventing  HBV
transmission;  however,  with  the  availability  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  HBIG  typically  is
used as an adjunct to vaccination. Unvaccinated persons or persons known not to have
responded  to  a  complete  hepatitis  B  vaccine  series  should  receive  both  HBIG  and
hepatitis  vaccine  as  soon  as  possible  (preferably  ≤24  hours)  after  a  discrete,
identifiable  exposure  to  blood  or  body  fluids  that  contain  blood  from  a  person  with
HBsAg (Table 7). Hepatitis B vaccine should be administered simultaneously with HBIG
at a separate anatomic site, and the vaccine series should be completed by using the
age-appropriate  vaccine  dose  and  schedule  (Table  6).  Exposed  persons  who  are  not
fully  vaccinated  because  they  have  not  completed  the  vaccine  series  should  receive
HBIG (i.e., 0.06 mL/kg body weight) and complete the vaccine series. Persons who have
written  documentation  of  a  complete  hepatitis  B  vaccine  series  who  did  not  receive
postvaccination testing should receive a single vaccine booster dose. Exposed persons
who  are  known  to  have  responded  to  vaccination  by  postvaccination  testing  are
considered protected; therefore, they need no additional doses of vaccine or HBIG. All
persons with an occupational exposure to blood or body fluids that contain HBV should
be  managed  according  to  guidelines  (12).  Unvaccinated  persons  and  persons  with
previous  nonresponse  to  hepatitis  B  vaccination  who  have  a  discrete,  identifiable
exposure to blood or body fluids containing blood from a person with unknown HBsAg
status should receive the hepatitis B vaccine series, with the first dose initiated as soon
as possible after exposure (preferably <24 hours) and the series completed according
to  the  age-appropriate  dose  and  schedule.  Exposed  persons  who  are  not  fully
vaccinated but started the series should complete the vaccine series. Exposed persons
with written documentation of a complete hepatitis B vaccine series who did not receive
postvaccination  testing  require  no  further  treatment.  All  persons  with  HBV  infection
should  be  tested  for  HIV,  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydia.  Recommendations  for
management of all persons with HBsAg include the following: When seeking medical or
dental care, persons who are HBsAg positive should be advised to inform their health
care providers of their HBsAg status so that they can be evaluated and managed. The
following are key counseling messages for persons with HBsAg: Regardless of whether
they have been previously tested or vaccinated, all pregnant women should be tested
for HBsAg at the first prenatal visit and again at delivery if at high risk for HBV infection
(see  STI  Detection  Among  Special  Populations).  Pregnant  women  at  risk  for  HBV
infection  and  without  documentation  of  a  complete  hepatitis  B  vaccine  series  should
receive hepatitis B vaccination. All pregnant women with HBsAg should be reported to
state and local perinatal hepatitis B prevention programs and referred to a specialist.
Information  about  management  of  pregnant  women  with  HBsAg  and  their  infants  is
available  at  https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hbv/perinatalxmtn.htm.  HIV  infection  can
impair the response to hepatitis B vaccination. Persons with HIV should be tested for
anti-HBs  1–2  months  after  the  third  vaccine  dose  (see  Postvaccination  Serologic
Testing). Modified dosing regimens, including a doubling of the standard antigen dose
and administration of additional doses, might increase the response rate and should be
managed
 in
 consultation
 with
 an
 infectious
 disease
 specialist.
 Additional
recommendations  for  management  of  persons  with  HBsAg  and  HIV  infection  are
available (98). HCV infection is the most common chronic bloodborne infection in the
United States, with an estimated 2.4 million persons living with chronic infection (1332).
HCV  is  not  efficiently  transmitted  through  sex  (1333–1335).  Studies  of  HCV
transmission  between  heterosexual  couples  and  MSM  have  yielded  mixed  results;
however, studies have reported either no or minimally increased rates of HCV infection
among partners of persons with HCV infection compared with partners of those without
HCV  (1334,1336–1338).  However,  data  indicate  that  sexual  transmission  of  HCV  can
occur, especially among persons with HIV infection. Increasing incidence of acute HCV
infection  among  MSM  with  HIV  infection  has  been  reported  in  multiple  U.S.
(96,236,239,1339)  and  European  cities  (237,1340–1342).  A  recent  systematic  review
reported  an  HCV  incidence  of  6.35  per  1,000  person  years  among  MSM  with  HIV
infection  (1343).  An  association  exists  with  high-risk  and  traumatic  sexual  practices
(e.g., condomless receptive anal intercourse or receptive fisting) and concurrent genital
ulcerative  disease  or  STI-related  proctitis  (237,1342).  HCV  transmission  among  MSM
with  HIV  infection  has  also  been  associated  with  group  sex  and  chemsex  (i.e.,  using
recreational drugs in a sexual context) (1344–1348). Shedding of HCV in the semen and
in  the  rectum  of  men  with  HIV  infection  has  been  documented  (1349,1350).  Certain
studies  have  revealed  that  risk  increases  commensurate  with  increasing  numbers  of
sex  partners  among  heterosexual  persons  (1337,1338,1351–1353)  and  MSM  with  HIV
infection  (1349,1354–1357),  especially  if  their  partners  are  also  coinfected  with  HIV
(237,1340,1354–1356,1358).  More  recently,  acute  HCV  infections  have  been  reported
among MSM on PrEP, increasing concerns that certain MSM might be at increased risk
for incident HCV infection through condomless sexual intercourse with MSM with HCV
infection  (1359,1360).  Persons  newly  infected  with  HCV  typically  are  either
asymptomatic or have a mild clinical illness. HCV RNA can be detected in blood within
1–3  weeks  after  exposure.  The  average  time  from  exposure  to  antibody  to  HCV
(anti-HCV)  seroconversion  is  4−10  weeks,  and  anti-HCV  can  be  detected  among
approximately
 97%
 of
 persons
 by
 6
 months
 after
 exposure
 (1361–1364)
(https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/hcvfaq.htm#section3).
 Chronic
 HCV
 infection
develops among 75%–85% of persons with HCV infection (1365,1366), and 10%–20% of
persons with chronic infection develop cirrhosis in 20–30 years of active liver disease
(1367). The majority of infected persons remain unaware of their infection because they
are not clinically ill. However, infected persons are a source of transmission to others
and are at risk for cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma decades after infection. HCV
is primarily transmitted parenterally, usually through shared drug-injecting needles and
paraphernalia. HCV also can be transmitted through exposures in health care settings
as a consequence of inadequate infection control practices (1314). Transmission after
receipt of blood from donors and from transplantation of tissues and organs with HCV
infection has occurred only rarely since 1992, when routine screening of these donated
products was mandated in the United States (1367,1369). Tattoos applied in regulated
settings have not been associated with HCV transmission, although those obtained in
certain  settings  have  been  linked  to  such  transmission  (1336).  Occupational  and
perinatal exposures also can result in transmission of HCV; however, such transmission
is uncommon. Acute HCV infection is a reportable condition in 49 states. Matching viral
hepatitis and HIV surveillance registries, and molecular epidemiologic assessments, can
facilitate early detection of social networks of HCV transmission among MSM with HIV
infection.  CDC  recommends  hepatitis  C  screening  at  least  once  in  a  lifetime  for  all
adults  aged  ≥18  years  and  for  all  women  during  each  pregnancy,  except  in  settings
where the prevalence of HCV infection is <0.1% (156). One-time hepatitis C testing is
also  recommended  regardless  of  age,  setting,  or  recognized  conditions  or  exposures
(e.g., HIV infection, history of injecting drug use, or children born to women with HCV
infection). Routine periodic HCV testing is recommended for persons with ongoing risk
factors  (e.g.,  injecting  drug  use  or  hemodialysis).  Testing  for  HCV  infection  should
include  use  of  an  FDA-cleared  test  for  antibody  to  HCV  (i.e.,  immunoassay,  EIA,  or
enhanced CIA and, if recommended, a supplemental antibody test) followed by NAAT to
detect  HCV  RNA  for  those  with  a  positive  antibody  result  (1370).  Persons  with  HIV
infection with low CD4+ T-cell count might require further testing by NAAT because of
the  potential  for  a  false-negative  antibody  assay.  Persons  determined  to  have  HCV
infection  (i.e.,  positive  for  HCV  RNA)  should  be  evaluated  for  treatment.  Antibody  to
HCV remains positive after spontaneously resolving or successful treatment; therefore,
subsequent testing for HCV reinfection among persons with ongoing risk factors should
be  limited  to  HCV  RNA.  Persons  who  have  spontaneous  resolution  or  who  have
undergone  successful  treatment  are  not  immune  to  reinfection.  HCV  infection  is
curable,  and  persons  with  diagnosed  HCV  infection  should  be  linked  to  care  and
treatment.  Providers  should  consult  existing  guidelines  to  learn  about  the  latest
advances  in  treating  HCV  infection  (https://www.hcvguidelines.org)  and  with  hepatitis
specialists,  as  needed.  Persons  at  high  risk  for  transmitting  HCV  to  others  should  be
treated both for individual benefit and to prevent HCV transmission. Because incident
HCV  has  not  been  demonstrated  to  occur  among  heterosexual  couples  followed  over
time  (1334,1371–1373),  condom  use  might  not  be  necessary  in  such  circumstances.
Persons  with  HCV  infection  with  one  long-term,  steady  sex  partner  do  not  need  to
change their sexual practices. However, they should discuss the risk for transmission
with
 their
 partner
 and
 discuss
 the
 need
 for
 testing
 (234)
(https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/index.htm).  Heterosexual  persons  and  MSM  with
HCV  infection  and  more  than  one  partner,  especially  those  with  concurrent  HIV
infection,  should  protect  their  partners  against  HCV  and  HIV  acquisition  by  using
external  latex  condoms  (237,1358,1374)  and  HIV  PrEP.  Partners  of  persons  with  HCV
and HIV should be tested for both infections. All persons with HCV infection for whom
HIV and HBV infection status is unknown should be tested for these infections. Those
who have HIV or HBV infection should be referred for or provided with recommended
care  and  treatment.  Persons  without  previous  exposure  to  HAV  or  HBV  should  be
vaccinated.  Reducing  the  burden  of  HCV  infection  and  disease  in  the  United  States
requires  implementing  both  primary  and  secondary  prevention  activities.  Primary
prevention  reduces  or  eliminates  HCV  transmission,  whereas  secondary  prevention
identifies  persons  through  screening  and  then  provides  treatment  to  reduce  chronic
liver disease and other chronic diseases and HCV transmission. No vaccine for hepatitis
C is available, and prophylaxis with IG is not effective in preventing HCV infection after
exposure.  PEP  using  direct-acting  antivirals  is  not  recommended.  Persons  with  HCV
infection should be provided information about how to protect their liver from further
harm  (i.e.,  hepatotoxic  agents);  for  instance,  persons  with  HCV  infection  should  be
advised  to  avoid  drinking  alcohol  and  taking  any  new  medicines,  including
over-the-counter  or  herbal  medications,  without  checking  with  their  clinician.  In
addition, a need for hepatitis A and B vaccination should be determined; persons who
are  not  immune  should  be  vaccinated.  To  reduce  the  risk  for  transmission  to  others,
persons with HCV infection should be advised not to donate blood, body organs, other
tissue, or semen; not to share any personal items that might have blood on them (e.g.,
toothbrushes or razors); and to cover cuts and sores on the skin to keep the virus from
spreading  by  blood  or  secretions.  Women  with  HCV  infection  do  not  need  to  avoid
pregnancy or breastfeeding, although children born to women with HCV also should be
tested  for  HCV.  Persons  who  use  or  inject  drugs  should  be  counseled  about  the
importance  of  prevention  and  provided  access  to  substance  misuse  treatment,
including medication-assisted treatment, if indicated. Persons who inject drugs should
be  encouraged  to  take  the  following  additional  steps  to  reduce  personal  and  public
health  risks:  No  PEP  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  effective  against  HCV  infection.
Testing  for  HCV  is  recommended  for  health  care  workers  after  percutaneous  or
perimucosal exposures to HCV-positive blood. Prompt identification of acute infection is
vital  because  outcomes  are  improved  when  treatment  is  initiated  early  during  the
illness  course.  All  pregnant  women  should  be  screened  with  each  pregnancy  for  HCV
antibodies  at  the  first  prenatal  visit  in  settings  where  the  HCV  prevalence  is  >0.1%
(https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/index.htm)
 (154,155).
 Although
 the
 rate
 of
transmission is highly variable, more than six of every 100 infants born to women with
HCV  infection  become  infected;  this  infection  occurs  predominantly  during  or  near
delivery,  and  no  treatment  or  delivery  method  (e.g.,  cesarean  delivery)  has  been
demonstrated  to  decrease  this  risk  (1375).  However,  the  risk  is  increased  by  the
presence of maternal HCV viremia at delivery and is twofold to threefold greater if the
woman  has  HIV  infection.  Although  no  recommendations  are  available  for  HCV
treatment  during  pregnancy,  discussion  about  the  individual  risks  and  benefits  of
postpartum  treatment  can  be  considered  in  accordance  with  existing  guidance
(https://www.hcvguidelines.org/unique-populations/pregnancy).  HCV  has  not  been
reported  to  be  transmitted  through  breast  milk,  although  mothers  with  HCV  infection
should consider abstaining from breastfeeding if their nipples are cracked or bleeding.
Infants born to mothers with HCV infection should be tested for HCV infection; children
should be tested for anti-HCV no sooner than age 18 months because anti-HCV from the
mother might last until that age. If diagnosis is desired before the child reaches age 18
months, testing for HCV RNA can be performed at or after the infant’s first well-child
visit  at  age  1–2  months.  HCV  RNA  testing  can  be  repeated  at  a  subsequent  visit,
independent
 of
 the
 initial
 HCV
 RNA
 test
 result
 (1376)
(https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/hcvfaq.htm#section3). All persons with HIV infection
should
 undergo
 serologic
 screening
 for
 HCV
 at
 initial
 evaluation
 (98)
(https://www.hcvguidelines.org). Providers should be aware of the likelihood that MSM
with HIV infection can acquire HCV after initial screening. Because acute HCV infection
acquisition  among  persons  with  HIV  infection  can  occur,  especially  among  MSM,  and
regular  screening  of  those  with  HIV  is  cost-effective  (238,239,1377),  periodic  HCV
screening should be conducted (1378–1380). For persons with HIV infection, hepatitis C
screening with HCV antibody assays (followed by HCV RNA if antibody positive) can be
considered  at  least  yearly,  for  those  at  high  risk  for  infection,  and  more  frequently
depending  on  specific  circumstances  (e.g.,  community  HCV  infection  prevalence  and
incidence,  high-risk  sexual  behavior,  and  concomitant  ulcerative  STIs  and  proctitis).
Antibody to HCV remains positive after spontaneously resolved infection or successful
treatment; therefore, subsequent testing for potential HCV reinfection among persons
with  ongoing  risk  should  be  limited  to  HCV  RNA  testing  only.  Indirect  testing  (e.g.,
alanine  aminotransferase  [ALT])  is  not  recommended  for  detecting  incident  HCV
infections because such testing, especially if performed once a year, can miss persons
who have reverted after acute HCV infection to a normal ALT level at the time of testing
(239)
 (https://www.hcvguidelines.org).
 Conversely,
 ALT
 can
 be
 elevated
 by
antiretroviral  and  other  medications,  alcohol,  and  toxins.  If  ALT  levels  are  being
monitored, persons with HIV infection who experience new or unexplained increases in
ALT  should  be  tested  for  acute  HCV  infection  and  evaluated  for  possible  medication
toxicity  or  excessive  alcohol  use.  Continued  unprotected  sexual  contact  between
partners  with  HIV  can  facilitate  spread  of  HCV  infection  because  the  virus  can  be
recovered from the semen of men with HIV infection (1349,1381). Specific prevention
practices  (e.g.,  barrier  precautions  that  limit  contact  with  body  fluids  during  sexual
contact with other MSM) should be discussed. Because a minimal percentage of persons
with  HIV  infection  do  not  develop  HCV  antibodies,  HCV  RNA  testing  should  be
performed  for  persons  with  HIV  infection  and  unexplained  liver  disease  who  are
anti-HCV negative. The course of liver disease is more rapid among persons with HIV
and HCV, and the risk for cirrhosis is higher than that for persons with HCV infection
alone.
 Top
 Sexually
 transmitted
 gastrointestinal
 syndromes
 include
 proctitis,
proctocolitis,
 and
 enteritis.
 Evaluation
 for
 these
 syndromes
 should
 include
recommended  diagnostic  procedures,  including  anoscopy  or  sigmoidoscopy,  stool
examination for WBCs, and microbiologic workup (e.g., gonorrhea, chlamydia [LGV PCR
if available], herpes simplex NAAT, and syphilis serology). For those with enteritis, stool
culture or LGV PCR also is recommended. Proctitis is inflammation of the rectum (i.e.,
the  distal  10–12  cm)  that  can  be  associated  with  anorectal  pain,  tenesmus,  or  rectal
discharge.  Fecal  leukocytes  are  common.  Proctitis  occurs  predominantly  among
persons who have receptive anal exposures (oral-anal, digital-anal, or genital-anal). N.
gonorrhoeae,  C.  trachomatis  (including  LGV  serovars),  HSV,  and  T.  pallidum  are  the
most common STI pathogens. Genital HSV and LGV proctitis are more prevalent among
persons with HIV infection (545,556,1382). M. genitalium has been detected in certain
cases  of  proctitis  and  might  be  more  common  among  persons  with  HIV  infection
(937,1382). N. meningitidis has been identified as an etiology of proctitis among MSM
with  HIV  infection  (1383).  Proctocolitis  is  associated  with  symptoms  of  proctitis,
diarrhea or abdominal cramps, and inflammation of the colonic mucosa extending to 12
cm  above  the  anus.  Fecal  leukocytes  might  be  detected  on  stool  examination,
depending  on  the  pathogen.  Proctocolitis  can  be  acquired  through  receptive  anal
intercourse or by oral-anal contact, depending on the pathogen. Pathogenic organisms
include  Campylobacter  species,  Shigella  species,  E.  histolytica,  LGV  serovars  of  C.
trachomatis,  and  T.  pallidum.  Among  immunosuppressed  persons  with  HIV  infection,
CMV or other opportunistic agents should be considered. The clinical presentation can
be  mistaken  for  inflammatory  bowel  disease  or  malignancy,  resulting  in  a  delayed
diagnosis  (1384,1385).  Enteritis  usually  results  in  diarrhea  and  abdominal  cramping
without signs of proctitis or proctocolitis. Fecal leukocytes might be detected on stool
examination,  depending  on  the  pathogen.  When  outbreaks  of  gastrointestinal  illness
occur  among  social  or  sexual  networks  of  MSM,  clinicians  should  consider  sexual
transmission as a mode of spread and provide counseling accordingly. Sexual practices
that  can  facilitate  transmission  of  enteric  pathogens  include  oral-anal  contact  or,  in
certain  instances,  direct  genital-anal  contact.  G.  lamblia  is  the  most  frequently
implicated  parasite,  and  bacterial  pathogens  include  Shigella  species,  Salmonella,  E.
coli,  Campylobacter  species,  and  Cryptosporidium.  Outbreaks  of  Shigella  species,
Campylobacter, Cryptosporidium, and microsporidiosis have been reported among MSM
(259,274,1386,1387).  Multiple  enteric  pathogens  and  concurrent  STIs  have  also  been
reported.  Among  immunosuppressed  persons  with  HIV  infection,  CMV  or  other
opportunistic  pathogens  should  be  considered.  Persons  with  symptoms  of  acute
proctitis  should  be  examined  by  anoscopy.  A  Gram-stained  smear  of  any  anorectal
exudate
 from
 anoscopic
 or
 anal
 examination
 should
 be
 examined
 for
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes.  All  persons  should  be  evaluated  for  herpes  simplex
(preferably by NAAT of rectal lesions), N. gonorrhoeae (NAAT or culture), C. trachomatis
(NAAT), and T. pallidum (darkfield of lesion if available and serologic testing). If the C.
trachomatis  NAAT  test  is  positive  on  a  rectal  swab  and  severe  symptoms  associated
with LGV are present (including rectal ulcers, anal discharge, bleeding, ≥10 WBCs on
Gram stain, and tenesmus), patients should be treated empirically for LGV. Molecular
testing for LGV is not widely available or not FDA cleared, and results are not typically
available  in  time  for  clinical  decision-making.  However,  if  available,  molecular  PCR
testing for C. trachomatis serovars L1, L2, or L3 can be considered for confirming LGV
(553).  The  pathogenic  role  of  M.  genitalium  in  proctitis  is  unclear.  For  persons  with
persistent symptoms after standard treatment, providers should consider testing for M.
genitalium with NAAT and treat if positive (see Mycoplasma genitalium). Acute proctitis
among  persons  who  have  anal  exposure  through  oral,  genital,  or  digital  contact  is
usually  sexually  acquired  (1382,1388).  Presumptive  therapy  should  be  initiated  while
awaiting  results  of  laboratory  tests  for  persons  with  anorectal  exudate  detected  on
examination  or  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  detected  on  a  Gram-stained  smear  of
anorectal exudate or secretions. Such therapy also should be initiated when anoscopy
or  Gram  stain  is  not  available  and  the  clinical  presentation  is  consistent  with  acute
proctitis  for  persons  reporting  receptive  anal  exposures.  Bloody  discharge,  perianal
ulcers,  or  mucosal  ulcers  among  persons  with  acute  proctitis  and  rectal  chlamydia
(NAAT)  should  receive  presumptive  treatment  for  LGV  with  an  extended  course  of
doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 3 weeks (1389,1390) (see Lymphogranuloma
Venereum).  If  painful  perianal  ulcers  are  present  or  mucosal  ulcers  are  detected  on
anoscopy, presumptive therapy should also include a regimen for genital herpes (see
Genital  Herpes).  Treatment  for  proctocolitis  or  enteritis  should  be  directed  to  the
specific enteric pathogen identified. Multiple stool examinations might be necessary for
detecting  Giardia,  and  special  stool  preparations  are  required  for  diagnosing
cryptosporidiosis and microsporidiosis. Diagnostic and treatment recommendations for
all  enteric  infections  are  beyond  the  scope  of  these  guidelines.  Providers  should  be
aware  of  the  potential  for  antimicrobial-resistant  pathogens,  particularly  during
outbreaks  of  Shigella  and  Campylobacter  among  sexual  networks  of  MSM  where
increased  resistance  to  azithromycin,  fluoroquinolones,  and  isolates  resistant  to
multiple  antibiotics  have  been  described  (266,272,273,1391,1392).  To  minimize
transmission and reinfection, patients treated for acute proctitis should be instructed to
abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  partners  have  been  treated  (i.e.,
until  completion  of  a  7-day  regimen  and  symptoms  have  resolved).  Studies  have
reported  that  behaviors  that  facilitate  enteric  pathogen  transmission  might  be
associated with acquisition of other STIs, including HIV infection. All persons with acute
proctitis and concern for sexually transmitted proctocolitis or enteritis should be tested
for  HIV,  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydia  (at  other  exposed  sites).  PEP  should  be
considered for exposures that present a risk for HIV acquisition. For ongoing risk for HIV
acquisition,  PrEP  should  be  considered.  Evidence-based  interventions  for  preventing
acquisition  of  sexually  transmitted  enteric  pathogens  are  not  available.  However,
extrapolating  from  general  infection  control  practices  for  communicable  diseases  and
established  STI  prevention  practices,  recommendations  include  avoiding  contact  with
feces during sex, using barriers, and washing hands after handing materials that have
been in contact with the anal area (i.e., barriers and sex toys) and after touching the
anus  or  rectal  area.  Follow-up  should  be  based  on  specific  etiology  and  severity  of
clinical  symptoms.  For  proctitis  associated  with  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia,  retesting  for
the respective pathogen should be performed 3 months after treatment. Partners who
have  had  sexual  contact  with  persons  treated  for  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia  <60  days
before  the  onset  of  the  persons  symptoms  should  be  evaluated,  tested,  and
presumptively  treated  for  the  respective  infection.  Partners  of  persons  with  proctitis
should  be  evaluated  for  any  diseases  diagnosed  in  the  index  partner.  Sex  partners
should abstain from sexual contact until they and their partners are treated. No specific
recommendations are available for screening or treating sex partners of persons with
diagnosed sexually transmitted enteric pathogens; however, partners should seek care
if
 symptomatic.
 Allergic
 reactions
 with
 third-generation
 cephalosporins
 (e.g.,
ceftriaxone)  are  uncommon  among  persons  with  a  history  of  penicillin  allergy
(620,631,658,896).  Persons  with  HIV  infection  and  acute  proctitis  might  present  with
bloody  discharge,  painful  perianal  ulcers,  or  mucosal  ulcers  and  LGV  and  herpes
proctitis  are  more  prevalent  among  this  population.  Presumptive  treatment  in  such
cases  should  include  a  regimen  for  genital  herpes  and  LGV.  Top  Persons  who  have
pediculosis pubis (i.e., pubic lice) usually seek medical attention because of pruritus or
because they notice lice or nits on their pubic hair. Pediculosis pubis is caused by the
parasite Phthirus pubis and is usually transmitted by sexual contact (1393). The clinical
diagnosis is based on typical symptoms of itching in the pubic region. Lice and nits can
be  observed  on  pubic  hair.  Reported  resistance  to  pediculicides  (permethrin  and
pyrethrin) has been increasing and is widespread (1394,1395). Malathion can be used
when treatment failure is believed to have occurred as a result of resistance. The odor
and  longer  duration  of  application  associated  with  malathion  therapy  make  it  a  less
attractive  alternative  compared  with  the  recommended  pediculicides.  Ivermectin  has
limited ovicidal activity (1396). Ivermectin might not prevent recurrences from eggs at
the  time  of  treatment,  and  therefore  treatment  should  be  repeated  in  7–14  days
(1397,1398). Ivermectin should be taken with food because bioavailability is increased,
thus  increasing  penetration  of  the  drug  into  the  epidermis.  Adjustment  of  ivermectin
dosage  is  not  required  for  persons  with  renal  impairment;  however,  the  safety  of
multiple  doses  among  persons  with  severe  liver  disease  is  unknown.  Lindane  is  not
recommended  for  treatment  of  pediculosis  because  of  toxicity,  contraindications  for
certain populations (pregnant and breastfeeding women, children aged <10 years, and
those with extensive dermatitis), and complexity of administration. The recommended
regimens  should  not  be  applied  to  the  eyes.  Pediculosis  of  the  eyelashes  should  be
treated  by  applying  occlusive  ophthalmic  ointment  or  petroleum  jelly  to  the  eyelid
margins 2 times/day for 10 days. Bedding and clothing should be decontaminated (i.e.,
machine  washed  and  dried  by  using  the  heat  cycle  or  dry  cleaned)  or  removed  from
body contact for at least 72 hours. Fumigation of living areas is unnecessary. Pubic hair
removal  has  been  associated  with  atypical  patterns  of  pubic  lice  infestation  and
decreasing incidence of infection (537,1399). Persons with pediculosis pubis should be
evaluated for HIV, syphilis, chlamydia, and gonorrhea. Evaluation should be performed
after 1 week if symptoms persist. Retreatment might be necessary if lice are found or if
eggs are observed at the hair-skin junction. If no clinical response is achieved to one of
the recommended regimens, retreatment with an alternative regimen is recommended.
Sex  partners  within  the  previous  month  should  be  treated.  Sexual  contact  should  be
avoided  until  patients  and  partners  have  been  treated,  bedding  and  clothing
decontaminated,  and  reevaluation  performed  to  rule  out  persistent  infection.  Existing
data from human participants demonstrate that pregnant and lactating women should
be  treated  with  either  permethrin  or  pyrethrin  with  piperonyl  butoxide.  Because  no
teratogenicity  or  toxicity  attributable  to  ivermectin  has  been  observed  during  human
pregnancy experience, ivermectin is classified as “human data suggest low risk” during
pregnancy  and  probably  compatible  with  breastfeeding  (431).  Persons  who  have
pediculosis  pubis  and  HIV  infection  should  receive  the  same  treatment  regimen  as
those who do not have HIV. Scabies is a skin infestation caused by the mite Sarcoptes
scabiei, which causes pruritus. Sensitization to S. scabiei occurs before pruritus begins.
The first time a person is infested with S. scabiei, sensitization takes weeks to develop.
However,  pruritus  might  occur  <24  hours  after  a  subsequent  reinfestation.  Scabies
among adults frequently is sexually acquired, although scabies among children usually
is not (1400–1402). Scabies diagnosis is made by identifying burrows, mites, eggs, or
the  mites’  feces  from  affected  areas.  Skin  scrapings  can  be  examined  under  the
microscope to identify organisms, although this method has low sensitivity and is time
consuming (1403). Alternatively, noninvasive examination of the affected skin by using
videodermatoscopy, videomicroscopy, or dermoscopy can be used, each of which has
high sensitivity and specificity, particularly when performed by experienced operators
(1404).  Low-technology  strategies  include  the  burrow  ink  test  and  the  adhesive  tape
test. Topical permethrin and oral and topical ivermectin have similar efficacy for cure of
scabies  (1405–1410).  Choice  of  treatment  might  be  based  on  patient  preference  for
topical  versus  oral  therapy,  drug  interactions  with  ivermectin  (e.g.,  azithromycin,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole [Bactrim], or cetirizine [Zytrec]), and cost. Permethrin is
safe  and  effective  with  a  single  application  (1411).  Ivermectin  has  limited  ovicidal
activity and might not prevent recurrences of eggs at the time of treatment; therefore,
a second dose of ivermectin should be administered 14 days after the first dose (1412).
Ivermectin  should  be  taken  with  food  because  bioavailability  is  increased,  thereby
increasing penetration of the drug into the epidermis. Adjustments to ivermectin dosing
are  not  required  for  patients  with  renal  impairment;  however,  the  safety  of  multiple
doses among patients with severe liver disease is unknown. Lindane is an alternative
regimen  because  it  can  cause  toxicity  (1413);  it  should  be  used  only  if  the  patient
cannot  tolerate  the  recommended  therapies  or  if  these  therapies  have  failed
(1414–1416).  Lindane  is  not  recommended  for  pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women,
children  aged  <10  years,  and  persons  with  extensive  dermatitis.  Seizures  have
occurred when lindane was applied after a bath or used by patients who had extensive
dermatitis.  Aplastic  anemia  after  lindane  use  also  has  been  reported  (1413).  Lindane
resistance has been reported in some areas of the world, including parts of the United
States  (1413).  Bedding  and  clothing  should  be  decontaminated  (i.e.,  either  machine
washed  and  dried  by  using  the  heat  cycle  or  dry  cleaned)  or  removed  from  body
contact for >72 hours. Fumigation of living areas is unnecessary. Persons with scabies
should be advised to keep fingernails closely trimmed to reduce injury from excessive
scratching  (1417).  Crusted  scabies  is  an  aggressive  infestation  that  usually  occurs
among  immunodeficient,  debilitated,  or  malnourished  persons,  including  persons
receiving  systemic  or  potent  topical  glucocorticoids,  organ  transplant  recipients,
persons with HIV infection or human T-lymphotropic virus-1 infection, and persons with
hematologic  malignancies.  Crusted  scabies  is  transmitted  more  easily  than  scabies
(1418). No controlled therapeutic studies for crusted scabies have been conducted, and
a recommended treatment remains unclear. Substantial treatment failure might occur
with  a  single-dose  topical  scabicide  or  with  oral  ivermectin  treatment.  Combination
treatment is recommended with a topical scabicide, either 5% topical permethrin cream
(full-body application to be repeated daily for 7 days then 2 times/week until cure) or
25% topical benzyl benzoate, and oral ivermectin 200 ug/kg body weight on days 1, 2,
8, 9, and 15. Additional ivermectin treatment on days 22 and 29 might be required for
severe cases (1419). Lindane should be avoided because of the risks for neurotoxicity
with heavy applications on denuded skin. The rash and pruritus of scabies might persist
for  <2  weeks  after  treatment.  Symptoms  or  signs  persisting  for  >2  weeks  can  be
attributed to multiple factors. Treatment failure can occur as a result of resistance to
medication or faulty application of topical scabicides. These medications do not easily
penetrate  into  thick,  scaly  skin  of  persons  with  crusted  scabies,  perpetuating  the
harboring  of  mites  in  these  difficult-to-penetrate  layers.  In  the  absence  of
recommended  contact  treatment  and  decontamination  of  bedding  and  clothing,
persisting  symptoms  can  be  attributed  to  reinfection  by  family  members  or  fomites.
Finally,  other  household  mites  can  cause  symptoms  to  persist  as  a  result  of
cross-reactivity  between  antigens.  Even  when  treatment  is  successful,  reinfection  is
avoided,  and  cross-reactivity  does  not  occur,  symptoms  can  persist  or  worsen  as  a
result  of  allergic  dermatitis.  Retreatment  2  weeks  after  the  initial  treatment  regimen
can be considered for those persons who are still symptomatic or when live mites are
observed. Use of an alternative regimen is recommended for those persons who do not
respond initially to the recommended treatment. Persons who have had sexual, close
personal,  or  household  contact  with  the  patient  within  the  month  preceding  scabies
infestation should be examined. Those identified as being infested should be provided
treatment. Scabies epidemics frequently occur in nursing homes, hospitals, residential
facilities,  and  other  communities  (1420,1421).  Control  of  an  epidemic  can  only  be
achieved  by  treating  the  entire  population  at  risk.  Ivermectin  can  be  considered  in
these settings, especially if treatment with topical scabicides fails. Mass treatment with
oral ivermectin is highly effective in decreasing prevalence in settings where scabies is
endemic (1422). Epidemics should be managed in consultation with a specialist. Infants
and  young  children  should  be  treated  with  permethrin;  the  safety  of  ivermectin  for
children  weighing  <15  kg  has  not  been  determined.  Infants  and  children  aged<10
years should not be treated with lindane. Ivermectin likely poses a low risk to pregnant
women and is likely compatible with breastfeeding; however, because of limited data
regarding ivermectin use for pregnant and lactating women, permethrin is the preferred
treatment  (431)  (see  Pediculosis  Pubis).  Persons  with  HIV  infection  who  have
uncomplicated scabies should receive the same treatment regimens as those who do
not have HIV. Persons with HIV infection and others who are immunosuppressed are at
increased  risk  for  crusted  scabies  and  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  a
specialist. Top These guidelines are primarily limited to the identification, prophylaxis,
and  treatment  of  STIs  and  conditions  among  adolescent  and  adult  female  sexual
assault survivors. However, some of the following guidelines might still apply to male
sexual  assault  survivors.  Documentation  of  findings,  collection  of  nonmicrobiologic
specimens for forensic purposes, and management of potential pregnancy or physical
and  psychological  trauma  are  beyond  the  scope  of  these  guidelines.  Examinations  of
survivors of sexual assault should be conducted by an experienced clinician in a way
that  minimizes  further  trauma  to  the  person.  The  decision  to  obtain  genital  or  other
specimens for STI diagnosis should be made on an individual basis. Care systems for
survivors  should  be  designed  to  ensure  continuity,  including  timely  review  of  test
results,  support  adherence,  and  monitoring  for  adverse  reactions  to  any  prescribed
therapeutic or prophylactic regimens. Laws in all 50 states limit the evidentiary use of a
survivor’s  previous  sexual  history,  including  evidence  of  previously  acquired  STIs,  as
part  of  an  effort  to  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  survivor’s  testimony.  Evidentiary
privilege against revealing any aspect of the examination or treatment also is enforced
in most states. Although it rarely occurs, STI diagnoses might later be accessed, and
the survivor and clinician might opt to defer testing for this reason. Although collection
of specimens at initial examination for laboratory STI diagnosis gives the survivor and
clinician  the  option  of  deferring  empiric  prophylactic  antimicrobial  treatment,
compliance  with  follow-up  visits  is  typically  poor  (1423–1425).  Among  sexually  active
adults, identification of an STI might represent an infection acquired before the assault,
and  therefore  might  be  more  important  for  the  medical  management  of  the  patient
than  for  legal  purposes.  Trichomoniasis,  BV,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydia  are  the  most
frequently diagnosed infections among women who have been sexually assaulted. Such
conditions are prevalent among the population, and detection of these infections after
an  assault  does  not  necessarily  imply  acquisition  during  the  assault.  However,  a
postassault examination presents an important opportunity for identifying or preventing
an STI. Chlamydial and gonococcal infections among women are of particular concern
because  of  the  possibility  of  ascending  infection.  In  addition,  HBV  infection  can  be
prevented through postexposure vaccination (see Hepatitis B Virus Infection). Because
persons who have been sexually assaulted also are at risk for acquiring HPV infection,
and  the  efficacy  of  the  HPV  vaccine  is  high  (1426,1427),  HPV  vaccination  is  also
recommended
 for
 females
 and
 males
 through
 age
 26
 years
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/hpv.html)
 (11).
Reproductive-aged  female  survivors  should  be  evaluated  for  pregnancy  and  offered
emergency contraception. Decisions to perform the following tests should be made on
an  individual  basis.  An  initial  examination  after  a  sexual  assault  might  include  the
following:  Compliance  with  follow-up  visits  is  poor  among  survivors  of  sexual  assault
(1423–1425).  Consequently,  the  following  routine  presumptive  treatments  after  a
sexual  assault  are  recommended:  Clinicians  should  counsel  persons  regarding  the
possible
 benefits
 and
 toxicities
 associated
 with
 these
 treatment
 regimens;
gastrointestinal  side  effects  can  occur  with  this  combination.  The  efficacy  of  these
regimens  in  preventing  infections  after  sexual  assault  has  not  been  evaluated.  For
those  requiring  alternative  treatments,  refer  to  the  specific  sections  in  this  report
relevant  to  the  specific  organisms.  At  the  initial  examination  and,  if  indicated,  at
follow-up examinations, patients should be counseled regarding symptoms of STIs and
the  need  for  immediate  examination  if  symptoms  occur.  Further,  they  should  be
instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  STI  prophylactic  treatment  is
completed. After the initial postassault examination, follow-up examinations provide an
opportunity  to  detect  new  infections  acquired  during  or  after  the  assault,  complete
hepatitis B and HPV vaccinations, if indicated, complete counseling and treatment for
other STIs, and monitor side effects and adherence to PEP, if prescribed. If initial testing
was  performed,  follow-up  evaluation  should  be  conducted  in  <1  week  to  ensure  that
results  of  positive  tests  can  be  discussed  promptly  with  the  survivor,  treatment  is
provided if not administered at the initial visit, and any follow-up for infections can be
arranged. If initial tests are negative and treatment was not provided, examination for
STIs  can  be  repeated  1–2  weeks  after  the  assault;  repeat  testing  detects  infectious
organisms  that  might  not  have  reached  sufficient  concentrations  to  produce  positive
test results at the time of initial examination. For survivors who are treated during the
initial visit, regardless of whether testing was performed, posttreatment testing should
be  conducted  only  if  the  person  reports  having  symptoms.  If  initial  test  results  were
negative and infection in the assailant cannot be ruled out, serologic tests for syphilis
can be repeated at 4–6 weeks and 3 months; HIV testing can be repeated at 6 weeks
and at 3 months by using methods to identify acute HIV infection. HIV seroconversion
has occurred among persons whose only known risk factor was sexual assault or sexual
abuse;  however,  the  frequency  of  this  occurrence  likely  is  low  (1428,1429).  In
consensual sex, the per-act risk for HIV transmission from vaginal intercourse is 0.08%,
and for receptive anal intercourse, 1.38% (192). The per-act risk for HIV transmission
from oral sex is substantially lower. Specific circumstances of an assault (e.g., bleeding,
which  often  accompanies  trauma)  might  increase  risk  for  HIV  transmission  in  cases
involving vaginal, anal, or oral penetration. Site of exposure to ejaculate, viral load in
ejaculate, and the presence of an STI or genital lesions in the assailant or survivor also
might  increase  risk  for  HIV  acquisition.  PEP  with  a  28-day  course  of  zidovudine  was
associated  with  an  81%  reduction  in  risk  for  acquiring  HIV  in  a  study  of  health  care
workers who had percutaneous exposures to HIV-infected blood (1430). On the basis of
these results and results from animal studies, PEP has been recommended for health
care workers who have occupational exposures to HIV (1431). These findings have been
extrapolated  to  nonoccupational  injecting  drug  and  sexual  HIV  exposures,  including
sexual assault. The possibility of HIV exposure from the assault should be assessed at
the initial examination; survivors determined to be at risk for acquiring HIV should be
informed about the possible benefit of PEP in preventing HIV infection. Initiation of PEP
as soon as possible after the exposure increases the likelihood of prophylactic benefit.
Multiple  factors  affect  the  medical  recommendation  for  PEP  and  affect  the  assault
survivor’s acceptance of that recommendation. These factors include the likelihood of
the assailant having HIV, any exposure characteristics that might increase the risk for
HIV transmission, the time elapsed after the event, and the potential benefits and risks
associated with PEP (1431). Determination of the assailant’s HIV status at the time of
the  postassault  examination  is  usually  not  possible.  Therefore,  health  care  providers
should  assess  any  available  information  concerning  the  characteristics  and  HIV  risk
behaviors  of  the  assailant  (e.g.,  being  an  MSM  or  using  injecting  drugs),  local
epidemiology  of  HIV/AIDS,  and  exposure  characteristics  of  the  assault.  When  an
assailant’s HIV status is unknown, determinations about risk for HIV transmission to the
survivor  should  be  based  on  whether  vaginal  or  anal  penetration  occurred;  whether
ejaculation  occurred  on  mucous  membranes;  whether  multiple  assailants  were
involved;  whether  mucosal  lesions  were  present  in  the  assailant  or  survivor;  and  any
other  characteristics  of  the  assault,  survivor,  or  assailant  that  might  increase  risk  for
HIV transmission. If PEP is offered, the following information should be discussed with
the survivor: the necessity of early initiation of PEP to optimize potential benefits (i.e.,
as  soon  as  possible  after  and  <72  hours  after  the  assault),  the  importance  of  close
follow-up,  the  benefit  of  adherence  to  recommended  dosing,  and  potential  adverse
effects  of  antiretroviral  medications.  Providers  should  emphasize  that  severe  adverse
effects are rare from PEP (1431–1435). Clinical management of the survivor should be
implemented according to the HIV PEP guidelines and in collaboration with specialists
(1436). Health care providers should provide an initial course of 3–7 days of medication
(i.e., a starter pack) with a prescription for the remainder of the course, or, if starter
packs are unavailable, they should provide a prescription for an entire 28-day course.
Provision  of  the  entire  28-day  PEP  medication  supply  at  the  initial  visit  has  been
reported  to  increase  likelihood  of  adherence,  especially  when  patients  have  difficulty
returning  for multiple follow-up  visits (1437). Routinely  providing  starter packs or the
entire  28-day  course  requires  that  health  care  providers  stock  PEP  drugs  in  their
practice setting or have an established agreement with a pharmacy to stock, package,
and  urgently  dispense  PEP  drugs  with  required  administration  instructions.  Uninsured
patients or those with high copayments can be enrolled in a patient-assistance program
to  ensure  access  to  PEP  medications.  An  early  follow-up  visit  should  be  scheduled  at
which  health  care  providers  can  discuss  the  results  of  HIV  and  STI  testing,  provide
additional counseling and support, provide indicated vaccines not administered at the
initial evaluation, assess medication side effects and adherence, or provide an altered
PEP  medication  regimen  if  indicated  by  side  effects  or  laboratory  test  results.  Health
care  providers  should  do  the  following:  Assistance  with  PEP-related  decisions  can  be
obtained by calling the National Clinician’s Post Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline (PEP Line)
(telephone:  888-448-4911).  These  guidelines  are  limited  to  the  identification  and
treatment  of  STIs  in  prepubertal  children.  Management  of  the  psychosocial  or  legal
aspects  of  the  sexual  assault  or  abuse  of  children  is  beyond  the  scope  of  these
guidelines. Identification of STIs in children past the neonatal period strongly indicates
sexual abuse (1438). The importance of identifying a sexually transmitted organism for
such  children  as  evidence  of  possible  child  sexual  abuse  varies  by  pathogen.
Postnatally  acquired  gonorrhea,  syphilis,  chlamydia,  and  T.  vaginalis  infection  and
nontransfusion,  nonperinatally  acquired  HIV  infection  are  indicative  of  sexual  abuse.
Sexual  abuse  should  be  suspected  when  anogenital  herpes  or  anogenital  warts  are
diagnosed.  Investigation  of  sexual  abuse  among  children  who  have  an  infection  that
might  have  been  transmitted  sexually  should  be  conducted  in  compliance  with
recommendations by clinicians who have experience and training in all elements of the
evaluation of child abuse, neglect, and assault. The social significance of an infection
that  might  have  been  acquired  sexually  varies  by  the  specific  organism,  as  does  the
threshold for reporting suspected child sexual abuse (Table 8). When any STI has been
diagnosed in a child, efforts should be made in consultation with a specialist to evaluate
the possibility of sexual abuse, including conducting a history and physical examination
for  evidence  of  abuse  and  diagnostic  testing  for  other  commonly  occurring  STIs
(1439–1441).  The  general  rule  that  STIs  beyond  the  neonatal  period  are  evidence  of
sexual abuse has exceptions. For example, genital infection with T. vaginalis (1442) or
rectal or genital infection with C. trachomatis among young children might be the result
of  perinatally  acquired  infection  and  has,  in  certain  cases  of  chlamydial  infection,
persisted for as long as 2–3 years (1443–1445), although perinatal chlamydial infection
is  now  uncommon  because  of  prenatal  screening  and  treatment  of  pregnant  women.
Genital  warts  have  been  diagnosed  among  children  who  have  been  sexually  abused
(1426)  but  also  among  children  who  have  no  other  evidence  of  sexual  abuse
(1446,1447);  lesions  appearing  for  the  first  time  in  a  child  aged  >5  years  are  more
likely  to  have  been  caused  by  sexual  transmission  (1448).  BV  has  been  diagnosed
among children who have been abused but its presence alone does not prove sexual
abuse. The majority of HBV infections among children result from household exposure
to persons who have chronic HBV infection rather than sexual abuse. All U.S. states and
territories  have  laws  that  require  reporting  of  child  abuse.  Although  the  exact
requirements differ by state or territory, if a health care provider has reasonable cause
to  suspect  child  abuse,  a  report  must  be  made  (1448).  Health  care  providers  should
contact  their  state  or  local  child  protection  service  agency  regarding  child  abuse
reporting  requirements.  Evaluating  children  for  sexual  assault  or  abuse  should  be
conducted  in  a  manner  designed  to  minimize  pain  and  trauma  to  the  child.
Examinations and collection of vaginal specimens in prepubertal girls can be extremely
uncomfortable  and  should  be  performed  by  an  experienced  clinician  to  avoid
psychological and physical trauma to the child. The decision to obtain genital or other
specimens  from  a  child  to  evaluate  for  STIs  should  be  made  on  an  individual  basis.
However,  children  who  received  a  diagnosis  of  one  STI  should  be  screened  for  other
STIs. History and reported type of sexual contact might not be a reliable indicator, and
urogenital, pharyngeal, and rectal testing should be considered for preverbal children
and  children  who  cannot  verbalize  details  of  the  assault  (1438,1449).  Factors  that
should lead the physician to consider testing for STIs include the following (1449): If a
child  has  symptoms,  signs,  or  evidence  of  an  infection  that  might  be  sexually
transmitted,  the  child  should  be  tested  for  common  STIs  before  initiation  of  any
treatment  that  might  interfere  with  diagnosing  other  STIs.  Because  of  the  legal  and
psychosocial  consequences  of  a  false-positive  diagnosis,  only  tests  with  high
specificities should be used. The potential benefit to the child of a reliable STI diagnosis
justifies  deferring  presumptive  treatment  until  specimens  for  highly  specific  tests  are
obtained  by  providers  with  experience  in  evaluating  sexually  abused  and  assaulted
children. Evaluations should be performed on a case-by-case basis, according to history
of  assault  or  abuse  and  in  a  manner  that  minimizes  the  possibility  for  psychological
trauma and social stigma. If the initial exposure was recent, the infectious organisms
acquired  through  the  exposure  might  not  have  produced  sufficient  concentrations  to
result in positive test results or examination findings (1450). Alternatively, positive test
results  after  a  recent  exposure  might  represent  the  assailant’s  secretions  (but  would
nonetheless be an indication for treatment of the child). A second visit approximately
2–6  weeks  after  the  most  recent  sexual  exposure  should  be  scheduled  to  include  a
repeat  physical  examination  and  collection  of  additional  specimens  to  identify  any
infection that might not have been detected at the time of initial evaluation. A single
evaluation might be sufficient if the child was abused for an extended period and if a
substantial amount of time elapsed between the last suspected episode of abuse and
the  medical  evaluation.  Compliance  with  follow-up  appointments  might  be  improved
when  law  enforcement  personnel  or  child  protective  services  are  involved.  Visual
inspection of the genital, perianal, and oral areas for genital discharge, odor, bleeding,
irritation, warts, and ulcerative lesions should be performed during initial examination.
The clinical manifestations of certain STIs are different for children than for adults. For
example,  typical  vesicular  lesions  might  be  absent  even  in  the  presence  of  HSV
infection.  The  following  should  be  performed  during  the  initial  examination,  if  STI
testing is indicated: The risk for a child acquiring an STI as a result of sexual abuse or
assault has not been well studied. Presumptive treatment for children who have been
sexually assaulted or abused is not recommended because the incidence of most STIs
among children is low after abuse or assault, prepubertal girls appear to be at lower risk
for  ascending  infection  than  adolescent  or  adult  women,  and  regular  follow-up  of
children usually can be ensured. However, certain children or their parent or guardian
might be concerned about the possibility of infection with an STI, even if the health care
provider  has  perceived  the  risk  to  be  low.  Such  concerns  might  be  an  indication  for
presumptive  treatment  in  certain  settings  and  might  be  considered  after  all  relevant
specimens  for  diagnostic  tests  have  been  collected.  Children  who  are  survivors  of
sexual  assault  or  abuse  are  at  increased  risk  for  future  unsafe  sexual  practices  that
have been linked to higher risk for HPV acquisition (1426,1453) and are more likely to
engage in these behaviors at an earlier age; therefore, ACIP recommends vaccination of
these children at age ≥9 years if they have not initiated or completed HPV vaccination
(see
 Human
 Papillomavirus
 Infections,
 Prevention)
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/hpv.html).
 Although
 HPV
vaccine  will  not  protect  against  progression  of  infection  already  acquired  or  promote
clearance of the infection, the vaccine protects against HPV types not yet acquired. If
no infections were identified at the initial examination after the last suspected sexual
exposure,  and  if  this  exposure  was  recent,  a  follow-up  evaluation  approximately  2
weeks after the last exposure can be considered. Likewise, if no physical examination
or diagnostic testing was performed at the initial visit, a complete examination can be
scheduled  approximately  2  weeks  after  the  last  exposure  to  identify  any  evidence  of
STIs. In circumstances in which transmission of syphilis, HIV, HBV, or HPV is a concern
but baseline tests for syphilis, HIV, and HBV are negative and examinations for genital
warts are negative, follow-up serologic testing and examination approximately 6 weeks
and <3 months after the last suspected sexual exposure is recommended to allow time
for antibodies to develop and signs of infection to appear. In addition, results of HBsAg
testing  should  be  interpreted  carefully  because  HBV  can  be  transmitted  nonsexually.
Decisions  regarding  which  tests  should  be  performed  should  be  made  on  a
case-by-case basis. HIV has been reported among children for whom sexual abuse was
the only known risk factor. Serologic testing for HIV should be considered for sexually
abused children. The decision to test for HIV should involve the family, if possible, and
be  made  on  a  case-by-case  basis  depending  on  the  likelihood  of  infection  in  the
assailant  (1448,1454).  Although  data  are  insufficient  concerning  the  efficacy  of  PEP
among  children,  treatment  is  well  tolerated  by  infants  and  children  with  and  without
HIV, and children have a minimal risk for serious adverse reactions because of the short
period  recommended  for  prophylaxis  (1455).  Providers  should  do  the  following:  Top
Chairperson: Kimberly A. Workowski, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC,  and  Emory  University,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Work  Group
Members: Elizabeth Alderman, MD, The Children’s Hospital at Montefiore, The Pediatric
Hospital for Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; Lindley Barbee, MD,
University of Washington and Public Health Seattle and King County STD Clinic, Seattle,
Washington;  Luis  Barroso,  MD,  Wake  Forest  Baptist  Health,  Winston-Salem,  North
Carolina;  Gale  Burstein,  MD,  Erie  County  Department  of  Health,  Buffalo,  New  York;
Virginia  A.  Caine,  MD,  Marion  County  Public  Health  Department,  Indiana  University,
Indianapolis, Indiana; Carla Chibwesha, MD, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Stephanie Cohen, MD, San Francisco Department of Public
Health,  San  Francisco,  California;  Susan  Cu-Uvin,  MD,  Brown  University,  Providence,
Rhode  Island;  Jodie  Dionne-Odom,  MD,  University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham,
Birmingham,  Alabama;  Julia  Dombrowski,  MD,  Public  Health  Seattle  and  King  County,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Carolyn Gardella, MD, Veterans Affairs
Puget  Sound  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  William  M.  Geisler,  MD,
University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham,  Birmingham,  Alabama;  Khalil  G.  Ghanem,  MD,
PhD, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; Matthew Golden, MD, Seattle and
King County STD/HIV Program University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Margaret
R. Hammerschlag, MD, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York; H. Hunter
Handsfield,  MD,  University  of  Washington  Center  for  AIDS  and  STD,  Seattle,
Washington; King K. Holmes, MD, PhD, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington;
Edward W. Hook, III, MD, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama;
Katherine  Hsu,  MD,  Ratelle  STD/HIV  Prevention  Training  Center,  Massachusetts
Department of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts; Christine Johnston, MD, University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Patricia Kissinger, PhD, Tulane University School of
Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana; Jeffrey D. Klausner, MD,
University  of  California  Los  Angeles,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Lisa  E.  Manhart,  PhD,
University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  Jeanne  Marrazzo,  MD,  University  of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; David H. Martin, MD, Tulane University,
Louisiana  State  University  Health  Sciences  Center,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana;  Leslie
Massad, MD, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri; Kenneth H. Mayer, MD, Fenway
Health, The Fenway Institute, Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital,
Boston,
 Massachusetts;
 Candice
 McNeil,
 MD,
 Wake
 Forest
 Baptist
 Health,
Alabama/North
 Carolina
 HIV/STD
 Prevention
 Training
 Center,
 Forsyth
 County
Department  of  Public  Health,  Winston-Salem,  North  Carolina;  Leandro  Mena,  MD,
University  of  Mississippi  Medical  Center,  Jackson,  Mississippi;  Caroline  Mitchell,  MD,
Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Boston, Massachusetts; Okeoma Mmeje, MD,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Anna-Barbara Moscicki, MD, University of
California  Los  Angeles,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Christina  A.  Muzny,  MD,  University  of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; Natalie Neu, MD, Columbia University,
New  York,  New  York;  Paul  Nyirjesy,  MD,  Sidney  Kimmel  Medical  College  at  Thomas
Jefferson  University,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  Jeff  Peipert,  MD,  PhD,  Indiana
University,  Indianapolis,  Indiana;  Rebecca  Perkins,  MD,  Boston  University,  Boston,
Massachusetts;  Susan  Philip,  MD,  San  Francisco  Department  of  Public  Health,  San
Francisco, California; Asa Radix, MD, PhD, Callen-Lorde Community Health Center, New
York,  New  York;  Anne  Rompalo,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  Maryland;
Sarah  Rudman,  MD,  County  of  Santa  Clara  Public  Health  Department,  San  Jose,
California;  Pablo  J.  Sanchez,  MD,  The  Ohio  State  University  Nationwide  Children’s
Hospital,  Columbus,  Ohio;  George  Sawaya,  MD,  University  of  San  Francisco,  San
Francisco, California; Arlene Seña, MD, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and
Durham County Department of Public Health, Durham, North Carolina; Jeanne Sheffield,
MD,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Jack  Sobel,  MD,  Wayne  State
University,  Detroit,  Michigan;  David  Soper,  MD,  Medical  University  of  South  Carolina,
Charleston,  South  Carolina;  Anne  Spaulding,  MD,  Emory  University,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
Bradley Stoner, MD, PhD, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri; Stephanie Taylor,
MD,  Louisiana  State  University  Crescent  Care  Sexual  Health  Center,  New  Orleans,
Louisiana;  Susan  Tuddenham,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  University  School  of  Medicine,
Baltimore,  Maryland;  Karen  Wendel,  MD,  Denver  Public  Health,  Denver,  Colorado;
Harold C. Wiesenfeld, MD, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Jonathan
Zenilman, MD, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. Moderators: Philip Chan,
MD, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island; Edward W. Hook, III, MD, University of
Alabama  at  Birmingham,  Birmingham,  Alabama;  Christine  Johnston,  MD,  University  of
Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  David  H.  Martin,  MD,  Tulane  University,  Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana; Jeanne Marrazzo, MD,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; Christina A. Muzny, MD,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; Ina Park, MD, University
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California; Hilary Reno, MD, PhD, Washington
University,  St.  Louis,  Missouri;  Jonathan  Zenilman,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  University,
Baltimore,  Maryland.  Rapporteurs:  Philip  Chan,  MD,  Brown  University,  Providence,
Rhode  Island;  Hilary  Reno,  MD,  PhD,  Washington  University,  St.  Louis,  Missouri;
Christine  Johnston,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  Christina  A.
Muzny, MD, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; Ina Park, MD,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California; Jonathan Zenilman, MD,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland Liaison Participants: Jean Anderson, MD,
CDC/HRSA  Advisory  Committee  on  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis  and  STD  Prevention  and
Treatment,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Kevin  Ault,  MD,  American
College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,  University  of  Kansas,  Lawrence,  Kansas;
Himani  Bisht,  PhD,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Silver  Spring,  Maryland;  J.  Quentin
Clemens,  MD,  American  Urological  Association,  University  of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,
Michigan; Gina Coleman, MD, Public Health Agency of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario; Carolyn
Deal,  PhD,  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases,  Bethesda,  Maryland;
Maeve  B.  Mello,  PhD,  Pan  American  Health  Organization/World  Health  Organization,
Washington,  DC;  Diane  Foley,  MD,  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,
Washington,  DC;  Michael  Ganio,  PharmD,  American  Society  of  Health-System
Pharmacists,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Eric  Garges,  MD,  U.S.  Department  of  Defense,
Arlington,  Virginia,  and  Uniformed  Services  University,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Brent
Gibson, MD, National Commission on Correctional Health Care, Chicago, Illinois; William
A. Glover, II, PhD, Association of Public Health Laboratories, Silver Spring, Maryland; W.
David  Hardy,  MD,  HIV  Medical  Association,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,
Maryland;  David  Harvey,  National  Coalition  of  STD  Directors,  Washington,  DC;  Letha
Healey,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration  (HIV/AIDS  Bureau),
Rockville,  Maryland;  Michael  Huey,  MD,  American  College  Health  Association,  Silver
Spring, Maryland, and Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia; Gal Mayer, MD, GLMA: Health
Professionals Advancing LGBTQ Equality, Washington, DC; Sumathi Nambiar, MD, Food
and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland; Seema Nayak, MD, National Institutes
of  Health,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Lori  Newman,  MD,  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland; Samantha Ritter, MPH, National Association of
County  and  City  Health  Officials,  Washington,  DC;  Elizabeth  Ruebush,  Association  of
State and Territorial Health Officials, Arlington, Virginia; Bisan Salhi, MD, PhD, American
College  of  Emergency  Physicians,  Irving,  Texas,  Emory  University,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
Natasha  Travis,  MD,  National  Medical  Association,  Silver  Spring,  Maryland,  and  Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; Maria Trent, MD, Society for Adolescent Health
and Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, and Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; Julie
Vaishampayan, MD, Infectious Disease Society of America, Arlington, Virginia; Barbara
Van  Der  Pol,  PhD,  American  Sexually  Transmitted  Diseases  Association,  Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina, and University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama;  Teodora  Elvira  Wi,  MD,  Department  of  Global  HIV,  Hepatitis  and  STI
Programmes,  World  Health  Organization,  Geneva,  Switzerland.  CDC  and  Outside  CDC
Consultants:  Sevgi  O.  Aral,  PhD;  Laura  H.  Bachmann,  MD;  Kyle  Bernstein,  PhD;  Gail
Bolan,  MD;  John  Brooks,  MD;  Philip  Chan,  MD,  Brown  University,  Providence,  Rhode
Island; Aaron Harris, MD; Matthew Hogben, PhD; Christine Johnston, MD, University of
Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  Sarah  Kidd,  MD;  Kristen  Kreisel,  PhD;  Lauri
Markowitz,  MD;  Christina  Muzny,  MD,  University  of  Alabama  at  Birmingham,
Birmingham,  Alabama;  Ina  Park,  MD,  University  of  California  San  Francisco,  San
Francisco,  California;  Allan  Pillay,  PhD;  Laura  Quilter,  MD;  Hilary  Reno,  MD,  PhD,
Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri; Sancta St. Cyr, MD; Mona Saraiya, MD; Julie
Schillinger,  MD;  Virginia  Senkomago,  PhD;  Philip  Spradling,  MD;  Phoebe  Thorpe,  MD;
Mark  Weng,  MD;  Jonathan  Zenilman,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,
Maryland.  CDC,  Division  of  Sexually  Transmitted  Disease  Prevention  Treatment
Guidelines, 2021, Project Coordinator: Kimberly A. Workowski, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC, and Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia.  CDC  Support  Staff:  Alexandra  Coor,  MPH;  Catherine  Carter;  Quinn  Haaga;
Amber Herald; Patricia Jackson; Brenda Kelly. Top All STI Treatment Guidelines, 2021,
Work  Group  members  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of
Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  Lindley
Barbee received research support from Hologic and SpeeDx and consults for Nabriva.
Christine  Johnston  received  research  funding  from  Sanofi-Pasteur;  royalties  from
UpToDate;  and  personal  fees  from  MedPace,  Gilead,  AbbVie,  and  UpToDate.  Jeffrey
Klausner received research supplies from Hologic, Cepheid, and SpeeDx; advisory fees
from  Shield  Diagnostics,  Click  Diagnostics,  and  SpeeDx;  and  research  funding  from
AbbVie  and  Gilead  Sciences.  Lisa  Manhart  received  research  supplies,  honoraria,  and
research  contracts  from  Hologic  and  served  as  a  consultant  to  diagnostic  test
manufacturers (SpeeDx, BioFire Diagnostics, Roche Diagnostics, and Click Diagnostics).
Jeanne  Marrazzo  serves  on  expert  advisory  boards  for  Becton  Dickinson,  BioFire
Diagnostics, and Gilead Sciences and has research and grant support and supplies from
Merck & Co. and Toltec. David Martin served as a consultant in 2019 to Hologic, which
recently gained Food and Drug Administration clearance for a Mycoplasma genitalium
diagnostic  test  and  markets  diagnostic  tests  for  gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  and
trichomonas.  Kenneth  Mayer  serves  on  the  scientific  advisory  boards  for  Gilead
Sciences  and  Merck  &  Co.  Pharmaceuticals  and  receives  grant  funds  from  Gilead
Sciences.  Leandro  Mena  received  research  funding  through  his  institution  from  Atlas
Genetics,  Merck  &  Co.,  Becton  Dickinson,  Hologic,  Biolytical,  and  Roche  and  received
consulting  honoraria  from  Roche  Molecular,  Merck  &  Co.,  Gilead  Sciences,  and  ViiV
Healthcare and from speaker bureaus for Gilead Sciences and ViiV Healthcare. Caroline
Mitchell  served  as  a  consultant  for  Lupin  Pharmaceuticals  and  Scynexis  and  received
grant funding from Merck & Co. Christina A. Muzny served as a consultant and received
research  support  from  Lupin  Pharmaceuticals  for  a  randomized  controlled  trial  of
secnidazole  versus  placebo  for  treatment  of  trichomoniasis  and  grants  from  the
National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases; was a
speaker for Abbott Molecular, Cepheid, and Roche Diagnostics on topics related to STIs;
received personal fees from Lupin Pharmaceuticals, PhagoMed, Cepheid, and Beckton
Dickinson;  and  served  as  a  consultant  for  BioFire  Diagnostics.  Paul  Nyirjesy  received
research  support  from  Mycovia  Pharmaceuticals,  Curatek  Pharmaceuticals,  Scynexis,
and Hologic and served as a consultant for Mycovia Pharmaceuticals, Hologic, Scynexis,
Daré  Bioscience,  and  Becton  Dickinson.  Jeffery  Pepest  serves  on  advisory  boards  for
Cooper Surgical and Bayer and provides research support to Merck & Co. Susan Philip is
an  unpaid  public  health  advisor  to  GlaxoSmithKline.  Anne  Rompalo  serves  on  the
BioFire Diagnostics advisory board and has financial ties to UpToDate. Hilary Reno is a
site  principle  investigator  on  a  project  evaluating  the  prevalence  of  M.  genitalium
funded  by  Hologic  (funds  are  allocated  via  her  institution).  Arlene  Seña  serves  on  a
speaker’s bureau and scientific advisory board for M. genitalium at Hologic, works with
the Gilead Focus grant for hepatitis C testing and linkage to care, and mentored Sancta
St. Cyr, MD, at the University of North Carolina Division of Infectious Diseases before
employment  at  CDC.  Anne  Spaulding  received  consulting  fees  or  honoraria  (either
directly  or  through  third  parties)  from  Gilead  Sciences,  Merck  &  Co.,  and  AbbVie  and
grants through her institution from Gilead Sciences and ViiV. Susan Tuddenham served
as a consultant for Biofire Diagnostics and Roche Molecular Diagnostics and received a
speaker  honorarium  from  Roche  Molecular  Diagnostics.  Karen  Wendel  has  stock
ownership in Pfizer. Top Corresponding author: Kimberly A. Workowski, MD, Division of
STD Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention,
CDC.  Telephone:  404-639-1898;  Email:  kgw2@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of  STD
Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC,
Atlanta,  Georgia;  2Emory  University,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  3Brown  University,  Providence,
Rhode Island; 4University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; 5University of Alabama
at  Birmingham,  Birmingham,  Alabama;  6University  of  California  San  Francisco,  San
Francisco,  California;  7Washington  University,  St.  Louis,  Missouri;  8Johns  Hopkins
University,  Baltimore,  Maryland  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the
International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential
conflicts  of  interest.  Christina  Muzny  reports  other  support  from  CDC,  during  the
conduct of the study; grants from the National Institutes of Health/National Institute of
Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  Lupin  Pharmaceuticals;  personal  fees  from  Lupin
Pharmaceuticals,  PhagoMed,  Cepheid,  and  Beckton  Dickinson;  and  personal  fees  and
other  support  from  Roche  Diagnostics,  Abbott  Molecular,  and  BioFire  Diagnostics,
outside  the  submitted  work.  Hilary  Reno  reports  grants  from  Hologic,  outside  the
submitted work. Christine Johnston reports other support from CDC, during the conduct
of the study; received research funding from Sanofi-Pasteur; royalties from UpToDate;
and personal fees from MedPace, Gilead, AbbVie, and UpToDate, outside the submitted
work. Top * Regardless of condom use during exposure. † Direct hyperbilirubinemia is
direct  bilirubin  level  >2  mg/dL  (34  umol/L)  or  20%  of  the  total  bilirubin  level.  §  One
dilution is within the test performance of nontreponemal tests and is not a significant
change.  ¶  The  absence  of  a  fourfold  or  greater  titer  for  a  neonate  does  not  exclude
congenital syphilis. ** Interpretation of CSF test results requires a nontraumatic lumbar
puncture  (i.e.,  a  CSF  sample  that  is  not  contaminated  with  blood).  CSF  test  results
obtained during the neonatal period can be difficult to interpret; normal values differ by
gestational  age  and  are  higher  among  preterm  infants.  Studies  indicate  that  95%  of
healthy  neonates  have  values  of  ≤16–19  WBCs/mm3  or  protein  levels  of  ≤115–118
mg/dL  on  CSF  examination.  During  the  second  month  of  life,  95%  of  healthy  infants
have  ≤9–11  WBCs/mm3  or  protein  levels  of  ≤89–91  mg/dL.  Lower  values  (i.e.,  5
WBCs/mm3  and  protein  level  of  40  mg/dL)  might  be  considered  the  upper  limits  of
normal for older infants. Other causes of elevated values should be considered when an
infant is being evaluated for congenital syphilis (Sources: Kestenbaum LA, Ebberson J,
Zorc  JJ,  Hodinka  RL,  Shah  SS.  Defining  cerebrospinal  fluid  white  blood  cell  count
reference values in neonates and young infants. Pediatrics 2010;125:257–64; Shah SS,
Ebberson  J,  Kestenbaum  LA,  Hodinka  RL,  Zorc  JJ.  Age-specific  reference  values  for
cerebrospinal  fluid  protein  concentration  in  neonates  and  young  infants.  J  Hosp  Med
2011;6:22–7;  Thomson  J,  Sucharew  H,  Cruz  AT,  et  al.;  Pediatric  Emergency  Medicine
Collaborative  Research  Committee  [PEM  CRC]  HSV  Study  Group.  Cerebrospinal  fluid
reference
 values
 for
 young
 infants
 undergoing
 lumbar
 puncture.
 Pediatrics
2018;141:e20173405.) †† A women treated with a regimen other than recommended in
these guidelines should be considered untreated. §§ For urethral microscopy, the cutoff
for  diagnosing  urethritis  is  ≥2  WBCs/HPF  (Sources:  Rietmeijer  CA,  Mettenbrink  CJ.
Recalibrating  the  Gram  stain  diagnosis  of  male  urethritis  in  the  era  of  nucleic  acid
amplification  testing.  Sex  Transm  Dis  2012;39:18–20;  Rietmeijer  CA,  Mettenbrink  CJ.
The diagnosis of nongonococcal urethritis in men: can there be a universal standard?
Sex  Transm  Dis  2017;44:195–6).  An  additional  evaluation  supported  this  cutoff  by
demonstrating  NGU  sensitivity  of  92.6%  for  cutoff  of  ≥2  versus  55.6%  sensitivity  for
cutoff  of  ≥5  (Source:  Sarier  M,  Sepin  N,  Duman  I,  et  al.  Microscopy  of  Gram-stained
urethral smear in the diagnosis of urethritis: which threshold value should be selected?
Andrologia
 2018;50:e13143).
 Diagnostic
 cutoffs
 for
 369
 symptomatic
 and
asymptomatic  heterosexual  men  seeking  STI  care  in  Seattle  revealed  a  maximal
sensitivity and specificity achieved with a cutoff of ≥5 WBCs/HPF. Using a lower cutoff
of  ≥2  WBCs/HPF  would  miss  13%  of  C.  trachomatis  and  M.  genitalium  and  overtreat
45% of persons who have negative tests (Source: Leipertz G, Chambers L, Lowens S, et
al. P796 Reassessing the Gram stain smear [GSS] polymorphonuclear leukocyte [PMN]
cutoff for diagnosing non-gonococcal urethritis [NGU]. Sex Transm Infect 2019;95[Suppl
1]:A339). Another study discussed that the WBC/HPF cutoff value should discriminate
on  the  basis  of  the  prevalence  of  chlamydia,  mycoplasma,  and  gonorrhea  among  a
clinic  population  (Source:  Moi  H,  Hartgill  U,  Skullerud  KH,  Reponen  EJ,  Syvertsen  L,
Moghaddam  A.  Microscopy  of  stained  urethral  smear  in  male  urethritis:  which  cutoff
should be used? Sex Transm Dis 2017;44:189–94). Top Top 1. Partners 2. Practices 3.
Protection from STIs 4. Past history of STIs Additional questions for identifying HIV and
viral  hepatitis  risk:  5.  Pregnancy  intention  Top  Gastrointestinal  symptoms  Headache
Pruritis  without  rash  Localized  rash  Delayed  onset  rash  (>24  hours)  Symptoms
unknown Family history of penicillin or another drug allergy Patient denies allergy but it
is  on  the  medical  record  Top  Major  determinant  Minor  determinant  precursors  Aged
penicillin is not an adequate source of minor determinants. Penicillin G should either be
freshly prepared or come from a fresh-frozen source. Positive control Negative control
Source:  Adapted  from  Saxon  A,  Beall  GN,  Rohr  AS,  Adelman  DC.  Immediate
hypersensitivity reactions to beta-lactam antibiotics. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:204−15.
Top Uncomplicated vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) Complicated VVC Source: Sobel JD,
Faro  S,  Force  RW,  et  al.  Vulvovaginal  candidiasis:  epidemiologic,  diagnostic,  and
therapeutic considerations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;178:203–11. Top Source: Perkins
R,  Guido  R,  Saraiya  M,  et  al.  Summary  of  current  guidelines  for  cervical  cancer
screening  and  management  of  abnormal  test  results:  2016–2020.  J  Womens  Health
(Larchmt) 2021;30:5–13.
Abbreviations:  ACS  =  American  Cancer  Society;  ACOG  =  American  College  of
Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists;  AIS  =  adenocarcinoma  in  situ;  ASCCP  =  American
Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology; CIN = cervical intraepithelial neoplasia;
HPV  =  human  papillomavirus;  HSIL  =  high-grade  squamous  intraepithelial  lesion;
USPSTF = U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
* Considered an alternative screening strategy by ACOG.
† Panel for Opportunistic Infections, ACOG, 2016.
§ ACOG, 2016.
¶ Either by cytology or by histology; includes a persistent cytologic diagnosis of atypical
squamous cells, cannot rule out HSIL. Top Sources: Massad LS, Einstein MH, Huh WK, et
al.; 2012 ASCCP Consensus Guidelines Conference. 2012 updated consensus guidelines
for  the  management  of  abnormal  cervical  cancer  screening  tests  and  cancer
precursors.  Obstet  Gynecol  2013;121:829–46;  Perkins  RB,  Guido  RS,  Castle  PE,  et  al;
2019  ASCCP  Risk-Based  Management  Consensus  Guidelines  Committee.  2019  ASCCP
risk-based  management  consensus  guidelines  for  abnormal  cervical  cancer  screening
tests and cancer precursors. J Low Genit Tract Dis 2020;24:102–31; Perkins R, Guido R,
Saraiya  M,  et  al.  Summary  of  current  guidelines  for  cervical  cancer  screening  and
management  of  abnormal  test  results:  2016–2020.  J  Womens  Health  (Larchmt)
2021;30:5–13.
Abbreviations: AGC = atypical glandular cells; AIS = adenocarcinoma in situ; ASC-H =
atypical  squamous  cells  cannot  exclude  high-grade  squamous  intraepithelial  lesion;
ASC-US  =  atypical  squamous  cells  of  undetermined  significance;  CIN  =  cervical
intraepithelial  neoplasia;  HPV  =  human  papillomavirus;  HSIL  =  high-grade  squamous
intraepithelial lesion; LSIL = low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; NILM = negative
for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy; Pap = Papanicolaou.
* Colposcopy may be warranted for patients with a history of high-grade lesions (CIN 2
or CIN 3, histologic or cytologic HSIL, ASC-H, AGC, or AIS).
†  Previous  Pap  test  results  do  not  modify  the  recommendation;  colposcopy  is  always
recommended for two consecutive HPV-positive tests
§ Negative HPV test or cotest (HPV plus Pap test) results only reduce risk sufficiently to
defer  colposcopy  if  performed  for  screening  purposes  within  the  last  5  years.
Colposcopy  is  still  warranted  if  negative  HPV  test  or  cotest  results  occurred  in  the
context of surveillance for a previous abnormal result.
¶  Expedited  treatment  is  preferred  for  nonpregnant  patients  aged  ≥25  years.
Colposcopy  with  biopsy  is  an  acceptable  option  if  desired  by  patient  after  shared
decision-making. Top Source: Nelson NP, Weng MK, Hofmeister MG, et al. Prevention of
hepatitis  A  virus  infection  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices, 2020. MMWR Recomm Rep 2020;69(No. RR-5).
Abbreviations: ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HAV = hepatitis A virus;
HBsAg  =  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen;  Hep  A  =  hepatitis  A;  Hep  B  =  hepatitis  B;  IM=
intramuscular.
*  Combined  Hep  A  and  Hep  B  vaccine  (Twinrix)  should  not  be  used  as  postexposure
prophylaxis. Top Children Persons at increased risk for hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection
Persons  at  increased  risk  for  severe  disease  from  HAV  infection  Other  persons
recommended for vaccination Vaccination during outbreaks Implementation strategies
for  settings  providing  services  to  adults  Hepatitis  A  vaccination  is  no  longer
recommended  by  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  Source:  Nelson
NP,  Weng  MK,  Hofmeister  MG,  et  al.  Prevention  of  hepatitis  A  virus  infection  in  the
United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices,
2020.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2020;69(No.  RR-5).  Top  Source:  Nelson  NP,  Weng  MK,
Hofmeister  MG,  et  al.  Prevention  of  hepatitis  A  virus  infection  in  the  United  States:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, 2020. MMWR
Recomm Rep 2020;69(No. RR-5).
Abbreviations: HAV = hepatitis A virus; IG = immune globulin.
* Measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine should not be administered for ≥2 weeks before
and 6 months after administration of IG.
†  A  second  dose  of  hepatitis  A  vaccine  is  not  required  for  postexposure  prophylaxis;
however,  for  long-term  immunity,  the  vaccination  series  should  be  completed  with  a
second dose ≥6 months after the first dose.
§ The provider’s risk assessment should determine the need for IG administration. If the
provider’s  risk  assessment  determines  that  both  vaccine  and  IG  are  warranted,
hepatitis A vaccine and IG should be administered simultaneously at different anatomic
sites (e.g., separate limbs).
¶  Vaccine  and  IG  should  be  administered  simultaneously  at  different  anatomic  sites
(e.g., separate limbs).
** Life-threatening allergic reaction to a previous dose of hepatitis A vaccine or allergy
to any vaccine component.
†† IG should be considered before travel for persons with special risk factors for either
HAV infection or severe disease from HAV infection.
§§  0.1  mL/kg  body  weight  for  travel  ≤1  month;  0.2  mL/kg  body  weight  for  travel  ≤2
months; 0.2 mL/kg every 2 months for travel of ≥2 months’ duration.
¶¶ This dose should not be counted toward the routine 2-dose series, which should be
initiated at age 12 months.
*** For persons not previously vaccinated with hepatitis A vaccine, administer dose as
soon as travel is considered and complete the series according to routine schedule if
the next dose is needed before travel.
†††  Can  be  administered  on  the  basis  of  the  provider’s  risk  assessment.  Top  Source:
Adapted  from  Schillie  S,  Vellozzi  C,  Reingold  A,  et  al.  Prevention  of  hepatitis  B  virus
infection  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2018;67(No. RR-1).
Abbreviations: anti-HBc = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to
hepatitis B surface antigen; HBIG = hepatitis B immune globulin; HBsAg = hepatitis B
surface antigen; IgM = immunoglobulin M.
* – = negative test result; + = positive test result.
†  To  ensure  that  an  HBsAg-positive  test  result  is  not  false  positive,  samples  with
repeatedly reactive HBsAg results should be tested with a neutralizing confirmatory test
cleared by the Food and Drug Administration.
§ Persons positive for only anti-HBc are unlikely to be infectious, except under unusual
circumstances involving direct percutaneous exposure to large quantities of blood (e.g.,
blood  transfusion  or  organ  transplantation)  or  mutant  HBsAg-related  infection.  Top
Source: Adapted from Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B
virus  infection  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2018;67(No. RR-1).
Abbreviation: NA = not applicable.
* Administered on a 2-dose schedule.
† Combined hepatitis A and B vaccines. This vaccine is recommended for persons aged
≥18 years who are at increased risk for both hepatitis B and hepatitis A virus infections.
§ Recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen protein dose.
¶  Heplisav-B  should  not  be  used  for  vaccination  of  infants,  children,  or  adolescents
because the safety and effectiveness of Heplisav-B has not been established in persons
aged <8 years and is not approved for use in these populations.
** Adult formulation administered on a 2-dose schedule.
†† Engerix-B and Recombivax HB are approved for use in persons of all ages.
§§ Higher doses might be more immunogenic; however, no specific recommendations
have been made.
¶¶ Dialysis formulation administered on a 3-dose schedule at 0, 1, and 6 months.
*** Two 1.0-mL doses administered at one site, on a 4-dose schedule at 0, 1, 2, and 6
months.  Top  Sources:  CDC.  CDC  guidance  for  evaluating  health-care  personnel  for
hepatitis  B  virus  protection  and  for  administering  postexposure  management.  MMWR
Recomm Rep 2013;62(No. RR-10); CDC. Postexposure prophylaxis to prevent hepatitis
B virus infection. MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55(No. RR-16).
Abbreviations:  HBIG  =  hepatitis  B  immune  globulin;  HBsAg  =  hepatitis  B  surface
antigen.
*  When  indicated,  immunoprophylaxis  should  be  initiated  as  soon  as  possible,
preferably  within  24  hours.  Studies  are  limited  regarding  the  maximum  interval  after
exposure during which postexposure prophylaxis is effective, but the interval is unlikely
to  exceed  7  days  for  percutaneous  exposures  or  14  days  for  sexual  exposures.  The
hepatitis  B  vaccine  series  should  be  completed.  These  guidelines  apply  to
nonoccupational exposures.
† These guidelines apply to nonoccupational exposures.
§ A person who is in the process of being vaccinated but who has not completed the
vaccine  series  should  complete  the  series  and  receive  treatment  for  hepatitis  B  as
indicated.
¶ A person who has written documentation of a complete hepatitis B vaccine series and
who did not receive postvaccination testing.
** No booster dose is needed for persons who have written documentation of hepatitis
B  vaccine  series  with  serologic  response.  Top  Source:  Adapted  from  Announcement:
updated
 guidelines
 for
 antiretroviral
 postexposure
 prophylaxis
 after
 sexual,
injection-drug  use,  or  other  nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV—United  States,  2016.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:458.
Abbreviation: PEP = postexposure prophylaxis. Top Sources: Adapted from Kellogg N;
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect. The evaluation
of child abuse in children. Pediatrics 2005;16:506–12; Adams JA, Farst KJ, Kellogg ND.
Interpretation  of  medical  findings  in  suspected  child  abuse:  an  update  for  2018.  J
Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 2018;31:225–31.
* If unlikely to have been perinatally acquired and vertical transmission, which is rare, is
excluded.
† Reports should be made to the local or state agency mandated to receive reports of
suspected child abuse or neglect.
§ If unlikely to have been acquired perinatally or through transfusion.
¶ Unless a clear history of autoinoculation exists.
** Report if evidence exists to suspect abuse, including history, physical examination,
or  other  identified  infections.  Lesions  appearing  for  the  first  time  in  a  child  aged  >5
years  are  more  likely  to  have  been  caused  by  sexual  transmission.  Top  Suggested
citation  for  this  article:  Workowski  KA,  Bachmann  LH,  Chan  PA,  et  al.  Sexually
Transmitted  Infections  Treatment  Guidelines,  2021.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2021;70(No.
RR-4):1–187. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7004a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/rr/rr7004a1.htm
