  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Please  note:  An  erratum  has
been  published  for  this  article.  To  view  the  erratum,  please  click  here.   Prepared  by
Kimberly  A.  Workowski,  MD1,2  Stuart  Berman,  MD1  1Division  of  STD  Prevention
National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention 2Emory University,
Atlanta,  Georgia  Corresponding  Author:  Kimberly  Workowski,  MD,  Division  of  STD
Prevention,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  10
Corporate  Square,  Corporate  Square  Blvd,  MS  E02,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  Telephone:
404-639-1898; Fax: 404-639-8610; kgw2@cdc.gov. These guidelines for the treatment
of  persons  who  have  or  are  at  risk  for  sexually  transmitted  diseases  (STDs)  were
updated by CDC after consultation with a group of professionals knowledgeable in the
field of STDs who met in Atlanta on April 18--30, 2009. The information in this report
updates  the  2006  Guidelines  for  Treatment  of  Sexually  Transmitted  Diseases  (MMWR
2006;55[No.  RR--11]).  Included  in  these  updated  guidelines  is  new  information
regarding  1)  the  expanded  diagnostic  evaluation  for  cervicitis  and  trichomoniasis;  2)
new  treatment  recommendations  for  bacterial  vaginosis  and  genital  warts;  3)  the
clinical  efficacy  of  azithromycin  for  chlamydial  infections  in  pregnancy;  4)  the  role  of
Mycoplasma genitalium and trichomoniasis in urethritis/cervicitis and treatment-related
implications;  5)  lymphogranuloma  venereum  proctocolitis  among  men  who  have  sex
with men; 6) the criteria for spinal fluid examination to evaluate for neurosyphilis; 7)
the  emergence  of  azithromycin-resistant  Treponema  pallidum;  8)  the  increasing
prevalence of antimicrobial-resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae; 9) the sexual transmission
of hepatitis C; 10) diagnostic evaluation after sexual assault; and 11) STD prevention
approaches. The term sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) is used to refer to a variety
of  clinical  syndromes  caused  by  pathogens  that  can  be  acquired  and  transmitted
through sexual activity. Physicians and other health-care providers play a critical role in
preventing and treating STDs. These guidelines for the treatment of STDs are intended
to  assist  with  that  effort.  Although  these  guidelines  emphasize  treatment,  prevention
strategies
 and
 diagnostic
 recommendations
 also
 are
 discussed.
 These
recommendations  should  be  regarded  as  a  source  of  clinical  guidance  and  not
prescriptive  standards;  health-care  providers  should  always  consider  the  clinical
circumstances  of  each  person  in  the  context  of  local  disease  prevalence.  They  are
applicable  to  various  patient-care  settings,  including  family-planning  clinics,  private
physicians'  offices,  managed  care  organizations,  and  other  primary-care  facilities.
These guidelines focus on the treatment and counseling of individual patients and do
not  address  other  community  services  and  interventions  that  are  essential  to
STD/human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  prevention  efforts.  These  guidelines  were
developed  using  a  multistage  process.  Beginning  in  2008,  CDC  staff  members  and
public  and  private  sector  experts  knowledgeable  in  the  field  of  STDs  systematically
reviewed  literature  using  an  evidence-based  approach  (e.g.,  published  abstracts  and
peer-reviewed journal articles), focusing on the common STDs and information that had
become  available  since  publication  of  the  2006  Guidelines  for  Treatment  of  Sexually
Transmitted Diseases (1). CDC staff members and STD experts developed background
papers  and  tables  of  evidence  that  summarized  the  type  of  study  (e.g.,  randomized
controlled  trial  or  case  series),  study  population  and  setting,  treatments  or  other
interventions,  outcome  measures  assessed,  reported  findings,  and  weaknesses  and
biases in study design and analysis. CDC staff then developed a draft document on the
basis of this evidence-based review. In April 2009, this information was presented at a
meeting  of  invited  consultants  (including  public-  and  private-sector  professionals
knowledgeable  in  the  treatment  of  patients  with  STDs),  where  all  evidence  from  the
literature  reviews  pertaining  to  STD  management  was  discussed.   Specifically,
participants identified key questions regarding STD treatment that emerged from the
literature reviews and discussed the information available to answer those questions.
Discussion  focused  on  four  principal  outcomes  of  STD  therapy  for  each  individual
disease: 1) treatment of infection based on microbiologic eradication; 2) alleviation of
signs  and  symptoms;  3)  prevention  of  sequelae;  and  4)  prevention  of  transmission.
Cost-effectiveness  and  other  advantages  (e.g.,  single-dose  formulations  and  directly
observed  therapy  [DOT])  of  specific  regimens  also  were  discussed.  The  consultants
then assessed whether the questions identified were relevant, ranked them in order of
priority,  and  answered  the  questions  using  the  available  evidence.  In  addition,  the
consultants evaluated the quality of evidence supporting the answers on the basis of
the  number,  type,  and  quality  of  the  studies.  The  sections  on  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)
and
 hepatitis
 A
 virus
 (HAV)
 infections
 are
 based
 on
 previously
 published
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) (2--4).
The  recommendations  for  STD  screening  during  pregnancy  and  cervical  cancer
screening  were  developed  after  CDC  staff  reviewed  the  published  recommendations
from other professional organizations, including the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG), United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), and
ACIP.  Throughout  this  report,  the  evidence  used  as  the  basis  for  specific
recommendations  is  discussed  briefly.  More  comprehensive,  annotated  discussions  of
such evidence will appear in background papers that will be published in a supplement
issue  of  the  journal  Clinical  Infectious  Diseases.  When  more  than  one  therapeutic
regimen is recommended, the sequence is alphabetized unless the choices for therapy
are prioritized based on efficacy, convenience, or cost. For those infections with more
than one recommended regimen, almost all regimens have similar efficacy and similar
rates  of  intolerance  or  toxicity  unless  otherwise  specified.  Recommended  regimens
should  be  used  primarily;  alternative  regimens  can  be  considered  in  instances  of
significant drug allergy or other contraindications to the recommended regimens. The
prevention  and  control  of  STDs  are  based  on  the  following  five  major  strategies:  
education and counseling of persons at risk on ways to avoid STDs through changes in
sexual  behaviors  and  use  of  recommended  prevention  services;  identification  of
asymptomatically  infected  persons  and  of  symptomatic  persons  unlikely  to  seek
diagnostic  and  treatment  services;  effective  diagnosis,  treatment,  and  counseling  of
infected persons;
 evaluation,  treatment,  and  counseling  of  sex  partners  of  persons  who  are
infected  with  an  STD;  and  pre-exposure  vaccination  of  persons  at  risk  for
vaccine-preventable STDs. Primary prevention of STDs begins with changing the sexual
behaviors that place persons at risk for infection. Health-care providers have a unique
opportunity to provide education and counseling to their patients (5,6). As part of the
clinical  interview,  health-care  providers  should  routinely  and  regularly  obtain  sexual
histories from their patients and address management of risk reduction as indicated in
this  report.  Guidance  in  obtaining  a  sexual  history  is  available  in  Contraceptive
Technology,  19th  edition  (7)  and  in  the  curriculum  provided  by  CDC's  STD/HIV
Prevention
 Training
 Centers
 (http://www.stdhivpreventiontraining.org).
 Effective
interviewing  and  counseling  skills,  characterized  by  respect,  compassion,  and  a
nonjudgmental attitude toward all patients, are essential to obtaining a thorough sexual
history and to delivering prevention messages effectively. Key techniques that can be
effective in facilitating rapport with patients include the use of 1) open-ended questions
(e.g., "Tell me about any new sex partners you've had since your last visit," and "What's
your experience with using condoms been like?"); 2) understandable language ("Have
you ever had a sore or scab on your penis?"); and 3) normalizing language ("Some of
my patients have difficulty using a condom with every sex act. How is it for you?"). The
"Five P's" approach to obtaining a sexual history is an example of an effective strategy
for eliciting information concerning five key areas of interest (Box 1). Efforts should be
made  to  ensure  that  all  patients  are  treated  regardless  of  individual  circumstances
(e.g., ability to pay, citizenship or immigration status, language spoken, or specific sex
practices).  Patients  seeking  treatment  or  screening  for  a  particular  STD  should  be
evaluated for all common STDs. All patients should be informed about all the STDs for
which  they  are  being  tested  and  notified  about  tests  for  common  STDs  (e.g.,  genital
herpes) that are available but not being performed.  USPSTF recommends high-intensity
behavioral counseling for all sexually active adolescents and for adults at increased risk
for STDs and HIV (5,6). All providers should routinely obtain a sexual history from their
patients  and  encourage  risk-reduction  using  various  strategies;  effective  delivery  of
prevention  messages  requires  that  providers  communicate  general  risk-reduction
messages  relevant  to  the  client  and  that  providers  educate  the  client  about  specific
actions  that  can  reduce  the  risk  for  STD/HIV  transmission  (e.g.,  abstinence,  condom
use, limiting the number of sex partners, modifying sexual practices, and vaccination),
each  of  which  is  discussed  separately  in  this  report  (see  Prevention  Methods).
Prevention counseling is most effective if provided in a nonjudgmental and empathetic
manner appropriate to the patient's culture, language, sex, sexual orientation, age, and
developmental level. Interactive counseling approaches directed at a patient's personal
risk,  the  situations  in  which  risk  occurs,  and  the  use  of  personalized  goal-setting
strategies  are  effective  in  STD/HIV  prevention  (5,6).  One  such  approach,  known  as
client-centered  STD/HIV  prevention  counseling,  involves  tailoring  a  discussion  of  risk
reduction to the patient's individual situation. Client-centered counseling can increase
the likelihood that the patient undertakes or enhances current risk-reduction practices,
especially  among  persons  seeking  STD  care.  One  such  approach,  known  as  Project
RESPECT, demonstrated that a brief counseling intervention led to a reduced frequency
of STD/HIV risk-related behaviors and resulted in lowered acquisition rates for curable
STDs,  including  trichomoniasis,  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  and  syphilis  (8,9).  Practice
models based on Project RESPECT have been successfully implemented in clinic-based
settings.  Other  approaches  use  motivational  interviewing  to  move  clients  toward
achievable risk reduction goals. CDC provides additional information on these and other
effective  behavioral  interventions  at  http://effectiveinterventions.org.  Interactive
counseling can be used effectively by all health-care providers, counselors, and other
clinical staff trained in counseling approaches. Extensive training is not a prerequisite
for effective risk reduction counseling; however, the quality of counseling is improved
when  providers  receive  training  in  prevention  counseling  methods  and  skill-building
approaches, providers are periodically observed when providing counseling and given
immediate feedback by persons with expertise in the counseling approach, counselors
are periodically evaluated and patients asked to evaluate their level of satisfaction, and
providers  have  access  to  expert  assistance  or  referral  for  challenging  situations.
Training in client-centered counseling is available through the CDC STD/HIV Prevention
Training  Centers  (http://www.stdhivpreventiontraining.org).   In  addition  to  individual
prevention  counseling,  videos  and  large  group  presentations  can  provide  explicit
information concerning STDs and instruction to reduce disease transmission (e.g., how
to use condoms correctly). Group-based strategies have been effective in reducing the
occurrence  of  additional  STDs  among  persons  at  high  risk,  including  those  attending
STD  clinics  (10).  Because  the  incidence  of  some  STDs,  notably  syphilis,  is  higher  in
HIV-infected  persons,  the  use  of  client-centered  STD  counseling  for  HIV-infected
persons  has  been  strongly  encouraged  by  public  health  agencies  and  other  health
organizations. Consensus guidelines issued by CDC, the Health Resources and Services
Administration,  the  HIV  Medicine  Association  of  the  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of
America, and the National Institutes of Health emphasize that STD/HIV risk assessment,
STD  screening,  and  client-centered  risk  reduction  counseling  should  be  provided
routinely to HIV-infected persons (11). Several specific methods have been designed for
the HIV care setting (12--14), and additional information regarding these approaches is
available  at  http://effectiveinterventions.org.  A  reliable  way  to  avoid  transmission  of
STDs  is  to  abstain  from  oral,  vaginal,  and  anal  sex  or  to  be  in  a  long-term,  mutually
monogamous  relationship  with  an  uninfected  partner.  For  persons  who  are  being
treated  for  an  STD  (or  whose  partners  are  undergoing  treatment),  counseling  that
encourages abstinence from sexual intercourse until completion of the entire course of
medication is crucial. A more comprehensive discussion of abstinence and other sexual
practices than can help persons reduce their risk for STDs is available in Contraceptive
Technology,  19th  Edition  (7).  For  persons  embarking  on  a  mutually  monogamous
relationship, screening for common STDs before initiating sex might reduce the risk for
future  disease  transmission.  Pre-exposure  vaccination  is  one  of  the  most  effective
methods for preventing transmission of some STDs. Two human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccines are available for females aged 9--26 years to prevent cervical precancer and
cancer (15,16): the quadrivalent HPV vaccine (Gardasil) and the bivalent HPV vaccine
(Cervarix). Gardasil also prevents genital warts. Routine vaccination of females aged 11
or 12 years is recommended with either vaccine, as is catch-up vaccination for females
aged 13--26 years. Gardasil can be administered to males aged 9--26 years to prevent
genital warts (17). Details regarding HPV vaccination are available at 
www.cdc.gov/std/hpv
 .
 Hepatitis
 B
 vaccination
 is
 recommended
 for
 all
unvaccinated,  uninfected  persons  being  evaluated  for  an  STD  (3,4).  In  addition,
hepatitis A and B vaccines are recommended for men who have sex with men (MSM)
and  injection-drug  users  (IDUs)  (2--4);  each  of  these  vaccines  should  also  be
administered to HIV-infected persons who have not yet been infected with one or both
types of hepatitis virus. Details regarding hepatitis A and B vaccination are available at
http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis.   When  used  consistently  and  correctly,  male  latex
condoms are highly effective in preventing the sexual transmission of HIV infection. In
heterosexual  serodiscordant  relationships  (i.e.,  those  involving  one  infected  and  one
uninfected  partner)  in  which  condoms  were  consistently  used,  HIV-negative  partners
were  80%  less  likely  to  become  HIV-infected  compared  with  persons  in  similar
relationships in which condoms were not used (18).  Moreover, studies show condoms
can reduce the risk for other STDs, including chlamydia, gonorrhea, and trichomoniasis;
by limiting lower genital tract infections, condoms also might reduce the risk for women
developing  pelvic  inflammatory  disease  (PID)  (19,20).  In  addition,  consistent  and
correct  use  of  latex  condoms  also  reduces  the  risk  for  genital  herpes,  syphilis,  and
chancroid  when  the  infected  area  or  site  of  potential  exposure  is  covered,  although
data for this effect are more limited (21--24). Additional information is available at 
www.cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness/latex.htm.  Cohort  studies  have  demonstrated
that  condoms  protect  against  the  acquisition  of  genital  HPV  infection.  A  prospective
study among newly sexually active women who were attending college demonstrated
that consistent and correct condom use was associated with a 70% reduction in risk for
HPV  transmission  (25).  Use  of  condoms  also  appears  to  reduce  the  risk  for
HPV-associated  diseases  (e.g.,  genital  warts  and  cervical  cancer)  and  mitigate  the
adverse  consequences  of  infection  with  HPV.  Condom  use  has  been  associated  with
higher  rates  of  regression  of  cervical  intraepithelial  neoplasia  (CIN)  and  clearance  of
HPV  infection  in  women  (26)  and  with  regression  of  HPV-associated  penile  lesions  in
men  (27).   Condoms  are  regulated  as  medical  devices  and  are  subject  to  random
sampling  and  testing  by  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA).  Each  latex
condom  manufactured  in  the  United  States  is  tested  electronically  for  holes  before
packaging.  Rates  of  condom  breakage  during  sexual  intercourse  and  withdrawal  are
approximately  two  broken  condoms  per  100  condoms  used  in  the  United  States.  The
failure  of  condoms  to  protect  against  STD  transmission  or  unintended  pregnancy
usually results from inconsistent or incorrect use rather than condom breakage (28). 
Male  condoms  made  of  materials  other  than  latex  are  available  in  the  United  States.
Two  general  categories  of  nonlatex  condoms  exist.  The  first  type  is  made  of
polyurethane or other synthetic material and provides protection against STDs/HIV and
pregnancy  equal  to  that  of  latex  condoms  (29).  These  can  be  substituted  for  latex
condoms by persons with latex allergy. Although they have had higher breakage and
slippage  rates  when  compared  with  latex  condoms  and  are  usually  more  costly,  the
pregnancy rates among women whose partners use these condoms are similar to those
asociated  with  use  of  latex  condoms  (30).   The  second  type  is  natural  membrane
condoms  (frequently  called  "natural"  condoms  or,  incorrectly,  "lambskin"  condoms).
These condoms are usually made from lamb cecum and can have pores up to 1,500 nm
in diameter. Although these pores do not allow the passage of sperm, they are more
than 10 times the diameter of HIV and more than 25 times that of HBV (29). Moreover,
laboratory  studies  demonstrate  that  viral  STD  transmission  can  occur  with  natural
membrane condoms (29). Use of natural membrane condoms for prevention of STDs is
not recommended. Providers should advise their patients that condoms must be used
consistently  and  correctly  to  be  effective  in  preventing  STDs;  providing  instructions
about  the  correct  use  of  condoms  can  be  useful.  Communicating  the  following
recommendations  can  help  ensure  that  patients  use  male  condoms  correctly:   Use  a
new  condom  with  each  sex  act  (i.e.,  oral,  vaginal,  and  anal).  Carefully  handle  the
condom  to  avoid  damaging  it  with  fingernails,  teeth,  or  other  sharp  objects.  Put  the
condom on after the penis is erect and before any genital, oral, or anal contact with the
partner.  Use  only  water-based  lubricants  (e.g.,  K-Y  Jelly,  Astroglide,  AquaLube,  and
glycerin)  with  latex  condoms.  Oil-based  lubricants  (e.g.,  petroleum  jelly,  shortening,
mineral oil, massage oils, body lotions, and cooking oil) can weaken latex and should
not  be  used.  Ensure  adequate  lubrication  during  vaginal  and  anal  sex,  which  might
require  the  use  of  exogenous  water-based  lubricants.  To  prevent  the  condom  from
slipping  off,  hold  the  condom  firmly  against  the  base  of  the  penis  during  withdrawal,
and withdraw while the penis is still erect. Laboratory studies indicate that the female
condom  (Reality)  is  an  effective  mechanical  barrier  to  viruses,  including  HIV,  and  to
semen. The first female condom approved for use in the United States consisted of a
lubricated polyurethane sheath with a ring on each end that is inserted into the vagina.
A  newer  version  made  from  nitrile  is  now  available  in  the  United  States.  A  limited
number of clinical studies have evaluated the efficacy of female condoms in providing
protection  from  STDs,  including  HIV  (31,32).  Although  female  condoms  are  costly
compared  with  male  condoms,  sex  partners  should  consider  using  a  female  condom
when a male condom cannot be used properly. The female condom also has been used
for  STDs/HIV  protection  during  receptive  anal  intercourse  (33);  although  it  might
provide some protection in this setting, its efficacy remains unknown. In observational
studies, diaphragm use has been demonstrated to protect against cervical gonorrhea,
chlamydia,  and  trichomoniasis  (34).  A  recent  trial  examined  the  effect  of  use  of  a
diaphragm plus polycarbophil (Replens) lubricant on HIV acquisition in women in Africa
relative to male condom use alone. The study revealed that neither the diaphragm nor
the lubricant gel provided additional protective effect when compared with the use of
condoms alone (35). Likewise, no difference by study arm in the rate of acquisition of
chlamydia  or  gonorrhea  occurred;  however,  data  from  participants  who  reported
following the protocol for the use of these products suggested that consistent use of the
diaphragm plus gel might reduce acquisition of gonorrhea (36). Diaphragms should not
be  relied  on  as  the  sole  source  of  protection  against  HIV  infection.  Diaphragm  and
nonoxynol-9  (N-9)  spermicide  use  have  been  associated  with  an  increased  risk  for
bacterial urinary-tract infections in women (37).  Studies examining nonspecific topical
microbicides for the prevention of HIV and STD have demonstrated that these products
are ineffective (38,39). Studies of spermicides containing N-9 have demonstrated that
they  should  not  be  recommended  for  STDs/HIV  prevention  (40),  and  more  recent
randomized  controlled  trials  have  failed  to  show  a  protective  effect  against  HIV
acquisition  for  BufferGel  (a  vaginal  buffering  agent),  Carraguard  (a  carrageenan
derivative) (41), cellulose sulfate (an HIV entry inhibitor), (42) and SAVVY (1.0% C31G,
a  surfactant)  (43,44).  Initial  results  from  a  study  in  which  participants  used  0.5%
PRO2000 vaginal gel (a synthetic polyanion polymer that blocks cellular entry of HIV) on
a daily basis appeared promising, reducing the rate of HIV acquisition by 30% relative
to no gel (45). However, a recent randomized trial of approximately 9,000 women failed
to  show  any  protective  effect  (46).  Topical  antiretroviral  agents  for  the  prevention  of
HIV appear more promising. Use of tenofovir gel during sexual intercourse significantly
reduced  the  rate  of  HIV  acquisition  (i.e.,  by  39%)  in  a  study  of  South  African  women
(47). Additional studies are being undertaken to elucidate the optimal dosing regimens
for this drug.  Other products remain under study, including VivaGel, a topical vaginal
microbicide.  A  list  of  products  under  development  is  maintained  by  the  Alliance  for
Microbicide Development at 
www.microbicide.org. Condoms lubricated with spermicides are no more effective
than other lubricated condoms in protecting against the transmission of HIV and other
STDs  (www.cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness/latex.htm).  Furthermore,  frequent  use  of
spermicides  containing  N-9  has  been  associated  with  disruption  of  the  genital
epithelium, which might be associated with an increased risk for HIV transmission (40).
Therefore,  use  of  condoms  lubricated  with  N-9  is  not  recommended  for  STD/HIV
prevention; in addition, spermicide-coated condoms cost more, have a shorter shelf-life
than other lubricated condoms, and have been associated with urinary-tract infection in
young women (37).  N-9 can damage the cells lining the rectum, which might provide a
portal of entry for HIV and other sexually transmissible agents. Therefore, it should not
used  as  a  microbicide  or  lubricant  during  anal  intercourse  by  MSM  or  by  women.  
Contraceptive methods that are not mechanical barriers offer no protection against HIV
or  other  STDs.  Sexually  active  women  who  use  hormonal  contraception  (i.e.,  oral
contraceptives,  Norplant,  and  Depo-Provera),  have  intrauterine  devices  (IUDs),  have
been surgically sterilized, or have had hysterectomies should be counseled regarding
the  use  of  condoms  and  the  risk  for  STDs,  including  HIV  infection,  because  these
women might incorrectly perceive that they are not at risk for these diseases. Women
who take oral contraceptives and are prescribed certain antibiotics should be counseled
about potential interactions (7). Although male circumcision should not be substituted
for other HIV risk-reduction strategies, it has been shown to reduce the risk for HIV and
some  STDs  in  heterosexual  men.  Three  randomized,  controlled  trials  performed  in
regions of sub-Saharan Africa where generalized HIV epidemics involving predominantly
heterosexual  transmission  were  occurring  demonstrated  that  male  circumcision
reduced the risk for HIV acquisition among men by 50%--60% (48--50). In these trials,
circumcision  was  also  protective  against  other  STDs,  including  high-risk  genital  HPV
infection  and  genital  herpes  (51--54).  Despite  these  data,  male  circumcision  has  not
been  demonstrated  to  reduce  the  risk  for  HIV  or  other  STDs  among  MSM  (55).  The
World Health Organization (WHO) and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS)  have  recommended  that  male  circumcision  be  scaled  up  as  an  effective
intervention  for  the  prevention  of  heterosexually  acquired  HIV  infection  (56).  These
organizations also recommend that countries with hyperendemic and generalized HIV
epidemics  and  low  prevalence  of  male  circumcision  expand  access  to  safe  male
circumcision services within the context of ensuring universal access to comprehensive
HIV prevention, treatment, care, and support. Similar recommendations have not been
made in the United States, although evidence regarding the role of male circumcision in
the prevention of HIV/AIDS is under review (57).  Women who might have been exposed
to STDs during a recent act of unprotected intercourse also are at risk for pregnancy.
Providers  managing  such  women  should  offer  counseling  about  the  option  of  EC  if
pregnancy  is  not  desired.  In  the  United  States,  EC  products  are  available
over-the-counter to women aged ≥17 years and by prescription to younger women. If
these EC pill products are not readily accessible, many commonly available brands of
oral  contraceptive  pills  can  effectively  provide  EC,  but  women  must  be  instructed  to
take an appropriate and specified number of tablets at one time. All oral EC regimens
are efficacious when initiated as soon as possible after unprotected sex, but have some
efficacy as long as 5 days later. EC is ineffective (but is also not harmful) if the woman
is already pregnant (58). More information about EC is available in the 19th edition of
Contraceptive Technology (7) or http://ec.princeton.edu/emergency-contraception.html.
Insertion of an IUD up to 7 days after unprotected sex can reduce pregnancy risk by
more than 99% (7). However, this method is not advisable for a woman who may have
untreated cervical gonorrhea or chlamydia, who is already pregnant, or who has other
contraindications  to  IUD  use.  Guidelines  for  the  use  of  PEP  aimed  at  preventing  HIV
infection as a result of sexual exposure are available and are discussed in this report
(see  Sexual  Assault  and  STDs).  Genital  hygiene  methods  (e.g.,  vaginal  washing  and
douching) after sexual exposure are ineffective in protecting against HIV and STD and
might increase the risk for bacterial vaginosis, some STDs, and HIV (59). Antiretroviral
therapy  (ART)  has  the  potential  to  impact  transmission  and  acquisition  of  HIV.  In
HIV-infected  persons,  ART  reduces  viral  load  and  presumably  reduces  infectiousness
(60). In HIV-uninfected persons, ART might reduce susceptibility to infection, a concept
supported both by animal studies and by a study of safety and acceptability involving
West  African  women  (61,62).  A  randomized,  placebo-controlled  trial  involving  South
African women recently demonstrated that use of tenofovir gel associated with sexual
intercourse  significantly  reduced  the  rate  of  HIV  and  herpes  simplex  virus  type  2
(HSV-2)  acquisition  by  39%  and  51%,  respectively  (47,63).  Several  large  randomized
controlled trials of PrEP are either underway or planned. These involve the oral use of
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (tenofovir or tenofovir-emtricitabine) or
vaginal  use  of  1%  tenofovir  gel.   Retesting  several  months  after  a  diagnosis  of
chlamydia  or  gonorrhea  can  detect  repeat  infection  and  potentially  can  be  used  to
enhance population-based prevention (64). Further details on retesting can be found in
the  specific  sections  on  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  within  this  report.   Partner
management  refers  to  a  continuum  of  activities  designed  to  increase  the  number  of
infected persons brought to treatment and disrupt transmission networks. Part of this
continuum  is  partner  notification  ---  the  process  by  which  providers  or  public  health
authorities  learn  about  the  sex-  and  needle-sharing  partners  of  infected  patients  and
help to arrange for partner evaluation and treatment. Clinical-care providers can obtain
this  information  and  help  to  arrange  for  evaluation  and  treatment  of  sex  partners
directly  or  by  cooperating  with  state  and  local  health  departments.  The  types  and
comprehensiveness  of  existing  partner  services  and  the  specific  STDs  for  which  they
are  offered  vary  by  provider,  public  health  agency,  and  geographic  area.  Ideally,
persons referred to such services should also receive health counseling and should be
referred  for  other  health  services  as  appropriate.  Data  are  limited  regarding  whether
partner notification effectively decreases exposure to STDs and whether it reduces the
incidence and prevalence of these infections in a community. Nevertheless, evaluations
of  partner  notification  interventions  have  documented  the  important  contribution  this
approach  can  make  to  case-finding  in  clinical  and  community  contexts  (65).  When
partners  are  treated,  index  patients  have  reduced  risk  for  reinfection.  Therefore,
providers  should  encourage  persons  with  STDs  to  notify  their  sex  partners  and  urge
them to seek medical evaluation and treatment. Further, providers can ask patients to
bring partners with them when returning for treatment. Time spent with index patients
to  counsel  them  on  the  importance  of  notifying  partners  is  associated  with  improved
notification  outcomes  (66).   When  patients  diagnosed  with  chlamydia  or  gonorrhea
indicate that their partners are unlikely to seek evaluation and treatment, providers can
offer  patient-delivered  partner  therapy  (PDPT),  a  form  of  expedited  partner  therapy
(EPT)  in  which  partners  of  infected  persons  are  treated  without  previous  medical
evaluation or prevention counseling. Because EPT might be prohibited in some states
and is the topic of ongoing legislation in others (67), providers should visit 
www.cdc.gov/std/ept to obtain updated information for their individual jurisdiction.
Any medication or prescription provided for PDPT should be accompanied by treatment
instructions, appropriate warnings about taking medications (if the partner is pregnant
or  has  an  allergy  to  the  medication),  general  health  counseling,  and  a  statement
advising  that  partners  seek  personal  medical  evaluation,  particularly  women  with
symptoms of STDs or PID. The evidence supporting PDPT is based on three clinical trials
that  included  heterosexual  men  and  women  with  chlamydia  or  gonorrhea.  The  trials
and  meta-analyses  revealed  that  the  magnitude  of  reduction  in  reinfection  of  index
case-patients compared with patient referral differed according to the STD and the sex
of  the  index  case-patient  (68--71).  However,  across  trials,  reductions  in  chlamydia
prevalence at follow-up were approximately 20%; reductions in gonorrhea at follow-up
were  approximately  50%.  Rates  of  notification  increased  in  some  trials  and  were
equivalent to patient referral without PDPT in others. Existing data suggest that PDPT
also might have a role in partner management for trichomoniasis; however, no single
partner management intervention has been shown to be more effective than any other
in  reducing  reinfection  rates  (72,73).  No  data  support  the  use  of  PDPT  in  the  routine
management of patients with syphilis. No studies have been published involving PDPT
for  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia  among  MSM.   Public  health  program  involvement  with
partner  notification  services  varies  by  locale  and  by  STD.  Some  programs  have
considered  partner  notification  in  a  broader  context,  developing  interventions  to
address sexual and social networks in which persons are exposed to STDs. Prospective
evaluations  incorporating  the  assessment  of  venues,  community  structure,  and  social
and  sexual  contacts  in  conjunction  with  partner  notification  efforts  have  improved
case-finding  and  illustrated  transmission  networks  (74,75).  While  such  efforts  are
beyond  the  scope  of  individual  clinicians,  support  of  and  collaboration  with  STD
programs by clinicians are critical to the success of social network-based interventions.
Certain evidence supports the use of the internet to facilitate partner notification (76),
especially among MSM and in cases where no other identifying information is available,
and  many  health  departments  now  conduct  formal  internet  partner  notification  (IPN)
(http://www.ncsddc.org/upload/wysiwyg/documents/NGuidelinesforInternet.htm).
Clinical providers are unlikely to participate directly in IPN. However, when discussing
partner notification approaches with patients, they should be aware of the value of the
internet in this type of communication and should know where to refer patients who are
interested in using the internet to notify partners about their diagnosis.  The accurate
and timely reporting of STDs is integral to efforts to assess morbidity trends, allocate
limited  resources,  and  assist  local  health  authorities  in  partner  notification  and
treatment. STD/HIV and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) cases should be
reported in accordance with state and local statutory requirements. Syphilis, gonorrhea,
chlamydia,  chancroid,  HIV  infection,  and  AIDS  are  reportable  diseases  in  every  state.
Because the requirements for reporting other STDs differ by state, clinicians should be
familiar with the reporting requirements applicable within their jurisdictions. Reporting
can  be  provider-  or  laboratory-based.  Clinicians  who  are  unsure  of  state  and  local
reporting  requirements  should  seek  advice  from  state  or  local  health  departments  or
STD programs. STDs and HIV reports are kept strictly confidential. In most jurisdictions,
such reports are protected by statute from subpoena. Before conducting a follow-up of
a  positive  STD-test  result,  public  health  professionals  should  consult  the  patient's
health-care  provider  to  verify  the  diagnosis  and  to  determine  the  treatments  being
received.  Intrauterine  or  perinatally  transmitted  STDs  can  have  severely  debilitating
effects on pregnant women, their partners, and their fetuses. All pregnant women and
their  sex  partners  should  be  asked  about  STDs,  counseled  about  the  possibility  of
perinatal infections, and provided access to treatment, if needed. All pregnant women
in  the  United  States  should  be  screened  for  HIV  infection  as  early  in  pregnancy  as
possible (77). Screening should be conducted after the woman is notified that she will
be screened for HIV as part of the routine panel of prenatal tests, unless she declines
(i.e., opt-out screening). For women who decline HIV testing, providers should address
their objections, and when appropriate, continue to encourage testing strongly. Women
who  decline  testing  because  they  have  had  a  previous  negative  HIV  test  should  be
informed  of  the  importance  of  retesting  during  each  pregnancy.  Testing  pregnant
women and treating those who are infected are vital not only to maintain the health of
the patient, but to reduce perinatal transmission of HIV through available antiretroviral
and  obstetrical  interventions.  Retesting  in  the  third  trimester  (preferably  before  36
weeks'  gestation)  is  recommended  for  women  at  high  risk  for  acquiring  HIV  infection
(e.g.,  women  who  use  illicit  drugs,  have  STDs  during  pregnancy,  have  multiple  sex
partners during pregnancy, live in areas with high HIV prevalence, or have HIV-infected
partners). Rapid HIV screening should be performed on any woman in labor who has an
undocumented  HIV  status  unless  she  declines.  If  a  rapid  HIV  test  result  is  positive  in
these women, antiretroviral prophylaxis should be administered without waiting for the
results of the confirmatory test (78). A serologic test for syphilis should be performed
on  all  pregnant  women  at  the  first  prenatal  visit  (79).  In  populations  in  which  the
amount of prenatal care delivered is not optimal, rapid plasma reagin (RPR) card test
screening (and treatment, if that test is reactive) should be performed at the time that
a pregnancy is confirmed. Women who are at high risk for syphilis, live in areas of high
syphilis  morbidity,  or  are  previously  untested  should  be  screened  again  early  in  the
third  trimester  (at  approximately  28  weeks'  gestation)  and  at  delivery.  Some  states
require all women to be screened at delivery. Infants should not be discharged from the
hospital unless the syphilis serologic status of the mother has been determined at least
one time during pregnancy and preferably again at delivery. Any woman who delivers a
stillborn  infant  should  be  tested  for  syphilis.  All  pregnant  women  should  be  routinely
tested for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) during an early prenatal visit (i.e., a visit
during the first trimester), even if they have been previously vaccinated or tested (80).
Women  who  were  not  screened  prenatally,  those  who  engage  in  behaviors  that  put
them  at  high  risk  for  infection  (e.g.,  having  had  more  than  one  sex  partner  in  the
previous 6 months, evaluation or treatment for an STD, recent or current injection-drug
use,  and  an  HBsAg-positive  sex  partner)  and  those  with  clinical  hepatitis  should  be
retested at the time of admission to the hospital for delivery. Pregnant women at risk
for  HBV  infection  also  should  be  vaccinated.  To  avoid  misinterpreting  a  transient
positive  HBsAg  result  during  the  21  days  after  vaccination,  HBsAg  testing  should  be
performed  before  vaccine  administration.  All  laboratories  that  conduct  HBsAg  tests
should  use  an  FDA-cleared  HBsAg  test  and  perform  testing  according  to  the
manufacturer's labeling, including testing of initially reactive specimens with a licensed
neutralizing confirmatory test. When pregnant women are tested for HBsAg at the time
of admission for delivery, shortened testing protocols can be used, and initially reactive
results should prompt expedited administration of immunoprophylaxis to infants (80).
All pregnant women should be routinely screened for
Chlamydia  trachomatis  (see  Chlamydia  Infections,  Diagnostic  Considerations)
during the first prenatal visit (81). Women aged ≤25 years and those at increased risk
for chlamydia (e.g., women who have a new or more than one sex partner) also should
be retested during the third trimester to prevent maternal postnatal complications and
chlamydial infection in the infant. Women found to have chlamydial infection during the
first trimester should be retested within approximately 3--6 months, preferably in the
third trimester. Screening during the first trimester might prevent the adverse effects of
chlamydia during pregnancy, but supportive evidence for such screening is lacking. All
pregnant women at risk for gonorrhea or living in an area in which the prevalence of
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is high should be screened at the first prenatal visit for 
N.  gonorrhoeae  (82).  Women  aged  <25  years  are  at  highest  risk  for  gonorrhea
infection. Other risk factors for gonorrhea include a previous gonorrhea infection, other
STDs,  new  or  multiple  sex  partners,  inconsistent  condom  use,  commercial  sex  work,
and  drug  use.  Pregnant  women  found  to  have  gonococcal  infection  during  the  first
trimester should be retested within approximately 3--6 months, preferably in the third
trimester. Uninfected pregnant women who remain at high risk for gonococcal infection
also should be retested during the third trimester. All pregnant women at high risk for
hepatitis  C  infection  should  be  screened  for  hepatitis  C  antibodies  (see  Hepatitis  C,
Diagnostic Considerations) at the first prenatal visit. Women at high risk include those
with  a  history  of  injection-drug  use  and  those  with  a  history  of  blood  transfusion  or
organ transplantion before 1992. Pregnant women should undergo a Papanicolau (Pap)
test  at  the  same  frequency  as  nonpregnant  women,  although  recommendations  for
their management differ (83,84). Evidence does not support routine testing for bacterial
vaginosis  (BV)  in  pregnancy.  For  asymptomatic  pregnant  women  at  high  risk  for
preterm delivery, evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of
screening  for  BV  (85).  Symptomatic  women  should  be  evaluated  and  treated  (see
Bacterial Vaginosis). Evidence does not support routine screening for
Trichomonas  vaginalis  in  asymptomatic  pregnant  women.  Women  who  report
symptoms should be evaluated and treated appropriately (see Trichomonas). Evidence
does  not  support  routine  HSV-2  serologic  screening  among  previously  undiagnosed
women during pregnancy. Pregnant women who are HBsAg positive should be reported
to  the  local  or  state  health  department  to  ensure  that  they  are  entered  into  a
case-management system and that timely and appropriate prophylaxis is provided for
their  infants.  Information  concerning  the  pregnant  woman's  HBsAg  status  should  be
provided  to  the  hospital  in  which  delivery  is  planned  and  to  the  health-care  provider
who will care for the newborn. In addition, household and sex contacts of women who
are  HBsAg  positive  should  be  vaccinated.  Women  who  are  HBsAg  positive  should  be
provided  with,  or  referred  for,  appropriate  counseling  and  medical  management.
Pregnant women who are HBsAg positive should receive information regarding hepatitis
B that addresses:
-- modes of transmission;
-- perinatal concerns (e.g., breastfeeding is not contraindicated);
--  prevention  of  HBV  transmission,  including  the  importance  of  postexposure
prophylaxis for the newborn infant and hepatitis B vaccination for household contacts
and sex partners; and
-- evaluation for and treatment of chronic HBV infection. No treatment is available
for  pregnant  women  infected  with  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV).  However,  all  women  with
HCV  infection  should  receive  appropriate  counseling  and  supportive  care  as  needed
(see Hepatitis C, Prevention). No vaccine is available to prevent HCV transmission. In
the  absence  of  lesions  during  the  third  trimester,  routine  serial  cultures  for  herpes
simplex virus (HSV) are not indicated for women who have a history of recurrent genital
herpes.  Prophylactic  cesarean  delivery  is  not  indicated  for  women  who  do  not  have
active genital lesions at the time of delivery. The presence of genital warts is not an
indication  for  cesarean  delivery.  For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  STD  testing  and
treatment  among  pregnant  women,  refer  to  the  following  references:  Prenatal
screening for HIV: A Review of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
(86);  Revised  Recommendations  for  HIV  Testing  of  Adults,  Adolescents,  and  Pregnant
Women  in  Health-Care  Setting  (77);  Guidelines  for  Perinatal  Care  (87);  Rapid  HIV
Antibody  Testing  During  Labor  and  Delivery  for  Women  of  Unknown  HIV  Status:  A
Practical Guide and Model Protocol (88); Viral Hepatitis in Pregnancy (89); Hepatitis B
Virus: A Comprehensive Strategy for Eliminating Transmission in the United States ---
Recommendations  of  the  Immunization  Practices  Advisory  Committee  (ACIP)  (4);
Screening
 for
 Chlamydial
 Infection:
 U.S.
 Preventive
 Services
 Task
 Force
Recommendation  Statement  (81);  Canadian  guidelines  on  sexually  transmitted
infections  (90);  USPSTF  recommendations  for  STI  screening  (91);  and  Screening  for
Bacterial Vaginosis in Pregnancy to Prevent Preterm Delivery: U.S. Preventive Services
Task  Force  Recommendation  Statement  (85).  Recommendations  to  screen  pregnant
women  for  STDs  are  based  on  disease  severity  and  sequelae,  prevalence  in  the
population, costs, medicolegal considerations (e.g., state laws), and other factors. The
screening recommendations in this report are generally broader (i.e., if followed, more
women  will  be  screened  for  more  STDs  than  would  by  following  other  screening
recommendations)  and  are  also  consistent  with  other  CDC  guidelines.  In  the  United
States,  prevalence  rates  of  many  sexually  acquired  infections  are  highest  among
adolescents (92,93). For example, the reported rates of chlamydia and gonorrhea are
highest  among  females  aged  15--19  years,  and  many  persons  acquire  HPV  infection
during  their  adolescent  years.  Persons  who  initiate  sex  early  in  adolescence  are  at
higher risk for STDs, along with persons residing in detention facilities, attending STD
clinics,  young  men  having  sex  with  men  (YMSM),  and  youth  who  use  injection  drugs.
Factors contributing to this increased risk during adolescence include having multiple
sexual partners concurrently, having sequential sexual partnerships of limited duration,
failing  to  use  barrier  protection  consistently  and  correctly,  having  increased  biologic
susceptibility to infection, and experiencing multiple obstacles to accessing health care
(92).  All 50 states and the District of Columbia explicitly allow minors to consent for
their own health services for STDs. No state requires parental consent for STD care or
requires  that  providers  notify  parents  that  an  adolescent  minor  has  received  STD
services, except in limited or unusual circumstances. Protecting confidentiality for such
care,  particularly  for  adolescents  enrolled  in  private  health  insurance  plans,  presents
multiple problems. After a claim has been reported, many states mandate that health
plans provide a written statement to a beneficiary indicating the benefits and charges
covered  or  not  covered  by  the  health  plan  (i.e.,  explanation  of  benefit  [EOB]).  In
addition,  federal  laws  obligate  notices  to  beneficiaries  when  claims  are  denied,
including alerting consumers who need to pay for care until the allowable deductable is
reached. For STD detection- and treatment-related care, an EOB or medical bill that is
received  by  a  parent  might  disclose  services  provided  and  list  any  laboratory  tests
performed.  This  type  of  mandated  notification  breeches  confidentiality,  and  at  a
minimum, could prompt parents and guardians to question the costs and reasons for
service  provision.  Despite  the  high  rates  of  infections  documented  in  the  adolescent
population, providers frequently fail to inquire about sexual behaviors, assess STD risks,
provide  risk  reduction  counseling,  and  ultimately,  fail  to  screen  for  asymptomatic
infections  during  clinical  encounters.  Sexual  health  discussions  should  be  appropriate
for the patient's developmental level and should be aimed at identifying risk behaviors
(e.g.,  unprotected  oral,  anal,  or  vaginal  sex  and  drug-use  behaviors).  Careful,
nonjudgmental, and thorough counseling is particularly vital for adolescents who might
not feel comfortable acknowledging their engagement in behaviors that place them at
high  risk  for  STDs.   Routine  laboratory  screening  for  common  STDs  is  indicated  for
sexually  active  adolescents.  The  following  screening  recommendations  summarize
published federal agency and medical professional organizations' clinical guidelines for
sexually active adolescents:  Routine screening for C. trachomatis of all sexually active
females  aged  ≤25  years  is  recommended  annually  (81).Evidence  is  insufficient  to
recommend routine screening for 
C.  trachomatis  in  sexually  active  young  men  based  on  feasibility,  efficacy,  and
cost-effectiveness.  However,  screening  of  sexually  active  young  men  should  be
considered  in  clinical  settings  associated  with  high  prevalence  of  chlamydia  (e.g.,
adolescent clinics, correctional facilities, and STD clinics) (81,94). 
 Routine  screening  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  in  all  sexually  active  women  at  risk  for
infection is recommended annually (82). Women aged <25 years are at highest risk for
gonorrhea  infection.  Other  risk  factors  that  place  women  at  increased  risk  include  a
previous gonorrhea infection, the presence of other STDs, new or multiple sex partners,
inconsistent condom use, commercial sex work, and drug use. HIV screening should be
discussed with all adolescents and encouraged for those who are sexually active and
those  who  use  injection  drugs  (77,95).  The  routine  screening  of  adolescents  who  are
asymptomatic for certain STDs (e.g., syphilis, trichomoniasis, BV, HSV, HPV, HAV, and
HBV)  is  not  recommended.  However,  YMSM  and  pregnant  adolescent  females  might
require more thorough evaluation. Guidelines from USPSTF and ACOG recommend that
cervical cancer screening begin at age 21 years (96,97), a recommendation based on
the  low  incidence  of  cervical  cancer  and  limited  utility  of  screening  for  younger
adolescents  (98).  However,  the  American  Cancer  Society  (ACS)  recommends  that
women  start  cervical  screening  with  Pap  tests  3  years  after  initiating  sexual  activity,
but by no later than age 21 years (99). 
 Primary  prevention  and  anticipatory  guidance  to  recognize  symptoms  and
behaviors associated with STDs are strategies that can be incorporated into any or all
types  of  health-care  visits.  The  following  recommendations  for  primary  prevention  of
STDs  (i.e.,  vaccination  and  counseling)  are  based  on  published  federal  agency  and
medical professional organizations' clinical guidelines for sexually active adolescents: 
The HPV vaccine, either Cervarix or Gardasil, is recommended for 11 and 12 year-old
females. The vaccine series can be started at 9 years of age. Catch-up vaccination is
recommended for females aged 13--26 years who have not yet received or completed
the  vaccine  series  (16).  The  quadrivalent  (Gardasil)  HPV  vaccine  can  also  be  used  in
males and females aged 9--26 years to prevent genital warts (17). The HBV vaccination
series  is  recommended  for  all  adolescents.  Adolescents  who  have  not  previously
received  hepatitis  B  vaccine  should  be  vaccinated  routinely  at  any  age  with  an
appropriate  dose  and  schedule  (3,4).  The  HAV  vaccination  series  for  children  and
adolescents  aged  2--18  years  should  be  offered  in  areas  with  existing  hepatitis  A
vaccination  programs.  In  areas  without  existing  hepatitis  A  vaccination  programs,
catch-up vaccination of unvaccinated children aged 2--18 years can be considered (2).
Information regarding HIV infection, testing, transmission, and implications of infection
should be regarded as an essential component of the anticipatory guidance provided to
all adolescents as part of health care (77). Health-care providers who care for children
and  adolescents  should  integrate  sexuality  education  into  clinical  practice.  Providers
should counsel adolescents about the sexual behaviors that are associated with risk for
acquiring  STDs  and  should  educate  patients  using  evidence-based  prevention
strategies, all of which include a discussion about abstinence and other risk-reduction
behaviors
 (e.g.,
 consistent
 and
 correct
 condom
 use).
 USPSTF
 recommends
high-intensity behavioral counseling to prevent STIs* for all sexually active adolescents
(6). 
 Management  of  children  who  have  STDs  requires  close  cooperation  between
clinicians,  laboratorians,  and  child-protection  authorities.  Official  investigations,  when
indicated, should be initiated promptly. Certain diseases (e.g., gonorrhea, syphilis, and
chlamydia), if acquired after the neonatal period, are virtually 100% indicative of sexual
contact.  For  other  diseases  (e.g.,  HPV  infections  and  vaginitis),  the  association  with
sexual  contact  is  not  as  clear  (see  Sexual  Assault  and  STDs).  Multiple  studies  have
demonstrated  that  persons  entering  correctional  facilities  have  high  rates  of  STDs
(including HIV) and viral hepatitis, especially those aged ≤35 years (93). Incarcerated
persons are more likely to have low socioeconomic status, live in urban areas, and be
ethnic  and  racial  minorities.  Risk  behaviors  for  contracting  STDs  (e.g.,  having
unprotected  sex;  having  multiple  sexual  partners;  using  drugs  and  alcohol;  and
engaging  in  commercial,  survival  [prostitution  to  earn  money  for  food,  shelter,  or
drugs],  or  coerced  sex)  are  common  among  incarcerated  populations.  Before
incarceration,  many  have  had  limited  access  to  medical  care,  especially  to
community-based  clinical  prevention  services.   Although  no  comprehensive  national
guidelines regarding STD care and management have been developed for correctional
populations,  the  utility  of  expanded  STD  services  in  correctional  settings  has  been
reported (100). Capacity to provide STD care also varies by type of correctional facility.
For example, local juvenile detention facilities and jails are short-term facilities (often
housing entrants for ≤1 year) where up to half of all entrants are released back to the
community  within  48  hours  of  arrest,  thereby  complicating  efforts  to  provide
comprehensive STD services. These services are likely more conducive to prisons and
state  juvenile  confinement  facilities,  which  are  long-term,  secure  facilities  where
entrants  are  held  for  a  longer  period  of  time.  Most  institutions,  especially  those  for
adults, do not routinely screen for STDs. Diagnostic testing of inmates with symptoms
indicative  of  an  STD  is  the  more  common  practice  in  juvenile  detention  and  jail
facilities.  However,  screening  for  asymptomatic  infections  facilitates  the  identification
and  treatment  of  persons  with  otherwise  undetected  infections,  which  not  only
eliminates  complications  for  the  individual,  but  reduces  the  prevalence  of  infection
among detainees who are released back into the local community.  Females in juvenile
detention  facilities  and  young  women  ≤35  years  of  age  have  been  reported  to  have
high rates of chlamydia (101) and gonorrhea (93). Syphilis seroprevalence rates, which
can indicate previous infection, are considerably higher among adult men and women
than in adolescents, consistent with the overall national syphilis trends (102). Universal
screening of adolescent females for chlamydia and gonorrhea should be conducted at
intake in juvenile detention or jail facilities. Universal screening of adult females should
be conducted at intake among adult females up to 35 years of age (or on the basis of
local  institutional  prevalence  data).  Universal  screening  should  be  conducted  on  the
basis  of  the  local  area  and  institutional  prevalence  of  early  (primary,  secondary,  and
early latent) infectious syphilis. Subgroups of MSM are at high risk for HIV infection and
other  viral  and  bacterial  STDs.  The  frequency  of  unsafe  sexual  practices  and  the
reported  rates  of  bacterial  STDs  and  incident  HIV  infection  declined  substantially  in
MSM from the 1980s through the mid-1990s. However, since that time, increased rates
of  early  syphilis  (primary,  secondary,  or  early  latent),  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydial
infection  and  higher  rates  of  unsafe  sexual  behaviors  have  been  documented  among
MSM in the United States and virtually all industrialized countries (103,104). The effect
of  these  behavioral  changes  on  HIV  transmission  has  not  been  ascertained,  but
preliminary data suggest that the incidence of HIV infection is increasing among MSM in
some  urban  centers,  particularly  among  MSM  from  racial  and  ethnic  minority  groups
(105)  and  among  those  who  use  nonprescription  drugs  during  sex,  particularly
methamphetamine  and  volatile  nitrites  (also  known  as  "poppers").  These  adverse
trends  likely  reflect  the  1)  changing  attitudes  concerning  HIV  infection  that  have
accompanied advances in HIV therapy, resulting in improved quality of life and survival
for  HIV-infected  persons;  2)  changing  patterns  of  substance  abuse;  3)  demographic
shifts in MSM populations; and 4) changes in sex partner networks resulting from new
venues for partner acquisition (e.g., the internet). Increases in bacterial STDs are not
necessarily  accompanied  by  increases  in  HIV  incidence;  for  example,  oral  sex  may
permit efficient spread of bacterial STDs but not HIV, as does serosorting (preferential
selection of sex partners of the same serostatus) among HIV-infected MSM (106,107).
Clinicians should assess the STD-related risks for all male patients, including a routine
inquiry about the sex of sex partners. MSM, including those with HIV infection, should
routinely  undergo  nonjudgmental  STD/HIV  risk  assessment  and  client-centered
prevention counseling to reduce the likelihood of acquiring or transmitting HIV or other
STDs.  Clinicians  should  be  familiar  with  the  local  community  resources  available  to
assist MSM at high risk in facilitating behavioral change and to enable the conduct of
partner notification activities. Clinicians also should routinely ask sexually active MSM
about symptoms consistent with common STDs, including urethral discharge, dysuria,
genital  and  perianal  ulcers,  regional  lymphadenopathy,  skin  rash,  and  anorectal
symptoms  consistent  with  proctitis,  including  discharge  and  pain  on  defecation  or
during anal intercourse. Clinicians should perform appropriate diagnostic testing on all
symptomatic patients. Routine laboratory screening for common STDs is indicated for
all  sexually  active  MSM.  The  following  screening  tests  should  be  performed  at  least
annually for sexually active MSM: HIV serology, if HIV negative or not tested within the
previous  year;  syphilis  serology,  with  a  confirmatory  testing  to  establish  whether
persons with reactive serologies have incident untreated syphilis, have partially treated
syphilis,  or  are  manifesting  a  slow  serologic  response  to  appropriate  prior  therapy;  a
test for urethral infection with N. gonorrhoeae and 
C. trachomatis in men who have had insertive intercourse† during the preceding
year; testing of the urine using nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) is the preferred
approach; a test for rectal infection§ with 
N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  in  men  who  have  had  receptive  anal
intercourse*  during  the  preceding  year  (NAAT  of  a  rectal  swab  is  the  preferred
approach); and a test for pharyngeal infection§ with 
N.  gonorrhoeae  in  men  who  have  had  receptive  oral  intercourse†  during  the
preceding year (NAAT is the preferred approach). Testing for
C. trachomatis pharyngeal infection is not recommended. 
 Evaluation  for  HSV-2  infection  with  type-specific  serologic  tests  also  can  be
considered  if  infection  status  is  unknown;  knowledge  of  HSV-2  serostatus  might  be
helpful  in  identifying  persons  with  previously  undiagnosed  genital  tract  infection.
Because of the increased incidence of anal cancer in HIV-infected MSM, screening for
anal  cytologic  abnormalities  can  be  considered;  however,  evidence  is  limited
concerning  the  natural  history  of  anal  intraepithelial  neoplasias,  the  reliability  of
screening  methods,  the  safety  and  response  to  treatments,  and  the  programmatic
support  needed  for  such  a  screening  activity.  More  frequent  STD  screening  (i.e.,  at
3--6-month intervals) is indicated for MSM who have multiple or anonymous partners. In
addition,  MSM  who  have  sex  in  conjunction  with  illicit  drug  use  (particularly
methamphetamine use) or whose sex partners participate in these activities should be
screened more frequently. All MSM should be tested for HBsAg to detect HBV infection.
Prompt identification of chronic infection with HBV is essential to ensure necessary care
and  services  to  prevent  transmission  to  others  (108).  HBsAg  testing  should  be  made
available in STD treatment settings. In addition, screening among past or current drug
users  should  include  HCV  and  HBV  testing.  Vaccination  against  hepatitis  A  and  B  is
recommended  for  all  MSM  in  whom  previous  infection  or  vaccination  cannot  be
documented (2,3). Preimmunization serologic testing might be considered to reduce the
cost of vaccinating MSM who are already immune to these infections, but this testing
should  not  delay  vaccination.  Vaccinating  persons  who  are  immune  to  HAV  or  HBV
infection  because  of  previous  infection  or  vaccination  does  not  increase  the  risk  for
vaccine-related  adverse  events  (see  Hepatitis  B,  Prevaccination  Antibody  Screening).
Sexual  transmission  of  hepatitis  C  virus  infection  can  occur,  especially  among
HIV-infected  MSM.  Serologic  screening  for  hepatitis  C  infection  is  recommended  at
initial evaluation of newly diagnosed HIV-infected persons. HIV-infected MSM can also
acquire HCV after initial screening; therefore, men with new and unexplained increases
in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) should be tested for acute HCV infection. To detect
acute  HCV  infection  among  HIV-infected  MSM  with  high-risk  sexual  behaviors  or
concomitant  ulcerative  STDs,  routine  HCV  testing  of  HIV-infected  MSM  should  be
considered.  Women  who  have  sex  with  women  (WSW)  are  a  diverse  group  with
variations  in  sexual  identity,  sexual  behaviors,  sexual  practices,  and  risk  behaviors.
Recent  studies  indicate  that  some  WSW,  particularly  adolescents,  young  women,  and
women with both male and female partners, might be at increased risk for STDs and
HIV  as  a  result  of  certain  reported  risk  behaviors  (109--112).  WSW  are  at  risk  for
acquiring bacterial, viral, and protozoal infections from current and prior partners, both
male and female. WSW should not be presumed to be at low or no risk for STDs based
on  sexual  orientation.  Effective  screening  requires  that  providers  and  their  female
clients engage in a comprehensive and open discussion not only about sexual identify,
but sexual and behavioral risks.  Few data are available on the risk for STDs transmitted
by  sex  between  women,  but  risk  probably  varies  by  the  specific  STD  and  sexual
practice (e.g., oral-genital sex; vaginal or anal sex using hands, fingers, or penetrative
sex  items;  and  oral-anal  sex  [113,114]).  Practices  involving  digital-vaginal  or
digital-anal contact, particularly with shared penetrative sex items, present a possible
means  for  transmission  of  infected  cervicovaginal  secretions.  This  possibility  is  most
directly  supported  by  reports  of  metronidazole-resistant  trichomoniasis  (115)  and
genotype-concordant  HIV  transmitted  sexually  between  women  who  reported  these
behaviors  (116)  and  by  the  high  prevalence  of  BV  among  monogamous  WSW  (117).
Transmission of HPV can occur with skin-to-skin or skin-to-mucosa contact, which can
occur  during  sex  between  women.  HPV  DNA  has  been  detected  through  polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)-based methods from the cervix, vagina, and vulva in 13%--30% of
WSW,  and  high-  and  low-grade  squamous  intraepithelial  lesions  (SIL)  have  been
detected on Pap tests in WSW who reported no previous sex with men (118). However,
most self-identified WSW (53%--99%) report having had sex with men and indicate that
they might continue this practice in the future (119). Therefore, routine cervical cancer
screening  should  be  offered  to  all  women,  regardless  of  sexual  preference  or  sexual
practices,  and  women  should  be  offered  HPV  vaccine  in  accordance  with  current
guidelines. Limited data demonstrate that HSV-2 genital transmission between female
sex  partners  is  probably  inefficient  but  can  occur.  The  relatively  frequent  practice  of
orogenital sex among WSW might place them at higher risk for genital infection with
herpes  simplex  virus  type  1  (HSV-1),  a  hypothesis  supported  by  the  recognized
association between HSV-1 seropositivity and number of female partners among WSW
(120).  Although  the  rate  of  transmission  of  C.  trachomatis  between  women  remains
largely  unknown,  infection  also  can  be  acquired  from  past  or  current  male  partners.
Recent data suggest that C. trachomatis infection among WSW might be more common
than  previously  thought  (121);  transmission  of  syphilis  between  female  sex  partners
(likely through oral sex) also has been reported. Therefore, report of same-sex behavior
in women should not deter providers from screening these women for STDs, including
chlamydia and syphilis, as recommended. BV is common among women in general and
even more so among women with female partners. Sexual behaviors that facilitate the
transfer  of  vaginal  fluid  and/or  bacteria  between  partners  might  be  involved  in  the
pathogenesis of BV. A recent study demonstrated that female sex partners frequently
share  identical  genital  Lactobacillus  strains  (122).  Although  BV  is  common  in  WSW,
routine  screening  for  BV  is  not  recommended,  nor  is  the  treatment  of  partners  of
women with BV. Encouraging awareness of signs and symptoms of BV in women and
encouraging  healthy  sexual  practices  (e.g.,  cleaning  shared  sex  toys  between  uses)
might be helpful. HIV infection represents a spectrum of disease that can begin with a
brief  acute  retroviral  syndrome  that  typically  transitions  to  a  multiyear  chronic  and
clinically  latent  illness.  Without  treatment,  this  illness  eventually  progresses  to  a
symptomatic,  life-threatening  immunodeficiency  disease  known  as  AIDS.  In  untreated
patients, the time between HIV infection and the development of AIDS varies, ranging
from a few months to many years with an estimated median time of approximately 11
years  (123).  HIV  replication  is  present  during  all  stages  of  the  infection  and
progressively depletes CD4 lymphocytes, which are critical for maintenance of effective
immune function. When the CD4 cell count falls below 200 cells/µL, patients are at high
risk  for  life-threatening  AIDS-defining  opportunistic  infections  (e.g.,  Pneumocystis
pneumonia,  Toxoplasma  gondii  encephalitis,  disseminated  Mycobacterium  avium
complex disease, tuberculosis, and bacterial pneumonia). In the absence of treatment,
virtually  all  HIV-infected  persons  will  die  of  AIDS.  Early  diagnosis  of  HIV  infection  is
essential  to  ensuring  that  patients  are  referred  promptly  for  evaluation,  provided
treatment (if indicated), and linked into counseling and related support services to help
them reduce their risk for transmitting HIV to others. Diagnosing persons during acute
infection is particularly important. It is during this phase that HIV-infected persons are
most  infectious  (124--126),  but  test  negative  for  HIV  antibodies  and  therefore
unknowingly  continue  to  engage  in  those  high-risk  behaviors  associated  with  HIV
transmission. Providers are in a particularly good position to diagnose persons during
acute HIV infection because such persons might present for assessment and treatment
of  a  concomitantly  acquired  STD  during  this  phase  of  the  disease.  Knowing  that  a
patient  is  infected  with  HIV  has  important  clinical  implications  because  HIV  infection
alters the immune system and thereby affects the diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, and
follow-up  of  other  STDs.  Even  in  the  era  of  highly  effective  antiretroviral  therapy
(HAART),  HIV  infection  is  often  diagnosed  in  persons  with  advanced  infection  (i.e.,
persons with low CD4 cell counts). Nationally, the proportion of patients diagnosed with
AIDS at or within 12 months of their HIV diagnosis in 2007 was 32% (127). Since 2006,
CDC has endorsed efforts to increase HIV testing by streamlining the consent process
and  expanding  opt-out  testing  to  all  health-care  settings,  especially  STD  clinics  (77).
However,  rates  of  testing  remain  unacceptably  low:  in  2006,  only  40%  of  surveyed
adults had ever been tested, and <25% of high-risk adults had been tested during the
preceding  12  months  (128).   Proper  management  of  HIV  infection  requires  medical
therapy, which for many patients should be coupled with behavioral and psychosocial
services.  Comprehensive  HIV  treatment  services  are  usually  not  available  in  facilities
focusing primarily on STD treatment (e.g., STD clinics); therefore, patients diagnosed in
these  settings  ideally  should  be  referred  to  a  health-care  provider  or  facility
experienced  in  caring  for  HIV-infected  patients.  Nonetheless,  providers  working  in
STD-treatment facilities should be knowledgeable about the treatment options available
in their communities, educate persons who test positive for HIV about the illness, and
know  where  to  refer  their  patients  for  support  services  and  HIV  care.  A  detailed
discussion  of  the  complex  issues  required  for  the  management  of  HIV  infection  is
beyond the scope of this report; however this information is available in other published
resources  (129--131).  In  subsequent  sections  of  this  report,  additional  types  of
HIV-related information about the diagnosis of HIV infection, counseling of HIV-infected
patients,  referral  of  patients  for  support  services  (including  medical  care),  and
management of sex and injection-drug partners in STD-treatment facilities is provided.
In addition, this report discusses HIV infection during pregnancy and among infants and
children. All persons who seek evaluation and treatment for STDs should be screened
for  HIV  infection.  Screening  should  be  routine,  regardless  of  whether  the  patient  is
known  or  suspected  to  have  specific  behavioral  risks  for  HIV  infection.  CDC
recommends  HIV  screening  for  patients  aged  13--64  years  in  all  health-care  settings
(77). Patients should be notified that testing will be performed, but given the option to
decline  or  defer  testing  (i.e.,  provided  with  opt-out  testing)  (128).  Assent  is  inferred
unless  the  patient  verbally  declines  testing.  Separate  written  consent  for  HIV  testing
should not be required; in most facilities, general consent for medical care is considered
sufficient to encompass consent for HIV testing. Providing prevention counseling along
with HIV diagnostic testing or as part of HIV screening programs is not a requirement
within  health-care  settings.  In  addition,  routine  opt-out  testing  (instead  of  traditional
written  informed  consent  with  pre-and  post-test  counseling)  might  be  precluded  in
some  jurisdictions  by  local  laws  and  regulations,  although  many  state  and  local
authorities have updated laws and regulations to facilitate adoption of routine opt-out
testing.  Information  about  regulations  in  specific  jurisdictions  is  available  through  the
National Clinicians Consultation Center at 
www.nccc.ucsf.edu.  Prevention counseling should be offered and encouraged in all
health-care facilities that serve patients at high risk (e.g., STD clinics), because these
facilities routinely elicit information about the behaviors that place persons at high risk
for  HIV.  Prevention  counseling  need  not  be  explicitly  linked  to  HIV  testing.  However,
some patients might be more likely to think about HIV and consider their risk-related
behavior when undergoing an HIV test. HIV testing presents an excellent opportunity to
provide or arrange for prevention counseling to assist with behavior changes that can
reduce  risk  for  acquiring  HIV  infection.   HIV  infection  can  be  diagnosed  by  serologic
tests  that  detect  antibodies  against  HIV-1  and  HIV-2  and  by  virologic  tests  that  can
detect HIV antigens or ribonucleic acid (RNA). Antibody testing begins with a sensitive
screening test (e.g., the conventional or rapid enzyme immunoassay [EIA]). Currently
available serologic tests are both highly sensitive and specific and can detect all known
subtypes of HIV-1. Most can also detect HIV-2 and uncommon variants of HIV-1 (e.g.,
Group O and Group N). The advent of HIV rapid serologic testing has enabled clinicians
to make an accurate presumptive diagnosis of HIV infection within half an hour, which
could  potentially  facilitate  the  identification  of  the  approximately  250,000  persons
estimated  to  be  living  with  undiagnosed  HIV  in  the  United  States  (127).  Reactive
screening tests must be confirmed by a supplemental antibody test (i.e., Western blot
[WB] and indirect immunofluorescence assay [IFA]) or virologic test (i.e., the HIV-1 RNA
assay)  (132).  A  confirmed  positive  antibody  test  result  indicates  that  a  person  is
infected  with  HIV  and  capable  of  transmitting  the  virus  to  others.  HIV  antibody  is
detectable  in  at  least  95%  of  patients  within  3  months  after  infection.  Although  a
negative antibody test result usually indicates that a person is not infected, antibody
tests cannot exclude recent infection. Virologic tests for HIV-1 RNA can also be used to
identify acute infection in persons who are negative for HIV antibodies.  The majority of
HIV infections in the United States are caused by HIV-1. However, HIV-2 infection should
be  suspected  in  persons  who  have  epidemiologic  risk  factors  or  an  unusual  clinical
presentation. Epidemiologic factors associated with HIV-2 infection include having lived
in  or  having  a  sex  partner  from  an  HIV-2  endemic  area  (e.g.,  West  Africa  and  some
European countries such as Portugal, where HIV-2 prevalence is increasing), having a
sex partner known to be infected with HIV-2, or having received a blood transfusion or
nonsterile injection in an HIV-2-endemic area. Specific testing for HIV-2 is also indicated
when  clinical  evidence  of  HIV  infection  exists  but  tests  for  HIV-1  antibodies  or  HIV-1
viral  load  are  negative,  or  when  HIV-1  WB  results  exhibit  the  unusual  indeterminate
pattern of gag (p55, p24, p17) plus pol (p66, p51, p31) bands in the absence of env
(gp160,  gp120,  gp41)  bands.  Health-care  providers  should  be  knowledgeable  about
acute  HIV  infection  and  the  symptoms  and  signs  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome,  which
develops  in  50%--80%  of  acutely  infected  patients.  Acute  retroviral  syndrome  is
characterized  by  non-specific  symptoms,  including  fever,  malaise,  lymphadenopathy,
and  skin  rash.  It  frequently  occurs  in  the  first  few  weeks  after  HIV  infection,  before
antibody  test  results  become  positive.  Suspicion  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome  should
result in prompt nucleic acid testing (HIV plasma RNA) in addition to an HIV antibody
test to detect the presence of HIV. A positive HIV nucleic acid test should be confirmed
by subsequent antibody testing to document seroconversion. Acutely infected patients
are highly contagious during this stage of infection because the concentration of virus
in plasma and genital secretions is extremely elevated (125,133). Antiretroviral therapy
might  benefit  the  health  of  persons  with  recently  acquired  HIV  infection  and  reduce
their  infectiousness  to  others,  but  evidence  to  support  this  recommendation  is  still
inconclusive and awaits the outcomes of several clinical trials currently underway (129).
Notwithstanding, patients with acute HIV infection should be referred immediately to an
HIV  clinical-care  provider.  Diagnosis  of  HIV  infection  should  prompt  efforts  to  reduce
behaviors  that  could  transmit  HIV  to  others  (134).   The  following  are  specific
recommendations that apply to testing for HIV infection: HIV screening is recommended
for  all  persons  who  seek  evaluation  and  treatment  for  STDs.  HIV  testing  must  be
voluntary and free from coercion. Patients must not be tested without their knowledge.
HIV screening after notifying the patient that an HIV test will be performed (unless the
patient declines) is recommended in all health-care settings. Specific signed consent for
HIV  testing  should  not  be  required.  In  most  settings,  general  informed  consent  for
medical  care  is  considered  sufficient  to  encompass  informed  consent  for  HIV  testing.
Use  of  rapid  HIV  tests  should  be  considered,  especially  in  clinics  where  a  high
proportion of patients do not return for HIV test results. Positive screening tests for HIV
antibody  must  be  confirmed  by  a  supplemental  test  before  the  diagnosis  of  HIV
infection  can  be  established.  Providers  should  be  alert  to  the  possibility  of  acute  HIV
infection  and  perform  a  nucleic  acid  test  in  addition  to  an  antibody  test  for  HIV,  if
indicated. Persons suspected of recently acquired HIV infection should be referred for
immediate  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist.  Persons  with  newly
diagnosed  HIV  infection  who  receive  care  in  the  STD  treatment  setting  should  be
informed of the importance of promptly initiating medical care, the effectiveness of HIV
treatments,  and  about  what  to  expect  as  they  enter  medical  care  for  HIV  infection
(131). In nonemergent situations, the initial evaluation of HIV-positive patients usually
includes the following: Detailed medical history, including sexual and substance abuse
history; vaccination history; previous STDs; travel history; and assessment for specific
HIV-related  symptoms  or  diagnoses;  physical  examination,  including  a  gynecologic
examination  for  women;  testing  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  (in  women
perform Pap test and wet mount examination or culture of vaginal secretions for 
Trichomonas  vaginalis);  complete  blood  and  platelet  counts,  blood  chemistry
profile, and lipid profile; toxoplasma antibody test; testing for antibodies to hepatitis C
virus;  testing  for  previous  or  present  infections  with  HAV  or  HBV  infection
(recommended if determined to be cost-effective before considering vaccination) (see
Hepatitis  A  and  Hepatitis  B);  syphilis  serology;  CD4  T-lymphocyte  analysis  and
determination of HIV plasma viral load; HIV genotypic resistance testing; tuberculin skin
test  (sometimes  referred  to  as  a  purified  protein  derivative);  urinalysis;  and  chest
radiograph.  Type-specific  testing  for  HSV-2  infection  can  be  considered  if  herpes
infection status is unknown. A first dose of hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccine should be
administered at this first visit for previously unvaccinated persons for whom vaccine is
recommended (see Hepatitis A and Hepatitis B). In subsequent visits, when the results
of laboratory tests are available, antiretroviral therapy can be offered based on existing
guidance  (129).  Recommendations  for  the  prophylaxis  of  opportunistic  infections  and
vaccinations in HIV-infected adults and adolescents are available (130,131).  Providers
should  be  alert  to  the  possibility  of  new  or  recurrent  STDs  and  should  treat  such
conditions  aggressively.  Diagnosis  of  an  STD  in  an  HIV-infected  person  indicates
on-going  or  recurrent  high-risk  behavior  and  should  prompt  referral  for  counseling.
Because  many  STDs  are  asymptomatic,  routine  screening  for  curable  STDs  (e.g.,
syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydia)  should  be  performed  at  least  annually  for  all
sexually active, HIV-positive persons. Women should be screened annually for cervical
cancer precursor lesions by cervical Pap tests. More frequent STD screening might be
appropriate depending on individual risk behaviors, the local epidemiology of STDs, and
whether  incident  STDs  are  detected  by  screening  or  by  the  presence  of  symptoms.
Recently identified HIV infection might not have been recently acquired; persons newly
diagnosed with HIV might be at any stage of infection. Therefore, health-care providers
should be alert for symptoms or signs that suggest advanced HIV infection (e.g., fever,
weight loss, diarrhea, cough, shortness of breath, and oral candidiasis). The presence of
any  of  these  symptoms  should  prompt  urgent  referral  to  an  infectious  diseases
provider. Similarly, providers should be alert for signs of psychological distress and be
prepared  to  refer  patients  accordingly  (see  Counseling  for  Patients  with  HIV  Infection
and  Referral  to  Support  Services).   Those  persons  who  test  positive  for  HIV  should
receive  prevention  counseling  before  leaving  the  testing  site.  Such  persons  should
receive  or  be  referred  for  a  medical  evaluation  and,  if  indicated,  be  provided  with
behavioral  and  psychological  services  as  determined  by  a  thorough  psychosocial
evaluation, which can also be used to identify high-risk behaviors. Providers who refer
their HIV-positive patients to other professionals should establish means to ensure that
these patients are linked successfully to such services, especially to on-going medical
care. Providers should expect persons to be distressed when first informed of a positive
HIV test result. Such persons face multiple major adaptive challenges, including coping
with the reactions of others to a stigmatizing illness, developing and adopting strategies
for maintaining physical and emotional health, initiating changes in behavior to prevent
HIV transmission to others, and reducing the risk for acquiring additional STDs. Many
persons  will  require  assistance  with  making  reproductive  choices,  gaining  access  to
health  services,  and  coping  with  changes  in  personal  relationships.  Therefore,
behavioral and psychosocial services are an integral part of health care for HIV-infected
persons.   Patients  testing  positive  for  HIV  have  unique  needs.  Some  patients  require
referral for specific behavioral interventions (e.g., a substance abuse program), mental
health  disorders  (e.g.,  depression),  or  emotional  distress.  Others  might  require
assistance with securing and maintaining employment and housing. Women should be
counseled or appropriately referred regarding reproductive choices and contraceptive
options,  and  patients  with  multiple  psychosocial  problems  might  be  candidates  for
comprehensive  risk-reduction  counseling  and  services.  The  following  are  specific
recommendations  for  HIV  counseling  and  referral:  Persons  who  test  positive  for  HIV
antibody  should  be  counseled,  either  on  site  or  through  referral,  concerning  the
behavioral,  psychosocial,  and  medical  implications  of  HIV  infection.  Health-care
providers should be alert for medical or psychosocial conditions that require immediate
attention. Providers should assess the needs of newly diagnosed persons for immediate
medical  care  or  support  and  should  link  them  to  services  provided  by  health-care
personnel experienced in providing care for HIV-infected persons. Such persons might
need medical care or services for substance abuse, mental health disorders, emotional
distress,  reproductive  counseling,  risk-reduction  counseling,  and  case  management.
Providers should follow up to ensure that patients have received the needed services.
Patients should be educated about the importance of follow-up medical care as well as
what  to  expect.  Several  successful,  innovative  interventions  for  HIV  prevention  have
been developed for diverse at-risk populations, and these can be locally replicated or
adapted
 (11--14,135,136).
 Involvement
 of
 nongovernment
 organizations
 and
community-based organizations might complement such efforts in the clinical setting. 
Clinicians  evaluating  HIV-infected  persons  should  determine  whether  any  partners
should be notified concerning possible exposure to HIV (77,137). In the context of HIV
management, the term "partner" includes not only sex partners, but persons who share
syringes or other injection equipment. Partner notification is an important component of
disease  management,  because  early  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  HIV  infection  might
reduce  morbidity  and  provide  the  opportunity  to  encourage  risk-reduction  behaviors.
Partner notification for HIV infection should be confidential. Specific guidance regarding
spousal  notification  varies  by  jurisdiction.  Detailed  recommendations  concerning
identification, notification, diagnosis, and treatment of exposed partners are available
in  Recommendations  for  Partner  Services  Programs  for  HIV  Infection,  Syphilis,
Gonorrhea,  and  Chlamydial  Infections  (137).   Two  complementary  notification
processes, patient referral and provider referral, can be used to identify partners. With
patient referral, patients directly inform their partners of their exposure to HIV infection,
whereas with provider referral, trained health department personnel locate partners on
the  basis  of  information  provided  by  the  patient.  During  the  provider  referral
notification  process,  the  confidentiality  of  patients  is  protected;  their  names  are  not
revealed to partners who are notified. Many state and local health departments provide
these  services.  The  following  are  specific  recommendations  for  implementing
partner-notification  procedures:  HIV-infected  patients  should  be  encouraged  to  notify
their partners and to refer them for counseling and testing. If requested by the patient,
health-care  providers  should  assist  in  this  process,  either  directly  or  by  referral  to
health department partner-notification programs. If patients are unwilling to notify their
partners or if they cannot ensure that their partners will seek counseling, physicians or
health  department  personnel  should  use  confidential  partner  notification  procedures.
Partners who have been reached and were exposed to genital secretions and/or blood
of  an  HIV-infected  partner  though  sex  or  injection-drug  use  within  the  preceding  72
hours should be offered postexposure prophylaxis with combination antiretrovirals (78).
All  pregnant  women  in  the  United  States  should  be  tested  for  HIV  infection  as  early
during  pregnancy  as  possible.  A  second  test  during  the  third  trimester,  preferably  at
<36  weeks'  gestation,  should  be  considered  for  all  pregnant  women  and  is
recommended for women known to be at high risk for acquiring HIV, those who receive
health care in jurisdictions with elevated incidence of HIV or AIDS among women, and
women living in facilities in which prenatal screening identifies at least one HIV-infected
pregnant  women  per  1,000  women  screened  (77).  An  RNA  test  should  be  used  in
conjunction  with  an  HIV  antibody  test  for  women  who  have  signs  or  symptoms
consistent with acute HIV infection. The patient should first be informed that she will be
tested for HIV as part of the panel of prenatal tests, unless she declines, or opts-out, of
screening  (77,86).  For  women  who  decline,  providers  should  continue  to  strongly
encourage  testing  and  address  concerns  that  pose  obstacles  to  testing.  Women  who
decline testing because they have had a previous negative HIV test should be informed
about the importance of retesting during each pregnancy. Testing pregnant women is
particularly  important  not  only  to  maintain  the  health  of  the  patient,  but  because
interventions  (i.e.,  antiretroviral  and  obstetrical)  can  reduce  the  risk  for  perinatal
transmission of HIV. After a pregnant woman has been identified as being HIV-infected,
she should be educated about the risk for perinatal infection. Evidence indicates that, in
the  absence  of  antiretroviral  and  other  interventions,  15%--25%  of  infants  born  to
HIV-infected mothers will become infected with HIV; such evidence also indicates that
an  additional  12%--14%  of  infants  born  to  infected  mothers  who  breastfeed  into  the
second  year  of  life  will  become  infected  (138,139).  The  risk  for  perinatal  HIV
transmission  can  be  reduced  to  <2%  through  the  use  of  antiretroviral  regimens  and
obstetrical interventions (i.e., zidovudine or nevirapine and elective cesarean section at
38  weeks  of  pregnancy)  and  by  avoiding  breastfeeding  (138,140).  Pregnant  women
who are HIV-infected should be counseled concerning their options (either on-site or by
referral),  given  appropriate  antenatal  treatment,  and  advised  not  to  breastfeed  their
infants. Diagnosis of HIV infection in a pregnant woman indicates the need to consider
whether the woman's other children might be infected. Infants and young children with
HIV infection differ from adults and adolescents with respect to the diagnosis, clinical
presentation,  and  management  of  HIV  disease.  For  example,  because  maternal  HIV
antibody  passes  through  the  placenta,  antibody  tests  for  HIV  are  expected  to  be
positive  in  the  sera  of  both  infected  and  uninfected  infants  born  to  seropositive
mothers. A definitive determination of HIV infection for an infant aged <18 months is
usually based on HIV nucleic acid testing (141). Management of infants, children, and
adolescents  who  are  known  or  suspected  to  be  infected  with  HIV  requires  referral  to
physicians  familiar  with  the  manifestations  and  treatment  of  pediatric  HIV  infection
(142,143). In the United States, most young, sexually active patients who have genital,
anal,  or  perianal  ulcers  have  either  genital  herpes  or  syphilis.  The  frequency  of  each
condition  differs  by  geographic  area  and  population;  however,  genital  herpes  is  the
most  prevalent  of  these  diseases.  More  than  one  etiologic  agent  (e.g.,  herpes  and
syphilis)  can  be  present  in  a  genital,  anal,  or  perianal  ulcer.  Less  common  infectious
causes  of  genital,  anal,  or  perianal  ulcers  include  chancroid  and  donovanosis.  HSV,
syphilis,  and  chancroid  have  been  associated  with  an  increased  risk  for  HIV
transmission, and genital, anal, or perianal lesions might be associated with conditions
that are not sexually transmitted (e.g., yeast, trauma, carcinoma, aphthae, fixed drug
eruption, and psoriasis).  A diagnosis based only on the patient's medical history and
physical examination frequently is inaccurate. Therefore, all patients who have genital,
anal,  or  perianal  ulcers  should  be  evaluated  with  a  serologic  test  for  syphilis  and  a
diagnostic evaluation for genital herpes; in settings where chancroid is prevalent, a test
for  Haemophilus  ducreyi  should  also  be  performed.  Specific  tests  for  evaluation  of
genital, anal, or perianal ulcers include 1) syphilis serology and darkfield examination;
2) culture for HSV or PCR testing for HSV; and 3) serologic testing for type-specific HSV
antibody. No FDA-cleared PCR test to diagnose either herpes or syphilis is available in
the United States; however, such testing can be performed by clinical laboratories that
have developed their own tests and have conducted a Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendment (CLIA) verification study. Type-specific serology for HSV-2 might be helpful
in identifying persons with genital herpes (see Genital Herpes, Type-Specific Serologic
Tests). In addition, biopsy of genital, anal, or perianal ulcers can help identify the cause
of ulcers that are unusual or that do not respond to initial therapy. HIV testing should be
performed  on  all  persons  with  genital,  anal,  or  perianal  ulcers  who  are  not  known  to
have HIV infection (see Diagnostic Considerations, sections on Syphilis, Chancroid, and
Genital  Herpes  Simplex  Virus).   Health-care  providers  frequently  must  treat  patients
before test results are available, because early treatment decreases the possibility of
ongoing transmission and because successful treatment of genital herpes depends on
prompt  initiation  of  therapy.  The  clinician  should  empirically  treat  for  the  diagnosis
considered  most  likely  on  the  basis  of  clinical  presentation  and  epidemiologic
circumstances (including travel history); even after complete diagnostic evaluation, at
least 25% of patients who have genital ulcers have no laboratory-confirmed diagnosis.
The  prevalence  of  chancroid  has  declined  in  the  United  States  (93).  When  infection
does  occur,  it  is  usually  associated  with  sporadic  outbreaks.  Worldwide,  chancroid
appears to have declined as well, although infection might still occur in some regions of
Africa  and  the  Caribbean.  Chancroid,  as  well  as  genital  herpes  and  syphilis,  is  a  risk
factor  in  the  transmission  of  HIV  infection  (144).   A  definitive  diagnosis  of  chancroid
requires  the  identification  of  H.  ducreyi  on  special  culture  media  that  is  not  widely
available  from  commercial  sources;  even  when  these  media  are  used,  sensitivity  is
<80% (145). No FDA-cleared PCR test for H. ducreyi is available in the United States,
but  such  testing  can  be  performed  by  clinical  laboratories  that  have  developed  their
own  PCR  test  and  have  conducted  a  CLIA  verification  study.  The  combination  of  a
painful  genital  ulcer  and  tender  suppurative  inguinal  adenopathy  suggests  the
diagnosis  of  chancroid  (146).  A  probable  diagnosis  of  chancroid,  for  both  clinical  and
surveillance purposes, can be made if all of the following criteria are met: 1) the patient
has one or more painful genital ulcers; 2) the patient has no evidence of T. pallidum
infection  by  darkfield  examination  of  ulcer  exudate  or  by  a  serologic  test  for  syphilis
performed at least 7 days after onset of ulcers; 3) the clinical presentation, appearance
of  genital  ulcers  and,  if  present,  regional  lymphadenopathy  are  typical  for  chancroid;
and 4) a test for HSV performed on the ulcer exudate is negative. Successful treatment
for  chancroid  cures  the  infection,  resolves  the  clinical  symptoms,  and  prevents
transmission  to  others.  In  advanced  cases,  scarring  can  result,  despite  successful
therapy.  Recommended  Regimens  Azithromycin  1  g  orally  in  a  single  dose  OR
Ceftriaxone  250  mg  intramuscularly  (IM)  in  a  single  dose  OR  Ciprofloxacin*  500  mg
orally twice a day for 3 days* OR Erythromycin base 500 mg orally three times a day for
7  days  *  Ciprofloxacin  is  contraindicated  for  pregnant  and  lactating  women.  
Azithromycin  and  ceftriaxone  offer  the  advantage  of  single-dose  therapy.  Worldwide,
several  isolates  with  intermediate  resistance  to  either  ciprofloxacin  or  erythromycin
have been reported. However, because cultures are not routinely performed, data are
limited  regarding  the  current  prevalence  of  antimicrobial  resistance.  Men  who  are
uncircumcised and patients with HIV infection do not respond as well to treatment as
persons  who  are  circumcised  or  HIV-negative.  Patients  should  be  tested  for  HIV
infection at the time chancroid is diagnosed. If the initial test results were negative, a
serologic  test  for  syphilis  and  HIV  infection  should  be  performed  3  months  after  the
diagnosis  of  chancroid.   Patients  should  be  re-examined  3--7  days  after  initiation  of
therapy.  If  treatment  is  successful,  ulcers  usually  improve  symptomatically  within  3
days and objectively within 7 days after therapy. If no clinical improvement is evident,
the  clinician  must  consider  whether  1)  the  diagnosis  is  correct,  2)  the  patient  is
coinfected with another STD, 3) the patient is infected with HIV, 4) the treatment was
not used as instructed, or 5) the H. ducreyi strain causing the infection is resistant to
the  prescribed  antimicrobial.  The  time  required  for  complete  healing  depends  on  the
size of the ulcer; large ulcers might require >2 weeks. In addition, healing is slower for
some  uncircumcised  men  who  have  ulcers  under  the  foreskin.  Clinical  resolution  of
fluctuant  lymphadenopathy  is  slower  than  that  of  ulcers  and  might  require  needle
aspiration  or  incision  and  drainage,  despite  otherwise  successful  therapy.  Although
needle  aspiration  of  buboes  is  a  simpler  procedure,  incision  and  drainage  might  be
preferred because of reduced need for subsequent drainage procedures.  Regardless of
whether  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  present,  sex  partners  of  patients  who  have
chancroid should be examined and treated if they had sexual contact with the patient
during  the  10  days  preceding  the  patient's  onset  of  symptoms.   Pregnancy
Ciprofloxacin is contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation. No adverse effects of
chancroid  on  pregnancy  outcome  have  been  reported.   HIV  Infection  HIV-infected
patients who have chancroid should be monitored closely because, as a group, they are
more likely to experience treatment failure and to have ulcers that heal more slowly.
HIV-infected  patients  might require repeated  or longer courses  of  therapy  than  those
recommended  for  HIV-negative  patients,  and  treatment  failures  can  occur  with  any
regimen.  Because  data  are  limited  concerning  the  therapeutic  efficacy  of  the
recommended  ceftriaxone  and  azithromycin  regimens  in  HIV-infected  patients,  these
regimens  should  be  used  for  such  patients  only  if  follow-up  can  be  ensured.   Genital
herpes is a chronic, life-long viral infection. Two types of HSV have been identified as
causing  genital  herpes:  HSV-1  and  HSV-2.  Most  cases  of  recurrent  genital  herpes  are
caused by HSV-2, and at least 50 million persons in the United States are infected with
this  type  of  genital  herpes  (147).  However,  an  increasing  proportion  of  anogenital
herpetic infections in some populations has been attributed to HSV-1 infection.  Most
persons infected with HSV-2 have not been diagnosed with genital herpes. Many such
persons  have  mild  or  unrecognized  infections  but  shed  virus  intermittently  in  the
genital tract. As a  result, the majority  of genital herpes infections are transmitted  by
persons  unaware  that  they  have  the  infection  or  who  are  asymptomatic  when
transmission occurs. Management of genital HSV should address the chronic nature of
the  disease  and  go  beyond  the  treatment  of  acute  episodes  of  genital  ulcers.  The
clinical diagnosis of genital herpes is both nonsensitive and nonspecific. The classical
painful  multiple  vesicular  or  ulcerative  lesions  are  absent  in  many  infected  persons.
HSV-1 is causing an increasing proportion of first episodes of anogenital herpes in some
populations  (e.g.,  young  women  and  MSM)  and  might  now  account  for  most  of  these
infections (148,149). Recurrences and subclinical shedding are much less frequent for
genital HSV-1 infection than for genital HSV-2 infection (150,151). A patient's prognosis
and  the  type  of  counseling  needed  depends  on  the  type  of  genital  herpes  (HSV-1  or
HSV-2) causing the infection; therefore, the clinical diagnosis of genital herpes should
be  confirmed  by  laboratory  testing  (152).  Both  virologic  and  type-specific  serologic
tests  for  HSV  should  be  available  in  clinical  settings  that  provide  care  for  persons
diagnosed with or at risk for STDs. Cell culture and PCR are the preferred HSV tests for
persons who seek medical treatment for genital ulcers or other mucocutaneous lesions.
The  sensitivity  of  viral  culture  is  low,  especially  for  recurrent  lesions,  and  declines
rapidly as lesions begin to heal. PCR assays for HSV DNA are more sensitive and are
increasingly  used  in  many  settings  (153,154).  PCR  is  the  test  of  choice  for  detecting
HSV in spinal fluid for diagnosis of HSV infection of the central nervous system (CNS).
Viral  culture  isolates  should  be  typed  to  determine  which  type  of  HSV  is  causing  the
infection. Failure to detect HSV by culture or PCR does not indicate an absence of HSV
infection,  because  viral  shedding  is  intermittent.  The  use  of  cytologic  detection  of
cellular changes of HSV infection is an insensitive and nonspecific method of diagnosis,
both  for  genital  lesions  (i.e.,  Tzanck  preparation)  and  for  cervical  Pap  smears  and
therefore should not be relied upon. Both type-specific and nontype-specific antibodies
to  HSV  develop  during  the  first  several  weeks  after  infection  and  persist  indefinitely.
Accurate type-specific HSV serologic assays are based on the HSV-specific glycoprotein
G2  (HSV-2)  and  glycoprotein  G1  (HSV-1).  Such  assays  first  became  commercially
available in 1999, but older assays that do not accurately distinguish HSV-1 from HSV-2
antibody (despite claims to the contrary) remain on the market (155); providers should
specifically  request  serologic  type-specific  glycoprotein  G  (gG)-based  assays  when
serology is performed for their patients (156--158). Both laboratory-based assays and
point-of-care  tests  that  provide  results  for  HSV-2  antibodies  from  capillary  blood  or
serum  during  a  clinic  visit  are  available.  The  sensitivities  of  these  glycoprotein  G
type-specific  tests  for  the  detection  of  HSV-2  antibody  vary  from  80%--98%,  and
false-negative  results  might  be  more  frequent  at  early  stages  of  infection.  The
specificities  of  these  assays  are  ≥96%.  False-positive  results  can  occur,  especially  in
patients with a low likelihood of HSV infection. Repeat or confirmatory testing might be
indicated  in  some  settings,  especially  if  recent  acquisition  of  genital  herpes  is
suspected. IgM testing for HSV is not useful, because the IgM tests are not type-specific
and  might  be  positive  during  recurrent  episodes  of  herpes  (159).  Because  nearly  all
HSV-2  infections  are  sexually  acquired,  the  presence  of  type-specific  HSV-2  antibody
implies anogenital infection. In this instance, education and counseling appropriate for
persons with genital herpes should be provided. The presence of HSV-1 antibody alone
is more difficult to interpret. Most persons with HSV-1 antibody have oral HSV infection
acquired  during  childhood,  which  might  be  asymptomatic.  However,  acquisition  of
genital HSV-1 appears to be increasing, and genital HSV-1 also can be asymptomatic
(147--149).  Lack  of  symptoms  in  an  HSV-1  seropositive  person  does  not  distinguish
anogenital  from  orolabial  or  cutaneous  infection,  and  regardless  of  site  of  infection,
these  persons  remain  at  risk  for  acquiring  HSV-2.  Type-specific  HSV  serologic  assays
might  be  useful  in  the  following  scenarios:  1)  recurrent  genital  symptoms  or  atypical
symptoms with negative HSV cultures; 2) a clinical diagnosis of genital herpes without
laboratory  confirmation;  or  3)  a  partner  with  genital  herpes.  HSV  serologic  testing
should be considered for persons presenting for an STD evaluation (especially for those
persons with multiple sex partners), persons with HIV infection, and MSM at increased
risk for HIV acquisition. Screening for HSV-1 and HSV-2 in the general population is not
indicated. Antiviral chemotherapy offers clinical benefits to most symptomatic patients
and is the mainstay of management. Counseling regarding the natural history of genital
herpes,  sexual  and  perinatal  transmission,  and  methods  to  reduce  transmission  is
integral to clinical management. Systemic antiviral drugs can partially control the signs
and  symptoms  of  herpes  episodes  when  used  to  treat  first  clinical  and  recurrent
episodes,  or  when  used  as  daily  suppressive  therapy.  However,  these  drugs  neither
eradicate latent virus nor affect the risk, frequency, or severity of recurrences after the
drug is discontinued. Randomized trials have indicated that three antiviral medications
provide  clinical  benefit  for  genital  herpes:  acyclovir,  valacyclovir,  and  famciclovir
(160--168).  Valacyclovir  is  the  valine  ester  of  acyclovir  and  has  enhanced  absorption
after oral administration. Famciclovir also has high oral bioavailability. Topical therapy
with  antiviral  drugs  offers  minimal  clinical  benefit,  and  its  use  is  discouraged.  Newly
acquired  genital  herpes  can  cause  a  prolonged  clinical  illness  with  severe  genital
ulcerations  and  neurologic  involvement.  Even  persons  with  first-episode  herpes  who
have mild clinical manifestations initially can develop severe or prolonged symptoms.
Therefore,  all  patients  with  first  episodes  of  genital  herpes  should  receive  antiviral
therapy. Recommended Regimens* Acyclovir 400 mg orally three times a day for 7--10
days OR Acyclovir 200 mg orally five times a day for 7--10 days OR Famciclovir 250 mg
orally three times a day for 7--10 days OR Valacyclovir 1 g orally twice a day for 7--10
days  *Treatment  can  be  extended  if  healing  is  incomplete  after  10  days  of  therapy.
Almost all persons with symptomatic first-episode genital HSV-2 infection subsequently
experience  recurrent  episodes  of  genital  lesions;  recurrences  are  less  frequent  after
initial  genital  HSV-1  infection.  Intermittent  asymptomatic  shedding  occurs  in  persons
with  genital  HSV-2  infection,  even  in  those  with  longstanding  or  clinically  silent
infection. Antiviral therapy for recurrent genital herpes can be administered either as
suppressive  therapy  to  reduce  the  frequency  of  recurrences  or  episodically  to
ameliorate or shorten the duration of lesions. Some persons, including those with mild
or infrequent recurrent outbreaks, benefit from antiviral therapy; therefore, options for
treatment should be discussed. Many persons might prefer suppressive therapy, which
has the additional advantage of decreasing the risk for genital HSV-2 transmission to
susceptible  partners  (169,170).  Suppressive  Therapy  for  Recurrent  Genital  Herpes
Suppressive therapy reduces the frequency of genital herpes recurrences by 70%--80%
in  patients  who  have  frequent  recurrences  (166--169);  many  persons  receiving  such
therapy  report  having  experienced  no  symptomatic  outbreaks.  Treatment  also  is
effective  in  patients  with  less  frequent  recurrences.  Safety  and  efficacy  have  been
documented  among  patients  receiving  daily  therapy  with  acyclovir  for  as  long  as  6
years  and  with  valacyclovir  or  famciclovir  for  1  year  (171,172).  Quality  of  life  is
improved in many patients with frequent recurrences who receive suppressive therapy
rather  than  episodic  treatment.  The  frequency  of  recurrent  genital  herpes  outbreaks
diminishes over time in many patients, and the patient's psychological adjustment to
the  disease  might  change.  Therefore,  periodically  during  suppressive  treatment  (e.g.,
once a year), providers should discuss the need to continue therapy with the patient.
Treatment with valacyclovir 500 mg daily decreases the rate of HSV-2 transmission in
discordant,  heterosexual  couples  in  which  the  source  partner  has  a  history  of  genital
HSV-2  infection  (170).  Such  couples  should  be  encouraged  to  consider  suppressive
antiviral therapy as part of a strategy to prevent transmission, in addition to consistent
condom use and avoidance of sexual activity during recurrences. Suppressive antiviral
therapy also is likely to reduce transmission when used by persons who have multiple
partners (including MSM) and by those who are HSV-2 seropositive without a history of
genital  herpes.   Recommended  Regimens  Acyclovir  400  mg  orally  twice  a  day  OR
Famiciclovir 250 mg orally twice a day OR Valacyclovir 500 mg orally once a day* OR
Valacyclovir  1  g  orally  once  a  day  *  Valacyclovir  500  mg  once  a  day  might  be  less
effective than other valacyclovir or acyclovir dosing regimens in patients who have very
frequent  recurrences  (i.e.,  ≥10  episodes  per  year).  Acyclovir,  famciclovir,  and
valacyclovir  appear  equally  effective  for  episodic  treatment  of  genital  herpes,  but
famciclovir  appears  somewhat  less  effective  for  suppression  of  viral  shedding
(163--167,173).  Ease  of  administration  and  cost  also  are  important  considerations  for
prolonged treatment. Episodic Therapy for Recurrent Genital Herpes Effective episodic
treatment of recurrent herpes requires initiation of therapy within 1 day of lesion onset
or during the prodrome that precedes some outbreaks. The patient should be provided
with a supply of drug or a prescription for the medication with instructions to initiate
treatment immediately when symptoms begin. Recommended Regimens Acyclovir 400
mg orally three times a day for 5 days OR Acyclovir 800 mg orally twice a day for 5
days OR Acyclovir 800 mg orally three times a day for 2 days OR Famciclovir 125 mg
orally  twice  daily  for  5  days  OR  Famciclovir  1000  mg  orally  twice  daily  for  1  day  OR
Famciclovir  500 mg  once,  followed  by  250 mg  twice daily  for  2 days  OR  Valacyclovir
500 mg orally twice a day for 3 days OR Valacyclovir 1 g orally once a day for 5 days
Intravenous (IV) acyclovir therapy should be provided for patients who have severe HSV
disease or complications that necessitate hospitalization (e.g., disseminated infection,
pneumonitis,  or  hepatitis)  or  CNS  complications  (e.g.,  meningoencephalitis).  The
recommended regimen is acyclovir 5--10 mg/kg IV every 8 hours for 2--7 days or until
clinical improvement is observed, followed by oral antiviral therapy to complete at least
10 days of total therapy. Acyclovir dose adjustment is recommended for impaired renal
function.  Counseling  of  infected  persons  and  their  sex  partners  is  critical  to  the
management of genital herpes. The goals of counseling include 1) helping patients cope
with  the  infection  and  2)  preventing  sexual  and  perinatal  transmission  (174,175).
Although initial counseling can be provided at the first visit, many patients benefit from
learning  about  the  chronic  aspects  of  the  disease  after  the  acute  illness  subsides.
Multiple resources, including websites (http://www.ashastd.org) and printed materials,
are available to assist patients, their partners, and clinicians who become involved in
counseling. Although the psychological effect of a serologic diagnosis of HSV-2 infection
in  a  person  with  asymptomatic  or  unrecognized  genital  herpes  appears  minimal  and
transient (176), some HSV-infected persons might express anxiety concerning genital
herpes  that  does  not  reflect  the  actual  clinical  severity  of  their  disease;  the
psychological  effect  of  HSV  infection  frequently  is  substantial.  Common  concerns
regarding genital herpes include the severity of initial clinical manifestations, recurrent
episodes,  sexual  relationships  and  transmission  to  sex  partners,  and  ability  to  bear
healthy children. The misconception that HSV causes cancer should be dispelled. The
following recommendations apply to counseling of persons with genital HSV infection:
Persons who have genital herpes should be educated concerning the natural history of
the disease, with emphasis on the potential for recurrent episodes, asymptomatic viral
shedding, and the attendant risks of sexual transmission. Persons experiencing a first
episode of genital herpes should be advised that suppressive therapy is available and
effective in preventing symptomatic recurrent episodes and that episodic therapy often
is useful in shortening the duration of recurrent episodes. All persons with genital HSV
infection  should  be  encouraged  to  inform  their  current  sex  partners  that  they  have
genital  herpes  and  to  inform  future  partners  before  initiating  a  sexual  relationship.
Sexual transmission of HSV can occur during asymptomatic periods. Asymptomatic viral
shedding is more frequent in genital HSV-2 infection than genital HSV-1 infection and is
most frequent during the first 12 months after acquiring HSV-2. All persons with genital
herpes  should  remain  abstinent  from  sexual  activity  with  uninfected  partners  when
lesions or prodromal symptoms are present. The risk for HSV-2 sexual transmission can
be decreased by the daily use of valacyclovir by the infected person. Episodic therapy
does  not  reduce  the  risk  for  transmission  and  its  use  should  be  discouraged  for  this
purpose among persons whose partners might be at risk for HSV-2 acquisition. Infected
persons  should  be  informed  that  male  latex  condoms,  when  used  consistently  and
correctly, might reduce the risk for genital herpes transmission (21--23). Sex partners of
infected persons should be advised that they might be infected even if they have no
symptoms. Type-specific serologic testing of the asymptomatic partners of persons with
genital herpes is recommended to determine whether such partners are already HSV
seropositive or whether risk for acquiring HSV exists. The risk for neonatal HSV infection
should  be  explained  to  all  persons,  including  men.  Pregnant  women  and  women  of
childbearing  age  who  have  genital  herpes  should  inform  their  providers  who  care  for
them  during  pregnancy  and  those  who  will  care  for  their  newborn  infant  about  their
infection.  Pregnant  women  who  are  not  known  to  be  infected  with  HSV-2  should  be
advised to abstain from intercourse with men who have genital herpes during the third
trimester of pregnancy. Similarly, pregnant women who are not known to be infected
with  HSV-1  should  be  counseled  to  avoid  genital  exposure  to  HSV-1  during  the  third
trimester (e.g., oral sex with a partner with oral herpes and vaginal intercourse with a
partner  with  genital  HSV-1  infection).  Asymptomatic  persons  diagnosed  with  HSV-2
infection  by  type-specific  serologic  testing  should  receive  the  same  counseling
messages as persons with symptomatic infection. In addition, such persons should be
educated  about  the  clinical  manifestations  of  genital  herpes.  When  exposed  to  HIV,
HSV-2 seropositive persons are at increased risk for HIV acquisition. Patients should be
informed that suppressive antiviral therapy does not reduce the increased risk for HIV
acquisition associated with HSV-2 infection (177,178). The sex partners of patients who
have  genital  herpes  can  benefit  from  evaluation  and  counseling.  Symptomatic  sex
partners  should  be  evaluated  and  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  patients  who  have
genital lesions. Asymptomatic sex partners of patients who have genital herpes should
be questioned concerning histories of genital lesions and offered type-specific serologic
testing for HSV infection. Allergy, Intolerance, and Adverse Reactions Allergic and other
adverse reactions to acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir are rare. Desensitization to
acyclovir  has  been  described  (179).  HIV  Infection  Immunocompromised  patients  can
have prolonged or severe episodes of genital, perianal, or oral herpes. Lesions caused
by  HSV  are  common  among  HIV-infected  patients  and  might  be  severe,  painful,  and
atypical.  HSV  shedding  is  increased  in  HIV-infected  persons.  Whereas  antiretroviral
therapy  reduces  the  severity  and  frequency  of  symptomatic  genital  herpes,  frequent
subclinical  shedding  still  occurs  (180).  Clinical  manifestations  of  genital  herpes  might
worsen  during  immune  reconstitution  after  initiation  of  antiretroviral  therapy.  
Suppressive or episodic therapy with oral antiviral agents is effective in decreasing the
clinical  manifestations  of  HSV  among  HIV-positive  persons  (181--183).  The  extent  to
which suppressive antiviral therapy will decrease HSV transmission from this population
is unknown. HSV type-specific serologies can be offered to HIV-positive persons during
their initial evaluation if infection status is unknown, and suppressive antiviral therapy
can  be  considered  in  those  who  have  HSV-2  infection.   Recommended  Regimens  for
Daily  Suppressive  Therapy  in  Persons  with  HIV  Acyclovir  400--800  mg  orally  twice  to
three times a day OR Famciclovir 500 mg orally twice a day OR Valacyclovir 500 mg
orally twice a day Recommended Regimens for Episodic Infection in Persons with HIV
Acyclovir 400 mg orally three times a day for 5--10 days OR Famciclovir 500 mg orally
twice  a  day  for  5--10  days  OR  Valacyclovir  1  g  orally  twice  a  day  for  5--10  days
Acyclovir,  valacyclovir,  and  famciclovir  are  safe  for  use  in  immunocompromised
patients  in  the  doses  recommended  for  treatment  of  genital  herpes.  For  severe  HSV
disease,  initiating  therapy  with  acyclovir  5--10  mg/kg  IV  every  8  hours  might  be
necessary.  If  lesions  persist  or  recur  in  a  patient  receiving  antiviral  treatment,  HSV
resistance  should  be  suspected  and  a  viral  isolate  should  be  obtained  for  sensitivity
testing (184). Such persons should be managed in consultation with an HIV specialist,
and  alternate  therapy  should  be  administered.  All  acyclovir-resistant  strains  are
resistant  to  valacyclovir,  and  the  majority  are  resistant  to  famciclovir.  Foscarnet,  40
mg/kg  IV  every  8  hours  until  clinical  resolution  is  attained,  is  frequently  effective  for
treatment  of  acyclovir-resistant  genital  herpes.  Intravenous  cidofovir  5  mg/kg  once
weekly might also be effective. Imiquimod is a topical alternative, as is topical cidofovir
gel 1%, which is not commercially available and must be compounded at a pharmacy.
These topical preparations should be applied to the lesions once daily for 5 consecutive
days.   Clinical  management  of  antiviral  resistance  remains  challenging  among
HIV-infected  patients,  and  other  preventative  approaches  might  be  necessary.
However,
 experience
 with
 another
 group
 of
 immunocompromised
 persons
(hematopoietic  stem-cell  recipients)  demonstrated  that  persons  receiving  daily
suppressive  antiviral  therapy  were  less  likely  to  develop  acyclovir-resistant  HSV
compared  with  those  who  received  episodic  therapy  with  outbreaks  (185).  Most
mothers  of  infants  who  acquire  neonatal  herpes  lack  histories  of  clinically  evident
genital herpes (186). The risk for transmission to the neonate from an infected mother
is high (30%--50%) among women who acquire genital herpes near the time of delivery
and low (<1%) among women with histories of recurrent herpes at term or who acquire
genital HSV during the first half of pregnancy (187). However, because recurrent genital
herpes  is  much  more  common  than  initial  HSV  infection  during  pregnancy,  the
proportion of neonatal HSV infections acquired from mothers with recurrent herpes is
substantial.  Prevention  of  neonatal  herpes  depends  both  on  preventing  acquisition  of
genital  HSV  infection  during  late  pregnancy  and  avoiding  exposure  of  the  infant  to
herpetic lesions during delivery. Because the risk for herpes is high in infants of women
who  acquire  genital  HSV  during  late  pregnancy,  these  women  should  be  managed  in
consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist.   Women  without  known  genital
herpes should be counseled to abstain from intercourse during the third trimester with
partners  known  or  suspected  of  having  genital  herpes.  In  addition,  pregnant  women
without  known  orolabial  herpes  should  be  advised  to  abstain  from  receptive  oral  sex
during the third trimester with partners known or suspected to have orolabial herpes.
Some  specialists  believe  that  type-specific  serologic  tests  are  useful  to  identify
pregnant women at risk for HSV infection and to guide counseling regarding the risk for
acquiring genital herpes during pregnancy and that such testing should be offered to
uninfected women whose sex partner has HSV infection. However, the effectiveness of
antiviral  therapy  to  decrease  the  risk  for  HSV  transmission  to  pregnant  women  by
infected partners has not been studied. All pregnant women should be asked whether
they  have  a  history  of  genital  herpes.  At  the  onset  of  labor,  all  women  should  be
questioned carefully about symptoms of genital herpes, including prodromal symptoms,
and  all  women  should  be  examined  carefully  for  herpetic  lesions.  Women  without
symptoms  or  signs  of  genital  herpes  or  its  prodrome  can  deliver  vaginally.  Although
cesarean  section  does  not  completely  eliminate  the  risk  for  HSV  transmission  to  the
infant,  women  with  recurrent  genital  herpetic  lesions  at  the  onset  of  labor  should
deliver by cesarean section to prevent neonatal HSV infection.  The safety of systemic
acyclovir,  valacyclovir,  and  famciclovir  therapy  in  pregnant  women  has  not  been
definitively established. Available data do not indicate an increased risk for major birth
defects compared with the general population in women treated with acyclovir during
the  first  trimester  (188)  ---  findings  that  provide  assurance  to  women  who  have  had
prenatal  exposure  to  acyclovir.  However,  data  regarding  prenatal  exposure  to
valacyclovir and famciclovir are too limited to provide useful information on pregnancy
outcomes. Acyclovir can be administered orally to pregnant women with first episode
genital herpes or severe recurrent herpes and should be administered IV to pregnant
women  with  severe  HSV  infection.  Acyclovir  treatment  late  in  pregnancy  reduces  the
frequency  of  cesarean  sections  among  women  who  have  recurrent  genital  herpes  by
diminishing  the  frequency  of  recurrences  at  term  (189--191);  the  effect  of  antiviral
therapy late in pregnancy on the incidence of neonatal herpes is not known. No data
support the use of antiviral therapy among HSV seropositive women without a history of
genital  herpes.   Infants  exposed  to  HSV  during  birth,  as  documented  by  maternal
virologic  testing  or  presumed  by  observation  of  maternal  lesions,  should  be  followed
carefully  in  consultation  with  a  pediatric  infectious  disease  specialist.  Surveillance
cultures  of  mucosal  surfaces  to  detect  HSV  infection  might  be  considered  before  the
development of clinical signs of neonatal herpes. In addition, administration of acyclovir
might be considered for infants born to women who acquired HSV near term because
the  risk  for  neonatal  herpes  is  high  for  these  infants.  All  infants  who  have  neonatal
herpes  should  be  promptly  evaluated  and  treated  with  systemic  acyclovir.  The
recommended regimen for infants treated for known or suspected neonatal herpes is
acyclovir 20 mg/kg IV every 8 hours for 21 days for disseminated and CNS disease or
for  14  days  for  disease  limited  to  the  skin  and  mucous  membranes.  Granuloma
inguinale  is  a  genital  ulcerative  disease  caused  by  the  intracellular  gram-negative
bacterium
 Klebsiella
 granulomatis
 (formerly
 known
 as
 Calymmatobacterium
granulomatis). The disease occurs rarely in the United States, although it is endemic in
some  tropical  and  developing  areas,  including  India;  Papua,  New  Guinea;  the
Caribbean;  central  Australia;  and  southern  Africa  (192,193).  Clinically,  the  disease  is
commonly  characterized  as  painless,  slowly  progressive  ulcerative  lesions  on  the
genitals  or  perineum  without  regional  lymphadenopathy;  subcutaneous  granulomas
(pseudoboboes)  might  also  occur.  The  lesions  are  highly  vascular  (i.e.,  beefy  red
appearance)  and  bleed  easily  on  contact.  The  clinical  presentation  also  can  include
hypertrophic,  necrotic,  or  sclerotic  variants.  Extragenital  infection  can  occur  with
extension  of  infection  to  the  pelvis,  or  it  can  disseminate  to  intraabdominal  organs,
bones,  or  the  mouth.  The  lesions  also  can  develop  secondary  bacterial  infection  and
can  coexist  with  other  sexually  transmitted  pathogens.  The  causative  organism  is
difficult to culture, and diagnosis requires visualization of dark-staining Donovan bodies
on tissue crush preparation or biopsy. No FDA-cleared molecular tests for the detection
of K. granulomatis DNA exist, but such an assay might be useful when undertaken by
laboratories  that  have  conducted  a  CLIA  verification  study.   Several  antimicrobial
regimens have been effective, but only a limited number of controlled trials have been
published (192). Treatment has been shown to halt progression of lesions, and healing
typically proceeds inward from the ulcer margins; prolonged therapy is usually required
to  permit  granulation  and  reepithelialization  of  the  ulcers.  Relapse  can  occur  6--18
months  after  apparently  effective  therapy.   Recommended  Regimen  Doxycycline  100
mg orally twice a day for at least 3 weeks and until all lesions have completely healed
Alternative Regimens Azithromycin 1 g orally once per week for at least 3 weeks and
until all lesions have completely healed OR Ciprofloxacin 750 mg orally twice a day for
at least 3 weeks and until all lesions have completely healed OR Erythromycin base 500
mg orally four times a day for at least 3 weeks and until all lesions have completely
healed OR Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole one double-strength (160 mg/800 mg) tablet
orally twice a day for at least 3 weeks and until all lesions have completely healed The
addition  of  an  aminoglycoside  (e.g.,  gentamicin  1  mg/kg  IV  every  8  hours)  to  these
regimens can be considered if improvement is not evident within the first few days of
therapy.  Patients should be followed clinically until signs and symptoms have resolved.
Persons  who  have  had  sexual  contact  with  a  patient  who  has  granuloma  inguinale
within  the  60  days  before  onset  of  the  patient's  symptoms  should  be  examined  and
offered therapy. However, the value of empiric therapy in the absence of clinical signs
and  symptoms  has  not  been  established.  Pregnancy  Pregnancy  is  a  relative
contraindication to the use of sulfonamides. Pregnant and lactating women should be
treated  with  the  erythromycin  regimen,  and  consideration  should  be  given  to  the
addition  of  a  parenteral  aminoglycoside  (e.g.,  gentamicin).  Azithromycin  might  prove
useful  for  treating  granuloma  inguinale  during  pregnancy,  but  published  data  are
lacking.  Doxycycline  and  ciprofloxacin  are  contraindicated  in  pregnant  women.  HIV
Infection Persons with both granuloma inguinale and HIV infection should receive the
same regimens as those who are HIV negative; however, the addition of a parenteral
aminoglycoside (e.g., gentamicin) can also be considered. Lymphogranuloma venereum
(LGV)  is  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  serovars  L1,  L2,  or  L3  (194).  The  most  common
clinical  manifestation  of  LGV  among  heterosexuals  is  tender  inguinal  and/or  femoral
lymphadenopathy  that  is  typically  unilateral.  A  self-limited  genital  ulcer  or  papule
sometimes occurs at the site of inoculation. However, by the time patients seek care,
the  lesions  have  often  disappeared.  Rectal  exposure  in  women  or  MSM  can  result  in
proctocolitis,  including  mucoid  and/or  hemorrhagic  rectal  discharge,  anal  pain,
constipation, fever, and/or tenesmus (195,196). LGV is an invasive, systemic infection,
and if it is not treated early, LGV proctocolitis can lead to chronic, colorectal fistulas and
strictures.  Genital  and  colorectal  LGV  lesions  can  also  develop  secondary  bacterial
infection  or  can  be  coinfected  with  other  sexually  and  nonsexually  transmitted
pathogens. Diagnosis is based on clinical suspicion, epidemiologic information, and the
exclusion of other etiologies for proctocolitis, inguinal lymphadenopathy, or genital or
rectal ulcers. C. trachomatis testing also should be conducted, if available. Genital and
lymph  node  specimens  (i.e.,  lesion  swab  or  bubo  aspirate)  can  be  tested  for  C.
trachomatis by culture, direct immunofluorescence, or nucleic acid detection. NAATs for
C.  trachomatis  are  not  FDA-cleared  for  testing  rectal  specimens,  although  some
laboratories  have  performed  the  CLIA  validation  studies  that  are  needed  to  provide
results  for  clinical  management.  Additional  molecular  procedures  (e.g.,  PCR-based
genotyping) can be used to differentiate LGV from non-LGV C. trachomatis, but these
are  not  widely  available.   Chlamydia  serology  (complement  fixation  titers  >1:64)  can
support  the  diagnosis  of  LGV  in  the  appropriate  clinical  context.  Comparative  data
between  types  of  serologic  tests  are  lacking,  and  the  diagnostic  utility  of  serologic
methods  other  than  complement  fixation  and  some  microimmunofluorescence
procedures  has  not  been  established.  Serologic  test  interpretation  for  LGV  is  not
standardized, tests have not been validated for clinical proctitis presentations, and C.
trachomatis serovar-specific serologic tests are not widely available. In the absence of
specific LGV diagnostic testing, patients with a clinical syndrome consistent with LGV,
including proctocolitis or genital ulcer disease with lymphadenopathy, should be treated
for  LGV  as  described  in  this  report.  Treatment  cures  infection  and  prevents  ongoing
tissue damage, although tissue reaction to the infection can result in scarring. Buboes
might  require  aspiration  through  intact  skin  or  incision  and  drainage  to  prevent  the
formation  of  inguinal/femoral  ulcerations.  Doxycycline  is  the  preferred  treatment.
Recommended Regimen Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 21 days Alternative
Regimen  Erythromycin  base  500  mg  orally  four  times  a  day  for  21  days  Although
clinical data are lacking, azithromycin 1 g orally once weekly for 3 weeks is probably
effective  based  on  its  chlamydial  antimicrobial  activity.  Fluoroquinolone-based
treatments  might  also  be  effective,  but  extended  treatment  intervals  are  likely
required. Patients should be followed clinically until signs and symptoms have resolved.
Persons who have had sexual contact with a patient who has LGV within the 60 days
before  onset  of  the  patient's  symptoms  should  be  examined,  tested  for  urethral  or
cervical chlamydial infection, and treated with a chlamydia regimen (azithromycin 1 gm
orally  single  dose  or  doxycycline  100  mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  7  days).   Pregnancy
Pregnant  and  lactating  women  should  be  treated  with  erythromycin.  Azithromycin
might  prove  useful  for  treatment  of  LGV  in  pregnancy,  but  no  published  data  are
available regarding its safety and efficacy. Doxycycline is contraindicated in pregnant
women. HIV Infection Persons with both LGV and HIV infection should receive the same
regimens  as  those  who  are  HIV  negative.  Prolonged  therapy  might  be  required,  and
delay in resolution of symptoms might occur. Syphilis is a systemic disease caused by
Treponema pallidum. On the basis of clinical findings, the disease has been divided into
a series of overlapping stages, which are used to help guide treatment and follow-up.
Persons  who  have  syphilis  might  seek  treatment  for  signs  or  symptoms  of  primary
infection  (i.e.,  ulcer  or  chancre  at  the  infection  site),  secondary  infection  (i.e.,
manifestations that include, but are not limited to, skin rash, mucocutaneous lesions,
and lymphadenopathy), neurologic infection (i.e., cranial nerve dysfunction, meningitis,
stroke, acute or chronic altered mental status, loss of vibration sense, and auditory or
ophthalmic abnormalities, which might occur through the natural history of untreated
infection),  or  tertiary  infection  (i.e.,  cardiac  or  gummatous  lesions).  Latent  infections
(i.e.,  those  lacking  clinical  manifestations)  are  detected  by  serologic  testing.  Latent
syphilis  acquired  within  the  preceding  year  is  referred  to  as  early  latent  syphilis;  all
other cases of latent syphilis are either late latent syphilis or latent syphilis of unknown
duration.  Treatment  for  both  late  latent  syphilis  and  tertiary  syphilis  might  require  a
longer duration of therapy because organisms might be dividing more slowly; however,
the validity of this concept has not been assessed. Darkfield examinations and tests to
detect T. pallidum in lesion exudate or tissue are the definitive methods for diagnosing
early syphilis (197). Although no T. pallidum detection tests are commercially available,
some laboratories provide locally developed PCR tests for the detection of T. pallidum.
A presumptive diagnosis of syphilis is possible with  the use of two  types of serologic
tests: 1) nontreponemal tests (e.g., Venereal Disease Research Laboratory [VDRL] and
RPR)  and  2)  treponemal  tests  (e.g.,  fluorescent  treponemal  antibody  absorbed
[FTA-ABS]  tests,  the  T.  pallidum  passive  particle  agglutination  [TP-PA]  assay,  various
EIAs,  and  chemiluminescence  immunoassays).  The  use  of  only  one  type  of  serologic
test is insufficient for diagnosis, because each type of test has limitations, including the
possibility  of  false-positive  test  results  in  persons  without  syphilis.  False-positive
nontreponemal test results can be associated with various medical conditions unrelated
to  syphilis,  including  autoimmune  conditions,  older  age,  and  injection-drug  use
(198,199);  therefore,  persons  with  a  reactive  nontreponemal  test  should  receive  a
treponemal  test  to  confirm  the  diagnosis  of  syphilis.   Nontreponemal  test  antibody
titers may correlate with disease activity, and results should be reported quantitatively.
A fourfold change in titer, equivalent to a change of two dilutions (e.g., from 1:16 to 1:4
or  from  1:8  to  1:32),  is  considered  necessary  to  demonstrate  a  clinically  significant
difference between two nontreponemal test results that were obtained using the same
serologic  test.  Sequential  serologic  tests  in  individual  patients  should  be  performed
using the same testing method (e.g., VDRL or RPR), preferably by the same laboratory.
The VDRL and RPR are equally valid assays, but quantitative results from the two tests
cannot  be  compared  directly  because  RPR  titers  frequently  are  slightly  higher  than
VDRL  titers.  Nontreponemal  test  titers  usually  decline  after  treatment  and  might
become  nonreactive  with  time;  however,  in  some  persons,  nontreponemal  antibodies
can persist for a long period of time --- a response referred to as the "serofast reaction."
Most  patients  who  have  reactive  treponemal  tests  will  have  reactive  tests  for  the
remainder  of  their  lives,  regardless  of  treatment  or  disease  activity.  However,
15%--25%  of  patients  treated  during  the  primary  stage  revert  to  being  serologically
nonreactive after 2--3 years (200). Treponemal test antibody titers should not be used
to assess treatment response. Some clinical laboratories and blood banks have begun
to  screen  samples  using  treponemal  tests,  typically  by  EIA  or  chemiluminescence
immunoassays  (201,202).  This  strategy  will  identify  both  persons  with  previous
treatment for syphilis and persons with untreated or incompletely treated syphilis. The
positive predictive value for syphilis associated with a treponemal screening test result
might be lower among populations with a low prevalence of syphilis.  Persons with a
positive  treponemal  screening  test  should  have  a  standard  nontreponemal  test  with
titer performed reflexively by the laboratory to guide patient management decisions. If
the  nontreponemal  test  is  negative,  then  the  laboratory  should  perform  a  different
treponemal test (preferably one based on different antigens than the original test) to
confirm the results of the initial test. If a second treponemal test is positive, persons
with a history of previous treatment will require no further management unless sexual
history  suggests  likelihood  of  re-exposure.  Those  without  a  history  of  treatment  for
syphilis should be offered treatment. Unless history or results of a physical examination
suggest  a  recent  infection,  previously  untreated  persons  should  be  treated  for  late
latent  syphilis.  If  the  second  treponemal  test  is  negative,  further  evaluation  or
treatment is not indicated. For most HIV-infected persons, serologic tests are accurate
and  reliable  for  the  diagnosis  of  syphilis  and  for  following  a  patient's  response  to
treatment.  However,  atypical  syphilis  serologic  test  results  (i.e.,  unusually  high,
unusually low, or fluctuating titers) can occur in HIV-infected persons. When serologic
tests do not correspond with clinical findings suggestive of early syphilis, use of other
tests  (e.g.,  biopsy  and  darkfield  microscopy)  should  be  considered.   Clinical  signs  of
neurosyphilis  (i.e.,  cranial  nerve  dysfunction,  meningitis,  stroke,  acute  or  chronic
altered  mental  status,  loss  of  vibration  sense,  and  auditory  or  ophthalmic
abnormalities) warrant further investigation and treatment for neurosyphilis. Laboratory
testing is helpful in supporting the diagnosis of neurosyphilis; however, no single test
can  be  used  to  diagnose  neurosyphilis  in  all  instances.  Cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF)
laboratory  abnormalities  are  common  in  persons  with  early  syphilis.  The  VDRL  in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF-VDRL), which is highly specific but insensitive, is the standard
serologic test for CSF. When reactive in the absence of substantial contamination of CSF
with blood, it is considered diagnostic of neurosyphilis; however in early syphilis, it can
be of unknown prognostic significance (203). Most other tests are both insensitive and
nonspecific  and  must  be  interpreted  in  relation  to  other  test  results  and  the  clinical
assessment.  Therefore,  the  laboratory  diagnosis  of  neurosyphilis  usually  depends  on
various combinations of reactive serologic test results, CSF cell count or protein, and a
reactive  CSF-VDRL  with  or  without  clinical  manifestations.  Among  persons  with  HIV
infection,  the  CSF  leukocyte  count  usually  is  elevated  (>5  white  blood  cell  count
[WBC]/mm3); using a higher cutoff (>20 WBC/ mm3) might improve the specificity of
neurosyphilis  diagnosis  (204).  The  CSF-VDRL  might  be  nonreactive  even  when
neurosyphilis is present; therefore, additional evaluation using FTA-ABS testing on CSF
can  be  considered.  The  CSF  FTA-ABS  test  is  less  specific  for  neurosyphilis  than  the
CSF-VDRL  but  is  highly  sensitive;  neurosyphilis  is  highly  unlikely  with  a  negative  CSF
FTA-ABS  test  (205).  Penicillin  G,  administered  parenterally,  is  the  preferred  drug  for
treating all stages of syphilis. The preparation used (i.e., benzathine, aqueous procaine,
or aqueous crystalline), the dosage, and the length of treatment depend on the stage
and  clinical  manifestations  of  the  disease.  Selection  of  the  appropriate  penicillin
preparation is important, because T. pallidum can reside in sequestered sites (e.g., the
CNS  and  aqueous  humor)  that  are  poorly  accessed  by  some  forms  of  penicillin.
Combinations  of  benzathine  penicillin,  procaine  penicillin,  and  oral  penicillin
preparations are not considered appropriate for the treatment of syphilis. Reports have
indicated
 that
 practitioners
 have
 inadvertently
 prescribed
 combination
benzathine-procaine penicillin (Bicillin C-R) instead of the standard benzathine penicillin
product (Bicillin L-A) widely used in the United States. Practitioners, pharmacists, and
purchasing agents should be aware of the similar names of these two products to avoid
using  the  inappropriate  combination  therapy  agent  for  treating  syphilis  (206).  The
effectiveness  of  penicillin  for  the  treatment  of  syphilis  was  well  established  through
clinical  experience  even  before  the  value  of  randomized  controlled  clinical  trials  was
recognized. Therefore, nearly all the recommendations for the treatment of syphilis are
based not only on clinical trials and observational studies, but approximately 50 years
of  clinical  experience.   Parenteral  penicillin  G  is  the  only  therapy  with  documented
efficacy for syphilis during pregnancy. Pregnant women with syphilis in any stage who
report  penicillin  allergy  should  be  desensitized  and  treated  with  penicillin  (see
Management
 of
 Patients
 Who
 Have
 a
 History
 of
 Penicillin
 Allergy).
 The
Jarisch-Herxheimer  reaction  is  an  acute  febrile  reaction  frequently  accompanied  by
headache,  myalgia,  fever,  and  other  symptoms  that  usually  occur  within  the  first  24
hours after the initiation of any therapy for syphilis. Patients should be informed about
this possible adverse reaction. The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction occurs most frequently
among  patients  who  have  early  syphilis,  presumably  because  bacterial  burdens  are
higher  during  these  stages.  Antipyretics  can  be  used  to  manage  symptoms,  but  they
have not been proven to prevent this reaction. The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction might
induce  early  labor  or  cause  fetal  distress  in  pregnant  women,  but  this  should  not
prevent  or  delay  therapy  (see  Syphilis  During  Pregnancy).  Sexual  transmission  of  T.
pallidum is thought to occur only when mucocutaneous syphilitic lesions are present.
Although such manifestations are uncommon after the first year of infection, persons
exposed  sexually  to  a  patient  who  has  syphilis  in  any  stage  should  be  evaluated
clinically and serologically and treated with a recommended regimen, according to the
following recommendations: Persons who were exposed within the 90 days preceding
the diagnosis of primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis in a sex partner might be
infected even if seronegative; therefore, such persons should be treated presumptively.
Persons  who  were  exposed  >90  days  before  the  diagnosis  of  primary,  secondary,  or
early latent syphilis in a sex partner should be treated presumptively if serologic test
results are not available immediately and the opportunity for follow-up is uncertain. For
purposes  of  partner  notification  and  presumptive  treatment  of  exposed  sex  partners,
patients with syphilis of unknown duration who have high nontreponemal serologic test
titers  (i.e.,  >1:32)  can  be  assumed  to  have  early  syphilis.  For  the  purpose  of
determining  a  treatment  regimen,  however,  serologic  titers  should  not  be  used  to
differentiate early from late latent syphilis (see Latent Syphilis, Treatment). Long-term
sex  partners  of  patients  who  have  latent  syphilis  should  be  evaluated  clinically  and
serologically  for  syphilis  and  treated  on  the  basis  of  the  evaluation  findings.  Sexual
partners  of  infected  patients  should  be  considered  at  risk  and  provided  treatment  if
they  have  had  sexual  contact  with  the  patient  within  3  months  plus  the  duration  of
symptoms  for  patients  diagnosed  with  primary  syphilis,  6  months  plus  duration  of
symptoms for those with secondary syphilis, and 1 year for patients with early latent
syphilis.  Treatment Parenteral penicillin G has been used effectively for more than 50
years to achieve clinical resolution (i.e., the healing of lesions and prevention of sexual
transmission) and to prevent late sequelae. However, no comparative trials have been
adequately conducted to guide the selection of an optimal penicillin regimen (i.e., the
dose, duration, and preparation). Substantially fewer data are available for nonpenicillin
regimens. Recommended Regimen for Adults* Benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units
IM in a single dose * Recommendations for treating syphilis in HIV-infected persons and
pregnant  women  are  discussed  later  in  this  report  (see  Syphilis  among  HIV--Infected
Persons and Syphilis in Pregnancy). Available data demonstrate that additional doses of
benzathine  penicillin  G,  amoxicillin,  or  other  antibiotics  in  early  syphilis  (primary,
secondary,  and  early  latent)  do  not  enhance  efficacy,  regardless  of  HIV  status.
Recommended Regimen for Infants and Children Infants and children aged ≥1 month
diagnosed  with  syphilis  should  have  a  CSF  examination  to  detect  asymptomatic
neurosyphilis,  and  birth  and  maternal  medical  records  should  be  reviewed  to  assess
whether  such  children  have  congenital  or  acquired  syphilis  (see  Congenital  Syphilis).
Children with acquired primary or secondary syphilis should be evaluated (e.g., through
consultation  with  child-protection  services)  (see  Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of  Children)
and  treated  by  using  the  following  pediatric  regimen.  Recommended  Regimen  for
Infants and Children Benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg IM, up to the adult dose of
2.4  million  units  in  a  single  dose  Other  Management  Considerations  All  persons  who
have  syphilis  should  be  tested  for  HIV  infection.  In  geographic  areas  in  which  the
prevalence of HIV is high, persons who have primary syphilis should be retested for HIV
after 3 months if the first HIV test result was negative. Patients who have syphilis and
symptoms or signs suggesting neurologic disease (e.g., meningitis and hearing loss) or
ophthalmic disease (e.g., uveitis, iritis, neuroretinitis, and optic neuritis) should have an
evaluation that includes CSF analysis, ocular slit-lamp ophthalmologic examination, and
otologic  examination.  Treatment  should  be  guided  by  the  results  of  this  evaluation.
Invasion of CSF by T. pallidum accompanied by CSF laboratory abnormalities is common
among adults who have primary or secondary syphilis (203). Therefore, in the absence
of  clinical  neurologic  findings,  no  evidence  exists  to  support  variation  from  the
recommended  treatment  regimen  for  early  syphilis.  Symptomatic  neurosyphilis
develops  in  only  a  limited  number  of  persons  after  treatment  with  the  penicillin
regimens recommended for primary and secondary syphilis. Therefore, unless clinical
signs or symptoms of neurologic or ophthalmic involvement are present or treatment
failure is documented, routine CSF analysis is not recommended for persons who have
primary or secondary syphilis.  Follow-Up Treatment failure can occur with any regimen.
However, assessing response to treatment frequently is difficult, and definitive criteria
for  cure  or  failure  have  not  been  established.  In  addition,  nontreponemal  test  titers
might decline more slowly for persons who previously have had syphilis (207). Clinical
and serologic evaluation should be performed 6 months and 12 months after treatment;
more frequent evaluation might be prudent if follow-up is uncertain.  Patients who have
signs or symptoms that persist or recur or who have a sustained fourfold increase in
nontreponemal test titer (i.e., compared with the maximum or baseline titer at the time
of  treatment)  probably  failed  treatment  or  were  reinfected.  These  patients  should  be
retreated and reevaluated for HIV infection. Because treatment failure usually cannot
be reliably distinguished from reinfection with T. pallidum, a CSF analysis also should be
performed.  Although failure of nontreponemal test titers to decline fourfold within 6--12
months after therapy for primary or secondary syphilis might be indicative of treatment
failure, clinical trial data have demonstrated that >15% of patients with early syphilis
treated  with  the  recommended  therapy  will  not  achieve  the  two  dilution  decline  in
nontreponemal titer used to define response at 1 year after treatment (208). Persons
whose  titers  do  not  decline  should  be  reevaluated  for  HIV  infection.  Optimal
management of such patients is unclear. At a minimum, these patients should receive
additional  clinical  and  serologic  follow-up.  If  additional  follow-up  cannot  be  ensured,
retreatment  is  recommended.  Because  treatment  failure  might  be  the  result  of
unrecognized CNS infection, CSF examination can be considered in such situations. For
retreatment, weekly injections of benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM for 3 weeks
is  recommended,  unless  CSF  examination  indicates  that  neurosyphilis  is  present  (see
Neurosyphilis). In rare instances, serologic titers do not decline despite a negative CSF
examination  and  a  repeated  course  of  therapy.  In  these  circumstances,  the  need  for
additional  therapy  or  repeated  CSF  examinations  is  unclear,  but  is  not  generally
recommended.  Management  of  Sex  Partners  See  General  Principles,  Management  of
Sex  Partners.  Special  Considerations  Penicillin  Allergy  Data  to  support  the  use  of
alternatives to penicillin in the treatment of early syphilis are limited. However, several
therapies  might  be  effective  in  nonpregnant,  penicillin-allergic  patients  who  have
primary  or  secondary  syphilis.  Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  twice  daily  for  14  days
(209,210)  and  tetracycline  (500  mg  four  times  daily  for  14  days)  are  regimens  that
have been used for many years. Compliance is likely to be better with doxycycline than
tetracycline,  because  tetracycline  can  cause  gastrointestinal  side  effects.  Although
limited  clinical  studies,  along  with  biologic  and  pharmacologic  evidence,  suggest  that
ceftriaxone  (1  g  daily  either  IM  or  IV  for  10--14  days)  is  effective  for  treating  early
syphilis, the optimal dose and duration of ceftriaxone therapy have not been defined
(211).  Azithromycin  as  a  single  2-g  oral  dose  is  effective  for  treating  early  syphilis
(212--214). However, T. pallidum chromosomal mutations associated with azithromycin
resistance and treatment failures have been documented in several geographical areas
in the United States (215--217). As such, the use of azithromycin should be used with
caution only when treatment with penicillin or doxycycline is not feasible. Azithromycin
should  not  be  used  in  MSM  or  pregnant  women.  Close  follow-up  of  persons  receiving
any  alternative  therapies  is  essential.   Persons  with  a  penicillin  allergy  whose
compliance  with  therapy  or  follow-up  cannot  be  ensured  should  be  desensitized  and
treated with benzathine penicillin. Skin testing for penicillin allergy might be useful in
some circumstances in which the reagents and expertise are available to perform the
test adequately (see Management of Patients Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy).
Pregnancy Pregnant patients who are allergic to penicillin should be desensitized and
treated  with  penicillin  (see  Management  of  Patients  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin
Allergy and Syphilis During Pregnancy). HIV Infection See Syphilis Among HIV-Infected
Persons.  Latent  syphilis  is  defined  as  syphilis  characterized  by  seroreactivity  without
other evidence of disease. Patients who have latent syphilis and who acquired syphilis
during  the  preceding  year  are  classified  as  having  early  latent  syphilis.  Patients'
conditions can be diagnosed as early latent syphilis if, during the year preceding the
evaluation, they had 1) a documented seroconversion or fourfold or greater increase in
titer  of  a  nontreponemal  test;  2)  unequivocal  symptoms  of  primary  or  secondary
syphilis;  or  3)  a  sex  partner  documented  to  have  primary,  secondary,  or  early  latent
syphilis.  In  addition,  for  persons  whose  only  possible  exposure  occurred  during  the
previous  12  months,  reactive  nontreponemal  and  treponemal  tests  are  indicative  of
early latent syphilis. In the absence of these conditions, an asymptomatic person should
be  considered  to  have  late  latent  syphilis  or  syphilis  of  unknown  duration.
Nontreponemal serologic titers usually are higher during early latent syphilis than late
latent syphilis. However, early latent syphilis cannot be reliably distinguished from late
latent  syphilis  solely  on  the  basis  of  nontreponemal  titers.  All  patients  with  latent
syphilis  should  have  careful  examination  of  all  accessible  mucosal  surfaces  (i.e.,  the
oral cavity, perianal area, perineum and vagina in women, and underneath the foreskin
in uncircumcised men) to evaluate for internal mucosal lesions. All patients who have
syphilis  should  be  tested  for  HIV  infection.  Treatment  Because  latent  syphilis  is  not
transmitted sexually, the objective of treating patients with this stage of disease is to
prevent  complications.  Although  clinical  experience  supports  the  effectiveness  of
penicillin in achieving this goal, limited evidence is available to guide choice of specific
regimens. The following regimens are recommended for penicillin nonallergic patients
who  have  normal  CSF  examinations  (if  performed).  Recommended  Regimens  for
Adults* Early Latent Syphilis Benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM in a single dose
Late Latent Syphilis or Latent Syphilis of Unknown Duration Benzathine penicillin G 7.2
million  units  total,  administered  as  3  doses  of  2.4  million  units  IM  each  at  1-week
intervals * Recommendations for treating syphilis in HIV-infected persons and pregnant
women are discussed later in this report (see Syphilis among HIV-Infected Persons and
Syphilis in Pregnancy). Available data demonstrate no enhanced efficacy of additional
doses of penicillin G, amoxicillin, or other antibiotics in early syphilis, regardless of HIV
status.  Infants  and  children  aged  ≥1  month  who  have  been  diagnosed  with  syphilis
should have a CSF examination to exclude neurosyphilis. In addition, birth and maternal
medical  records  should  be  reviewed  to  assess  whether  children  have  congenital  or
acquired syphilis (see Congenital Syphilis). Older children with acquired latent syphilis
should be evaluated as described for adults and treated using the following pediatric
regimens (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). These regimens are for penicillin
nonallergic children who have acquired syphilis and who have normal CSF examination
results. Recommended Regimens for Children Early Latent Syphilis Benzathine penicillin
G  50,000  units/kg  IM,  up  to  the  adult  dose  of  2.4  million  units  in  a  single  dose  Late
Latent Syphilis or Latent Syphilis of Unknown Duration Benzathine penicillin G 50,000
units/kg IM, up to the adult dose of 2.4 million units, administered as 3 doses at 1-week
intervals (total 150,000 units/kg up to the adult total dose of 7.2 million units) Other
Management  Considerations  Patients  diagnosed  with  latent  syphilis  who  demonstrate
any of the following criteria should have a prompt CSF examination: Neurologic (e.g.,
auditory disease, cranial nerve dysfunction, acute or chronic meningitis, stroke, acute
or  chronic  altered  mental  status,  and  loss  of  vibration  sense)  or  ophthalmic  signs  or
symptoms (e.g., iritis and uveitis); evidence of active tertiary syphilis (e.g., aortitis and
gumma);  or  serologic  treatment  failure.  If  a  patient  misses  a  dose  of  penicillin  in  a
course of weekly therapy for late syphilis, the appropriate course of action is unclear.
Pharmacologic considerations suggest that an interval of 10--14 days between doses of
benzathine  penicillin  for  late  syphilis  or  latent  syphilis  of  unknown  duration  might  be
acceptable  before  restarting  the  sequence  of  injections.  Missed  doses  are  not
acceptable  for  pregnant  patients  receiving  therapy  for  late  latent  syphilis.  Pregnant
women who miss any dose of therapy must repeat the full course of therapy. Follow-Up
Quantitative  nontreponemal  serologic  tests  should  be  repeated  at  6,  12,  and  24
months.  A  CSF  examination  should  be  performed  if  1)  titers  increase  fourfold,  2)  an
initially  high  titer  (≥1:32)  fails  to  decline  at  least  fourfold  (i.e.,  two  dilutions)  within
12--24 months of therapy, or 3) signs or symptoms attributable to syphilis develop. In
such  circumstances,  even  if  the  CSF  examination  is  negative,  retreatment  for  latent
syphilis should be initiated. In rare instances, despite a negative CSF examination and a
repeated  course  of  therapy,  serologic  titers  might  fail  to  decline.  In  these
circumstances,  the  need  for  additional  therapy  or  repeated  CSF  examinations  is
unclear.  Management  of  Sex  Partners  See  General  Principles,  Management  of  Sex
Partners.  Special  Considerations  Penicillin  Allergy  The  effectiveness  of  alternatives  to
penicillin  in  the  treatment  of  latent  syphilis  has  not  been  well  documented.
Nonpregnant patients allergic to penicillin who have clearly defined early latent syphilis
should  respond  to  therapies  recommended  as  alternatives  to  penicillin  for  the
treatment  of  primary  and  secondary  syphilis  (see  Primary  and  Secondary  Syphilis,
Treatment). The only acceptable alternatives for the treatment of late latent syphilis or
latent  syphilis  of  unknown  duration  are  doxycycline  (100  mg  orally  twice  daily)  or
tetracycline (500 mg orally four times daily), both for 28 days. These therapies should
be used only in conjunction with close serologic and clinical follow-up. Based on biologic
plausibility  and  pharmacologic  properties,  ceftriaxone  might  be  effective  for  treating
late  latent  syphilis  or  syphilis  of  unknown  duration.  However,  the  optimal  dose  and
duration of ceftriaxone therapy have not been defined, and treatment decisions should
be  discussed  in  consultation  with  a  specialist.  Some  patients  who  are  allergic  to
penicillin  also  might  be  allergic  to  ceftriaxone;  in  these  circumstances,  use  of  an
alternative  agent  might  be  required.  The  efficacy  of  these  alternative  regimens  in
HIV-infected persons has not been well studied.  Pregnancy Pregnant patients who are
allergic to penicillin should be desensitized and treated with penicillin (see Management
of Patients Who Have a History of Penicillin Allergy and Syphilis During Pregnancy). HIV
Infection  See  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected  Persons.  Tertiary  syphilis  refers  to  gumma
and cardiovascular syphilis but not to all neurosyphilis. Patients who are not allergic to
penicillin  and  have  no  evidence  of  neurosyphilis  should  be  treated  with  the  following
regimen.  Recommended  Regimen  Benzathine  penicillin  G  7.2  million  units  total,
administered  as  3  doses  of  2.4  million  units  IM  each  at  1-week  intervals  Other
Management  Considerations  Patients  who  have  symptomatic  late  syphilis  should  be
given a CSF examination before therapy is initiated. Some providers treat all patients
who have cardiovascular syphilis with a neurosyphilis regimen. These patients should
be  managed  in  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist.  Follow-Up  Limited
information is available concerning clinical response and follow-up of patients who have
tertiary syphilis. Management of Sex Partners See General Principles, Management of
Sex  Partners.  Special  Considerations  Penicillin  Allergy  Patients  allergic  to  penicillin
should  be  treated  in  consultation  with  an  infectious  disease  specialist.  Pregnancy
Pregnant patients who are allergic to penicillin should be desensitized and treated with
penicillin  (see  Management  of  Patients  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy  and
Syphilis  During  Pregnancy).  HIV  Infection  See  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected  Persons.
Treatment  CNS  involvement  can  occur  during  any  stage  of  syphilis.  However,  CSF
laboratory  abnormalities  are  common  in  persons  with  early  syphilis,  even  in  the
absence of clinical neurological findings. No evidence exists to support variation from
recommended  treatment  for  early  syphilis  for  patients  found  to  have  such
abnormalities. If clinical evidence of neurologic involvement is observed (e.g., cognitive
dysfunction, motor or sensory deficits, ophthalmic or auditory symptoms, cranial nerve
palsies, and symptoms or signs of meningitis), a CSF examination should be performed.
Syphilitic  uveitis  or  other  ocular  manifestations  frequently  are  associated  with
neurosyphilis and should be managed according to the treatment recommendations for
neurosyphilis.  Patients  who  have  neurosyphilis  or  syphilitic  eye  disease  (e.g.,  uveitis,
neuroretinitis, and optic neuritis) should be treated with the recommended regimen for
neurosyphilis;  those  with  eye  disease  should  be  managed  in  collaboration  with  an
ophthalmologist. A CSF examination should be performed for all patients with syphilitic
eye disease to identify those with abnormalities; patients found to have abnormal CSF
test  results  should  be  provided  follow-up  CSF  examinations  to  assess  treatment
response. Recommended Regimen Aqueous crystalline penicillin G 18--24 million units
per day, administered as 3--4 million units IV every 4 hours or continuous infusion, for
10--14  days  If  compliance  with  therapy  can  be  ensured,  the  following  alternative
regimen might be considered. Alternative Regimen Procaine penicillin 2.4 million units
IM once daily PLUS Probenecid 500 mg orally four times a day, both for 10--14 days The
durations of the recommended and alternative regimens for neurosyphilis are shorter
than the duration of the regimen used for late syphilis in the absence of neurosyphilis.
Therefore, benzathine penicillin, 2.4 million units IM once per week for up to 3 weeks,
can  be  considered  after  completion  of  these  neurosyphilis  treatment  regimens  to
provide  a  comparable  total  duration  of  therapy.  Other  Management  Considerations
Other  considerations  in  the  management  of  patients  who  have  neurosyphilis  are  as
follows:  All  persons  who  have  syphilis  should  be  tested  for  HIV.  Although  systemic
steroids are used frequently as adjunctive therapy for otologic syphilis, such drugs have
not been proven to be beneficial. Follow-Up If CSF pleocytosis was present initially, a
CSF  examination  should  be  repeated  every  6  months  until  the  cell  count  is  normal.
Follow-up CSF examinations also can be used to evaluate changes in the CSF-VDRL or
CSF  protein  after  therapy;  however,  changes  in  these  two  parameters  occur  more
slowly than cell counts, and persistent abnormalities might be less important (219,220).
The leukocyte count is a sensitive measure of the effectiveness of therapy. If the cell
count has not decreased after 6 months or if the CSF cell count or protein is not normal
after  2  years,  retreatment  should  be  considered.  Limited  data  suggest  that  in
immunocompetent  persons  and  HIV-infected  persons  on  highly  active  antiretroviral
therapy, normalization of the serum RPR titer predicts normalization of CSF parameters
(220).   Management  of  Sex  Partners  See  General  Principles,  Management  of  Sex
Partners. Special Considerations Penicillin Allergy Limited data suggest that ceftriaxone
2 g  daily  either IM  or IV for 10--14 days  can  be used  as  an  alternative treatment for
patients  with  neurosyphilis  (221,222).  However,  the  possibility  of  cross-reactivity
between  ceftriaxone  and  penicillin  exists.  Other  regimens  have  not  been  adequately
evaluated  for  treatment  of  neurosyphilis.  Therefore,  if  concern  exists  regarding  the
safety of ceftriaxone for a patient with neurosyphilis, skin testing should be performed
(if  available)  to  confirm  penicillin  allergy  and,  if  necessary,  desensitization  in
consultation with a specialist. Pregnancy Pregnant patients who are allergic to penicillin
should be desensitized and treated with penicillin (see Syphilis During Pregnancy). HIV
Infection See Syphilis Among HIV-Infected Persons. Diagnostic Considerations Although
they  are  uncommon,  unusual  serologic  responses  have  been  observed  among
HIV-infected persons who have syphilis. Most reports have involved serologic titers that
were  higher  than  expected,  but  false-negative  serologic  test  results  and  delayed
appearance  of  seroreactivity  also  have  been  reported  (223).  Regardless,  both
treponemal  and  nontreponemal  serologic  tests  for  syphilis  can  be  interpreted  in  the
usual  manner  for  most  patients  who  are  coinfected  with  T.  pallidum  and  HIV.  When
clinical  findings  are  suggestive  of  syphilis  but  serologic  tests  are  nonreactive  or  their
interpretation  is  unclear,  alternative  tests  (e.g.,  biopsy  of  a  lesion,  darkfield
examination, and PCR of lesion material) might be useful for diagnosis. Neurosyphilis
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of neurologic disease in HIV-infected
persons.  Treatment  Compared  with  HIV-negative  patients,  HIV-positive  patients  who
have  early  syphilis  might  be  at  increased  risk  for  neurologic  complications  (224)  and
might  have  higher  rates  of  serologic  treatment  failure  with  currently  recommended
regimens. The magnitude of these risks is not defined precisely, but is likely small. No
treatment  regimens  for  syphilis  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  more  effective  in
preventing  neurosyphilis  in  HIV-infected  patients  than  the  syphilis  regimens
recommended  for  HIV-negative  patients  (208).  Careful  follow-up  after  therapy  is
essential.  Primary  and  Secondary  Syphilis  Among  HIV-Infected  Persons  Treatment
Treatment of primary and secondary syphilis among HIV-infected persons is benzathine
penicillin  G,  2.4  million  units  IM  in  a  single  dose.   Available  data  demonstrate  that
additional  doses  of  benzathine  penicillin  G,  amoxicillin,  or  other  antibiotics  in  early
syphilis  do  not  result  in  enhanced  efficacy,  regardless  of  HIV  status  (208).   Other
Management  Considerations  Most  HIV-infected  persons  respond  appropriately  to
standard  benzathine  penicillin  for  primary  and  secondary  syphilis.  CSF  abnormalities
(e.g., mononuclear pleocytosis and elevated protein levels) are common in HIV-infected
persons,  even  in  those  without  neurologic  symptoms,  although  the  clinical  and
prognostic significance of such CSF abnormalities with primary and secondary syphilis
is unknown. Several studies have demonstrated that among persons infected with both
HIV  and  syphilis,  clinical  and  CSF  abnormalities  consistent  with  neurosyphilis  are
associated  with  a  CD4  count  of  ≤350  cells/mL  and/or  an  RPR  titer  of  ≥1:32
(204,225,226); however, unless neurologic symptoms are present, CSF examination in
this  setting  has  not  been  associated  with  improved  clinical  outcomes.   The  use  of
antiretroviral  therapy  as  per  current  guidelines  might  improve  clinical  outcomes  in
HIV-infected  persons  with  syphilis  (220,227,228).   Follow-Up  HIV-infected  persons
should be evaluated clinically and serologically for treatment failure at 3, 6, 9, 12, and
24  months  after  therapy.   HIV-infected  persons  who  meet  the  criteria  for  treatment
failure (i.e., signs or symptoms that persist or recur or persons who have a sustained
fourfold increase in nontreponemal test titer) should be managed in the same manner
as  HIV-negative  patients  (i.e.,  a  CSF  examination  and  retreatment).  CSF  examination
and retreatment also should be strongly considered for persons whose nontreponemal
test titers do not decrease fourfold within 6--12 months of therapy. If CSF examination
is normal, treatment with benzathine penicillin G administered as 2.4 million units IM
each at weekly intervals for 3 weeks is recommended.  Management of Sex Partners
See General Principles, Management of Sex Partners. Special Considerations Penicillin
Allergy. HIV-infected, penicillin-allergic patients who have primary or secondary syphilis
should  be  managed  according  to  the  recommendations  for  penicillin-allergic,
HIV-negative patients. Patients with penicillin allergy whose compliance with therapy or
follow-up  cannot  be  ensured  should  be  desensitized  and  treated  with  penicillin  (see
Management  of  Patients  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy).  The  use  of
alternatives  to  penicillin  has  not  been  well  studied  in  HIV-infected  patients.  These
therapies should be used only in conjunction with close serologic and clinical follow-up.
Latent Syphilis Among HIV-Infected Persons Treatment HIV-infected persons with latent
syphilis  should  be  treated  according  to  the  stage-specific  recommendations  for
HIV-negative persons. Treatment of early latent syphilis among HIV-infected persons is
benzathine penicillin G, 2.4 million units IM in a single dose.
 Treatment  of  late  latent  syphilis  or  syphilis  of  unknown  duration  among
HIV-infected persons is benzathine penicillin G, at weekly doses of 2.4 million units for 3
weeks.
 Other  Management  Considerations  All  HIV-infected  persons  with  syphilis  and
neurologic symptoms should undergo immediate CSF examination. Some studies have
demonstrated  that  clinical  and  CSF  abnormalities  consistent  with  neurosyphilis  are
most likely in HIV-infected persons who have been diagnosed with syphilis and have a
CD4 count of ≤350 cells/ml and/or an RPR titer of ≥1:32 (204,225,226); however unless
neurologic  symptoms  are  present,  CSF  examination  in  this  setting  has  not  been
associated  with  improved  clinical  outcomes.   Follow-Up  Patients  should  be  evaluated
clinically and serologically at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months after therapy. If, at any time,
clinical  symptoms  develop  or  nontreponemal  titers  rise  fourfold,  a  repeat  CSF
examination  should  be  performed  and  treatment  administered  accordingly.  If  during
12--24  months  the  nontreponemal  titer  does  not  decline  fourfold,  CSF  examination
should be strongly considered and treatment administered accordingly. Management of
Sex  Partners  See  General  Principles,  Management  of  Sex  Partners.  Special
Considerations  Penicillin  Allergy.  The  efficacy  of  alternative  nonpenicillin  regimens  in
HIV-infected persons has not been well studied. Patients with penicillin allergy whose
compliance  with  therapy  or  follow-up  cannot  be  ensured  should  be  desensitized  and
treated  with  penicillin  (see  Management  of  Patients  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin
Allergy). These therapies should be used only in conjunction with close serologic and
clinical  follow-up.  Limited  clinical  studies,  along  with  biologic  and  pharmacologic
evidence, suggest that ceftriaxone might be effective (229,230). However, the optimal
dose and duration of ceftriaxone therapy have not been defined. Neurosyphilis Among
HIV-Infected  Persons  Treatment  HIV-infected  patients  with  neurosyphilis  should  be
treated according to the recommendations for HIV-negative patients with neurosyphilis
(see  Neurosyphilis).   Follow  Up  If  CSF  pleocytosis  was  present  initially,  a  CSF
examination  should  be  repeated  every  6  months  until  the  cell  count  is  normal.
Follow-up CSF examinations also can be used to gauge response after therapy. Limited
data suggest that changes in CSF parameters might occur more slowly in HIV-infected
patients, especially those with more advanced immunosuppression (219,227). If the cell
count  has  not  decreased  after  6  months  or  if  the  CSF  is  not  normal  after  2  years,
retreatment  should  be  considered.   Management  of  Sex  Partners  See  General
Principles,  Management  of  Sex  Partners.  Special  Considerations  Penicillin  Allergy.
HIV-infected,  penicillin-allergic  patients  who  have  neurosyphilis  should  be  managed
according  to  the  recommendations  for  penicillin-allergic,  HIV-negative  patients  with
neurosyphilis.  Several  small  observational  studies  conducted  in  HIV-infected  patients
with  neurosyphilis  suggest  that  ceftriaxone  1--2  g  IV  daily  for  10-14  days  might  be
effective  as  an  alternate  agent  (218,229,230).  All  women  should  be  screened
serologically for syphilis early in pregnancy. Most states mandate screening at the first
prenatal  visit  for  all  women  (231);  antepartum  screening  by  nontreponemal  antibody
testing  is  typical,  but  in  some  settings,  treponemal  antibody  testing  is  being  used.
Pregnant  women  with  reactive  treponemal  screening  tests  should  have  confirmatory
testing  with  nontreponemal  tests  with  titers.  In  populations  in  which  use  of  prenatal
care is not optimal, RPR test screening and treatment (if the RPR test is reactive) should
be  performed  at  the  time  that  pregnancy  is  confirmed  (232).  For  communities  and
populations  in  which  the  prevalence  of  syphilis  is  high  and  for  patients  at  high  risk,
serologic testing should be performed twice during the third trimester (ideally at 28--32
weeks' gestation) and at delivery. Any woman who delivers a stillborn infant after 20
weeks'  gestation  should  be  tested  for  syphilis.  No  infant  should  leave  the  hospital
without  the  maternal  serologic  status  having  been  determined  at  least  once  during
pregnancy.  Diagnostic  Considerations  Seropositive  pregnant  women  should  be
considered infected unless an adequate treatment history is documented clearly in the
medical  records  and  sequential  serologic  antibody  titers  have  declined.  Serofast  low
antibody titers might not require treatment; however, persistent higher titer antibody
tests might indicate reinfection, and treatment might be required. Treatment Penicillin
is  effective  for  preventing  maternal  transmission  to  the  fetus  and  for  treating  fetal
infection (233). Evidence is insufficient to determine optimal, recommended penicillin
regimens (234). Recommended Regimen Pregnant women should be treated with the
penicillin  regimen  appropriate  for  their  stage  of  infection.  Other  Management
Considerations  Some  evidence  suggests  that  additional  therapy  can  be  beneficial  for
pregnant  women  in  some  settings  (e.g.,  a  second  dose  of  benzathine  penicillin  2.4
million units IM administered 1 week after the initial dose for women who have primary,
secondary, or early latent syphilis) (235). When syphilis is diagnosed during the second
half  of  pregnancy,  management  should  include  a  sonographic  fetal  evaluation  for
congenital syphilis, but this evaluation should not delay therapy. Sonographic signs of
fetal  or  placental  syphilis  (i.e.,  hepatomegaly,  ascites,  hydrops,  fetal  anemia,  or  a
thickened placenta) indicate a greater risk for fetal treatment failure (231); such cases
should be managed in consultation with obstetric specialists. Evidence is insufficient to
recommend  specific  regimens  for  these  situations.  Women  treated  for  syphilis  during
the second half of pregnancy are at risk for premature labor and/or fetal distress if the
treatment precipitates the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (236). These women should be
advised  to  seek  obstetric  attention  after  treatment  if  they  notice  any  fever,
contractions,  or  decrease  in  fetal  movements.  Stillbirth  is  a  rare  complication  of
treatment, but concern for this complication should not delay necessary treatment. All
patients  who  have  syphilis  should  be  offered  testing  for  HIV  infection.  Follow-Up
Coordinated prenatal care and treatment are vital. Serologic titers should be repeated
at  28--32  weeks'  gestation  and  at  delivery  as  recommended  for  the  disease  stage.
Providers should ensure that the clinical and antibody responses are appropriate for the
patient's  stage  of  disease,  although  most  women  will  deliver  before  their  serologic
response to treatment can be assessed definitively. Inadequate maternal treatment is
likely  if  delivery  occurs  within  30  days  of  therapy,  if  clinical  signs  of  infection  are
present at delivery, or if the maternal antibody titer at delivery is fourfold higher than
the pretreatment titer. Serologic titers can be checked monthly in women at high risk
for  reinfection  or  in  geographic  areas  in  which  the  prevalence  of  syphilis  is  high
Management  of  Sex  Partners  See  General  Principles,  Management  of  Sex  Partners.
Special Considerations Penicillin Allergy For treatment of syphilis during pregnancy, no
proven alternatives to penicillin exist. Pregnant women who have a history of penicillin
allergy should be desensitized and treated with penicillin. Oral step-wise penicillin dose
challenge or skin testing might be helpful in identifying women at risk for acute allergic
reactions  (see  Management  of  Patients  Who  Have  a  History  of  Penicillin  Allergy).  
Tetracycline and doxycycline usually are not used during pregnancy. Erythromycin and
azithromycin should not be used, because neither reliably cures maternal infection or
treats  an  infected  fetus  (234).  Data  are  insufficient  to  recommend  ceftriaxone  for
treatment  of  maternal  infection  and  prevention  of  congenital  syphilis.  HIV  Infection
Placental  inflammation  from  congenital  infection  might  increase  the  risk  for  perinatal
transmission  of  HIV.  All  HIV-infected  women  should  be  evaluated  for  syphilis  and
receive  treatment  as  recommended.  Data  are  insufficient  to  recommend  a  specific
regimen for HIV-infected pregnant women (see Syphilis Among HIV-Infected Patients).
Effective prevention and detection of congenital syphilis depends on the identification
of  syphilis  in  pregnant  women  and,  therefore,  on  the  routine  serologic  screening  of
pregnant women during the first prenatal visit. In communities and populations in which
the risk for congenital syphilis is high, serologic testing and a sexual history also should
be  obtained  at  28  weeks'  gestation  and  at  delivery.  Moreover,  as  part  of  the
management  of  pregnant  women  who  have  syphilis,  information  concerning  the
treatment of sex partners should be obtained to assess the risk for reinfection.  Routine
screening  of  newborn  sera  or  umbilical  cord  blood  is  not  recommended.  Serologic
testing  of  the  mother's  serum  is  preferred  rather  than  testing  of  the  infant's  serum
because  the  serologic  tests  performed  on  infant  serum  can  be  nonreactive  if  the
mother's  serologic  test  result  is  of  low  titer  or  the  mother  was  infected  late  in
pregnancy  (see  Diagnostic  Considerations  and  Use  of  Serologic  Tests).  Screening  can
be performed using either a nontreponemal or treponemal test. If either screening test
is positive, testing must be performed immediately using the other complimentary test
(i.e.,  nontreponemal  test  followed  by  treponemal  test  or  vice-versa).  No  infant  or
mother  should  leave  the  hospital  unless  maternal  serologic  status  has  been
documented at least once during pregnancy; in communities and populations in which
the risk for congenital syphilis is high, documentation should also occur at delivery. The
diagnosis  of  congenital  syphilis  is  complicated  by  the  transplacental  transfer  of
maternal  nontreponemal  and  treponemal  IgG  antibodies  to  the  fetus,  which  can
complicate  the  interpretation  of  reactive  serologic  tests  for  syphilis  in  infants.
Therefore,  treatment  decisions  frequently  must  be  made  on  the  basis  of  1)
identification of syphilis in the mother; 2) adequacy of maternal treatment; 3) presence
of  clinical,  laboratory,  or  radiographic  evidence  of  syphilis  in  the  infant;  and  4)
comparison  of  maternal  (at  delivery)  and  infant  nontreponemal  serologic  titers  using
the same test conducted preferably by the same laboratory. All infants born to mothers
who have reactive nontreponemal and treponemal test results should be evaluated with
a quantitative nontreponemal serologic test (RPR or VDRL) performed on infant serum,
because umbilical cord blood can become contaminated with maternal blood and yield
a  false-positive  result.  Conducting  a  treponemal  test  (i.e.,  TP-PA,  FTA-ABS,  EIA,  or
chemiluminescence  assay)  on  a  newborn's  serum  is  not  necessary.  No  commercially
available immunoglobulin (IgM) test can be recommended. All infants born to women
who  have  reactive  serologic  tests  for  syphilis  should  be  examined  thoroughly  for
evidence
 of
 congenital
 syphilis
 (e.g.,
 nonimmune
 hydrops,
 jaundice,
hepatosplenomegaly,  rhinitis,  skin  rash,  and  pseudoparalysis  of  an  extremity).
Pathologic  examination  of  the  placenta  or  umbilical  cord  using  specific  fluorescent
antitreponemal  antibody  staining  is  suggested.  Darkfield  microscopic  examination  of
suspicious lesions or body fluids (e.g., nasal discharge) also should be performed. The
following  scenarios  describe  the  evaluation  and  treatment  of  infants  for  congenital
syphilis.  Scenario  1  Infants  with  proven  or  highly  probable  disease  and  an  abnormal
physical  examination  that  is  consistent  with  congenital  syphilis;  a  serum  quantitative
nontreponemal  serologic  titer  that  is  fourfold  higher  than  the  mother's  titer;¶  or  a
positive darkfield test of body fluid(s). Recommended Evaluation CSF analysis for VDRL,
cell count, and protein** Complete blood count (CBC) and differential and platelet count
Other  tests  as  clinically  indicated  (e.g.,  long-bone  radiographs,  chest  radiograph,
liver-function tests, cranial ultrasound, ophthalmologic examination, and auditory brain
stem
 response)
 Recommended
 Regimens
 Aqueous
 crystalline
 penicillin
 G
100,000--150,000 units/kg/day, administered as 50,000 units/kg/dose IV every 12 hours
during  the  first  7  days  of  life  and  every  8  hours  thereafter  for  a  total  of  10  days  OR
Procaine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg/dose IM in a single daily dose for 10 days If more
than  1  day  of  therapy  is  missed,  the  entire  course  should  be  restarted.  Data  are
insufficient  regarding  the  use  of  other  antimicrobial  agents  (e.g.,  ampicillin).  When
possible,  a  full  10-day  course  of  penicillin  is  preferred,  even  if  ampicillin  was  initially
provided  for  possible  sepsis.  The  use  of  agents  other  than  penicillin  requires  close
serologic follow-up to assess adequacy of therapy. In all other situations, the maternal
history of infection with T. pallidum and treatment for syphilis must be considered when
evaluating  and  treating  the  infant.  Scenario  2  Infants  who  have  a  normal  physical
examination  and  a  serum  quantitive  nontreponemal  serologic  titer  the  same  or  less
than fourfold the maternal titer and the mother was not treated, inadequately treated,
or  has  no  documentation  of  having  received  treatment;  mother  was  treated  with
erythromycin  or  another  nonpenicillin  regimen;††  or  mother  received  treatment  <4
weeks before delivery. Recommended Evaluation CSF analysis for VDRL, cell count, and
protein  CBC,  differential,  and  platelet  count  Long-bone  radiographs  A  complete
evaluation is not necessary if 10 days of parenteral therapy is administered, although
such evaluations might be useful. For instance, a lumbar puncture might document CSF
abnormalities that would prompt close follow-up. Other tests (e.g., CBC, platelet count,
and bone radiographs) can be performed to further support a diagnosis of congenital
syphilis. If a single dose of benzathine penicillin G is used, then the infant must be fully
evaluated  (i.e.,  by  CSF  examination,  long-bone  radiographs,  and  CBC  with  platelets),
the  full  evaluation  must  be  normal,  and  follow-up  must  be  certain.  If  any  part  of  the
infant's  evaluation  is  abnormal  or  not  performed  or  if  the  CSF  analysis  is  rendered
uninterpretable because of contamination with blood, then a 10-day course of penicillin
is
 required.§§
 Recommended
 Regimens
 Aqueous
 crystalline
 penicillin
 G
100,000--150,000 units/kg/day, administered as 50,000 units/kg/dose IV every 12 hours
during  the  first  7  days  of  life  and  every  8  hours  thereafter  for  a  total  of  10  days  OR
Procaine  penicillin  G  50,000  units/kg/dose  IM  in  a  single  daily  dose  for  10  days  OR
Benzathine  penicillin  G  50,000  units/kg/dose  IM  in  a  single  dose  If  the  mother  has
untreated early syphilis at delivery, 10 days of parenteral therapy can be considered. 
Scenario 3 Infants who have a normal physical examination and a serum quantitative
nontreponemal serologic titer the same or less than fourfold the maternal titer and the
mother  was  treated  during  pregnancy,  treatment  was  appropriate  for  the  stage  of
infection, and treatment was administered >4 weeks before delivery and mother has no
evidence of reinfection or relapse. Recommended Evaluation No evaluation is required.
Recommended  Regimen  Benzathine  penicillin  G  50,000  units/kg/dose  IM  in  a  single
dose*  *  Another  approach  involves  not  treating  the  infant,  but  rather  providing  close
serologic  follow-up  in  those  whose  mother's  nontreponemal  titers  decreased  fourfold
after appropriate therapy for early syphilis or remained stable or low for late syphilis.
Scenario 4 Infants who have a normal physical examination and a serum quantitative
nontreponemal serologic titer the same or less than fourfold the maternal titer and the
mother's  treatment  was  adequate  before  pregnancy  and  mother's  nontreponemal
serologic  titer  remained  low  and  stable  before  and  during  pregnancy  and  at  delivery
(VDRL  <1:2;  RPR  <1:4).  Recommended  Evaluation  No  evaluation  is  required.
Recommended  Regimen  No  treatment  is  required;  however,  benzathine  penicillin  G
50,000 units/kg as a single IM injection might be considered, particularly if follow-up is
uncertain.  Older  infants  and  children  aged  ≥1  month  who  are  identified  as  having
reactive  serologic  tests  for  syphilis  should  have  maternal  serology  and  records
reviewed to assess whether they have congenital or acquired syphilis (see Primary and
Secondary Syphilis and Latent Syphilis, Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). Any child
at  risk  for  congenital  syphilis  should  receive  a  full  evaluation  and  testing  for  HIV
infection. Recommended Evaluation CSF analysis for VDRL, cell count, and protein CBC,
differential,  and  platelet  count  Other  tests  as  clinically  indicated  (e.g.,  long-bone
radiographs,
 chest
 radiograph,
 liver
 function
 tests,
 abdominal
 ultrasound,
ophthalmologic  examination,  and  auditory  brain  stem  response)  Recommended
Regimen
 Aqueous
 crystalline
 penicillin
 G
 200,000--300,000
 units/kg/day
 IV,
administered as 50,000 units/kg every 4--6 hours for 10 days If the child has no clinical
manifestations of disease, the CSF examination is normal, and the CSF VDRL test result
is negative, treatment with up to 3 weekly doses of benzathine penicillin G, 50,000 U/kg
IM can be considered. Any child who is suspected of having congenital syphilis or who
has neurologic involvement should be treated with aqueous penicillin G. A single dose
of  benzathine  penicillin  G,  50,000  units/kg  IM  after  the  10-day  course  of  IV  aqueous
penicillin can be considered. This treatment also would be adequate for children who
might  have  other  treponemal  infections.  Follow-Up  All  seroreactive  infants  (or  infants
whose  mothers  were  seroreactive  at  delivery)  should  receive  careful  follow-up
examinations and serologic testing (i.e., a nontreponemal test) every 2--3 months until
the  test  becomes  nonreactive  or  the  titer  has  decreased  fourfold.  Nontreponemal
antibody  titers  should  decline  by  age  3  months  and  should  be  nonreactive  by  age  6
months if the infant is not infected (i.e., if the reactive test result was caused by passive
transfer  of  maternal  IgG  antibody)  or  was  infected  but  adequately  treated.  The
serologic response after therapy might be slower for infants treated after the neonatal
period. If these titers are stable or increase after age 6--12 months, the child should be
evaluated  (e.g.,  given  a  CSF  examination)  and  treated  with  a  10-day  course  of
parenteral  penicillin  G.  Treponemal  tests  should  not  be  used  to  evaluate  treatment
response, because the results for an infected child can remain positive despite effective
therapy.  Passively  transferred  maternal  treponemal  antibodies  can  be  present  in  an
infant until age 15 months; therefore, a reactive treponemal test after age 18 months is
diagnostic of congenital syphilis. If the nontreponemal test is nonreactive at this time,
no further evaluation or treatment is necessary. If the nontreponemal test is reactive at
age  18  months,  the  infant  should  be  fully  (re)evaluated  and  treated  for  congenital
syphilis.  Infants  whose  initial  CSF  evaluations  are  abnormal  should  undergo  a  repeat
lumbar puncture approximately every 6 months until the results are normal. A reactive
CSF  VDRL  test  or  abnormal  CSF  indices  that  cannot  be  attributed  to  other  ongoing
illness requires retreatment for possible neurosyphilis. Follow-up of children treated for
congenital syphilis after the newborn period should be conducted as recommended for
neonates.  Special  Considerations  Penicillin  Allergy  Infants  and  children  who  require
treatment for syphilis but who have a history of penicillin allergy or develop an allergic
reaction  presumed  secondary  to  penicillin  should  be  desensitized,  if  necessary,  and
then  treated  with  penicillin  (see  Management  of  Patients  With  a  History  of  Penicillin
Allergy).  Data  are  insufficient  regarding  the  use  of  other  antimicrobial  agents  (e.g.,
ceftriaxone);  if  a  nonpenicillin  agent  is  used,  close  serologic  and  CSF  follow-up  are
indicated.  Penicillin  Shortage  During  periods  when  the  availability  of  penicillin  is
compromised,
 the
 following
 is
 recommended
 (see
http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/dstd/penicillinG.htm).  For  infants  with  clinical  evidence  of
congenital syphilis (Scenario 1), check local sources for aqueous crystalline penicillin G
(potassium  or  sodium).  If  IV  penicillin  G  is  limited,  substitute  some  or  all  daily  doses
with procaine penicillin G (50,000 U/kg/dose IM a day in a single daily dose for 10 days).
If  aqueous  or  procaine  penicillin  G  is  not  available,  ceftriaxone  (in  doses
appropriate  for  age  and  weight)  can  be  considered  with  careful  clinical  and  serologic
follow-up.  Ceftriaxone  must  be  used  with  caution  in  infants  with  jaundice.  For  infants
aged  ≥30  days,  use  75  mg/kg  IV/IM  a  day  in  a  single  daily  dose  for  10--14  days;
however,  dose  adjustment  might  be  necessary  based  on  current  weight.  For  older
infants,  the  dose  should  be  100  mg/kg  a  day  in  a  single  daily  dose.  Evidence  is
insufficient  to  support  the  use  of  ceftriaxone  for  the  treatment  of  congenital  syphilis.
Therefore, ceftriaxone should be used in consultation with a specialist in the treatment
of infants with congenital syphilis. Management may include a repeat CSF examination
at age 6 months if the initial examination was abnormal. For infants without any clinical
evidence of infection (Scenario 2 and Scenario 3), use
a. procaine penicillin G, 50,000 U/kg/dose IM a day in a single dose for 10 days;
or
b. benzathine penicillin G, 50,000 U/kg IM as a single dose.
If any part of the evaluation for congenital syphilis is abnormal, CSF examination
is  not  interpretable,  CSF  examination  was  not  performed,  or  follow-up  is  uncertain,
procaine  penicillin  G  is  recommended.  A  single  dose  of  ceftriaxone  is  inadequate
therapy.  For  premature  infants  who  have  no  other  clinical  evidence  of  infection
(Scenario 2 and Scenario 3) and might not tolerate IM injections because of decreased
muscle  mass,  IV  ceftriaxone  can  be  considered  with  careful  clinical  and  serologic
follow-up  (see  Penicillin  Shortage,  Number  1).  Ceftriaxone  dosing  must  be  adjusted
according to age and birth weight. HIV Infection Evidence is insufficient to determine
whether infants who have congenital syphilis and whose mothers are coinfected with
HIV require different evaluation, therapy, or follow-up for syphilis than is recommended
for  all  infants.  No  proven  alternatives  to  penicillin  are  available  for  treating
neurosyphilis,  congenital  syphilis,  or  syphilis  in  pregnant  women.  Penicillin  also  is
recommended  for  use,  whenever  possible,  in  HIV-infected  patients.  Of  the  adult  U.S.
population,  3%--10%  have  experienced  an  immunoglobulin  E  (IgE)-mediated  allergic
response  to  penicillin  (238,239),  such  as  urticaria,  angioedema,  or  anaphylaxis  (i.e.,
upper airway obstruction, bronchospasm, or hypotension). Readministration of penicillin
to  these  patients  can  cause  severe,  immediate  reactions.  Because  anaphylactic
reactions to penicillin can be fatal, every effort should be made to avoid administering
penicillin  to  penicillin-allergic  patients,  unless  they  undergo  acute  desensitization  to
eliminate anaphylactic sensitivity. Although an estimated 10% of persons who report a
history of severe allergic reactions to penicillin continue to remain allergic their entire
lives,  with  the  passage  of  time,  most  persons  who  have  had  a  severe  reaction  to
penicillin stop expressing penicillin-specific IgE (238,239). These persons can then be
treated  safely  with  penicillin.  Penicillin  skin  testing  with  the  major  and  minor
determinants  of  penicillin  can  reliably  identify  persons  at  high  risk  for  penicillin
reactions  (238,239).  Although  these  reagents  are  easily  generated  and  have  been
available for more than 30 years, only benzylpenicilloyl poly-L-lysine (Pre-Pen [i.e., the
major determinant]) and penicillin G have been available commercially. These two tests
identify  an  estimated  90%--97%  of  the  currently  allergic  patients.  However,  because
skin  testing  without  the  minor  determinants  would  still  miss  3%--10%  of  allergic
patients
 and
 because
 serious
 or
 fatal
 reactions
 can
 occur
 among
 these
minor-determinant--positive patients, caution should be exercised when the full battery
of  skin-test  reagents  is  not  available  (Box  2).  Manufacturers  are  working  to  ensure
better availability of the Pre-Pen skin test reagent as well as an accompanying minor
determinant mixture. If the full battery of skin-test reagents is available, including both
major and minor determinants (see Penicillin Allergy Skin Testing), patients who report
a history of penicillin reaction and who are skin-test negative can receive conventional
penicillin  therapy.  Skin-test--positive  patients  should  be  desensitized  before  initiating
treatment.  If the full battery of skin-test reagents, including the minor determinants, is
not  available,  the  patient  should  be  skin  tested  using  benzylpenicilloyl  poly-L-lysine
(i.e.,  the  major  determinant)  and  penicillin  G.  Patients  who  have  positive  test  results
should be desensitized. One approach suggests that persons with a history of allergy
who  have  negative  test  results  should  be  regarded  as  possibly  allergic  and
desensitized.  Another  approach  in  those  with  negative  skin-test  results  involves
test-dosing gradually with oral penicillin in a monitored setting in which treatment for
anaphylactic  reaction  can  be  provided.  If  the  major  determinant  (Pre-Pen)  is  not
available for skin testing, all patients with a history suggesting IgE-mediated reactions
to  penicillin  (e.g.,  anaphylaxis,  angioedema,  bronchospasm,  or  urticaria)  should  be
desensitized  in  a  hospital  setting.  In  patients  with  reactions  not  likely  to  be
IgE-mediated, outpatient-monitored test doses can be considered. Patients at high risk
for anaphylaxis, including those who 1) have a history of penicillin-related anaphylaxis,
asthma, or other diseases that would make anaphylaxis more dangerous or 2) are being
treated with beta-adrenergic blocking agents, should be tested with 100-fold dilutions
of the full-strength skin-test reagents before being tested with full-strength reagents. In
these situations, patients should be tested in a monitored setting in which treatment for
an  anaphylactic  reaction  is  available.  If  possible,  the  patient  should  not  have  taken
antihistamines  recently  (e.g.,  chlorpheniramine  maleate  or  fexafenadine  during  the
preceding 24 hours, diphenhydramine HCl during the preceding 4 days, or hydroxyzine
or phenathiazines during the preceding 3 weeks). Dilute the antigens either 100-fold for
preliminary  testing  (if  the  patient  has  had  a  life-threatening  reaction  to  penicillin)  or
10-fold  (if  the  patient  has  had  another  type  of  immediate,  generalized  reaction  to
penicillin within the preceding year). Duplicate drops of skin-test reagent are placed on
the volar surface of the forearm. The underlying epidermis is pierced with a 26-gauge
needle  without  drawing  blood.  An  epicutaneous  test  is  positive  if  the  average  wheal
diameter after 15 minutes is ≥4 mm larger than that of negative controls; otherwise,
the test is negative. The histamine controls should be positive to ensure that results are
not falsely negative because of the effect of antihistaminic drugs. If epicutaneous tests
are negative, duplicate 0.02-mL intradermal injections of negative control and antigen
solutions  are  made  into  the  volar  surface  of  the  forearm  by  using  a  26-  or  27-gauge
needle  on  a  syringe.  The  margins  of  the  wheals  induced  by  the  injections  should  be
marked  with  a  ball  point  pen.  An  intradermal  test  is  positive  if  the  average  wheal
diameter 15 minutes after injection is >2 mm larger than the initial wheal size and also
is >2 mm larger than the negative controls. Otherwise, the tests are negative. Patients
who have a positive skin test to one of the penicillin determinants can be desensitized
(Table  1).  This  is  a  straightforward,  relatively  safe  procedure  that  can  be  performed
orally or IV. Although the two approaches have not been compared, oral desensitization
is regarded as safer and easier to perform. Patients should be desensitized in a hospital
setting  because  serious  IgE-mediated  allergic  reactions  can  occur.  Desensitization
usually can be completed in approximately 4--12 hours, after which time the first dose
of  penicillin  is  administered.  After  desensitization,  patients  must  be  maintained  on
penicillin  continuously  for  the  duration  of  the  course  of  therapy.  Urethritis,  as
characterized  by  urethral  inflammation,  can  result  from  infectious  and  noninfectious
conditions.  Symptoms,  if  present,  include  discharge  of  mucopurulent  or  purulent
material, dysuria, or urethral pruritis. Asymptomatic infections are common. Although
N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  are  well  established  as  clinically  important
infectious  causes  of  urethritis,  Mycoplasma  genitalium  has  also  been  associated  with
urethritis (240--243). If clinic-based diagnostic tools (e.g., Gram-stain microscopy, first
void urine with microscopy, and leukocyte esterase) are not available, patients should
be treated with drug regimens effective against both gonorrhea and chlamydia. Further
testing to determine the specific etiology is recommended because both chlamydia and
gonorrhea are reportable to health departments and a specific diagnosis might improve
partner notification and treatment. Culture, nucleic acid hybridization tests, and NAATs
are available for the detection of both N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis. Culture and
hybridization tests require urethral swab specimens, whereas NAATs can be performed
on  urine  specimens.  Because  of  their  higher  sensitivity,  NAATs  are  preferred  for  the
detection  of  C.  trachomatis  (197).  Several  organisms  can  cause  infectious  urethritis.
The  presence  of  Gram-negative  intracellular  diplococci  (GNID)  on  urethral  smear  is
indicative  of  gonorrhea  infection,  which  is  frequently  accompanied  by  chlamydial
infection.  Nongonoccocal  urethritis  (NGU),  which  is  diagnosed  when  examination
findings or microscopy indicate inflammation without GNID, is caused by C. trachomatis
in 15%--40% of cases; however, prevalence varies by age group, with a lower burden of
disease occurring among older men (244). Complications of NGU among males infected
with  C.  trachomatis  include  epididymitis  and  Reiter's  syndrome.  Documentation  of
chlamydial infection is essential because of the need for partner referral for evaluation
and treatment.  In most cases of nonchlamydial NGU, no pathogen can be detected. M.
genitalium,  which  appears  to  be  sexually  transmitted,  is  associated  with  both
symptoms of urethritis and urethral inflammation and accounts for 15%--25% of NGU
cases in the United States (240--243). T. vaginalis, HSV, and adenovirus also can cause
NGU,  but  data  supporting  other  Mycoplasma  species  and  Ureaplasma  as  etiologic
agents  are  inconsistent  (244--247).  Diagnostic  and  treatment  procedures  for  these
organisms  are  reserved  for  situations  in  which  these  infections  are  suspected  (e.g.,
contact with trichomoniasis, genital lesions, or severe dysuria and meatitis, which might
suggest  genital  herpes)  or  when  NGU  is  not  responsive  to  therapy.  Enteric  bacteria
have  been  identified  as  an  uncommon  cause  of  NGU  and  might  be  associated  with
insertive anal intercourse (244).  Clinicians should attempt to obtain objective evidence
of  urethral  inflammation.  However,  if  clinic-based  diagnostic  tools  (e.g.,  Gram-stain
microscopy) are not available, patients should be treated with drug regimens effective
against both gonorrhea and chlamydia.  Urethritis can be documented on the basis of
any of the following signs or laboratory tests:  Mucopurulent or purulent discharge on
examination.
 Gram stain of urethral secretions demonstrating ≥5 WBC per oil immersion field.
The  Gram  stain  is  the  preferred  rapid  diagnostic  test  for  evaluating  urethritis  and  is
highly  sensitive  and  specific  for  documenting  both  urethritis  and  the  presence  or
absence  of  gonococcal  infection.  Gonococcal  infection  is  established  by  documenting
the presence of WBC containing GNID.
 Positive leukocyte esterase test on first-void urine or microscopic examination of
first-void urine sediment demonstrating ≥10 WBC per high-power field.
 If  none  of  these  criteria  are  present,  testing  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.
trachomatis  using  NAATs  might  identify  additional  infections  (248).  If  the  results
demonstrate infection with either of these pathogens, the appropriate treatment should
be  given  and  sex  partners  referred  for  evaluation  and  treatment.  If  none  of  these
criteria are present, empiric treatment of symptomatic males is recommended only for
men at high risk for infection who are unlikely to return for a follow-up evaluation. Such
patients  should  be  treated  with  drug  regimens  effective  against  gonorrhea  and
chlamydia. Partners of patients treated empirically should be evaluated and treated, if
indicated.  All patients who have confirmed or suspected urethritis should be tested for
gonorrhea and chlamydia. Testing for chlamydia is strongly recommended because of
the  increased  utility  and  availability  of  highly  sensitive  and  specific  testing  methods
(e.g., NAATs) and because a specific diagnosis might enhance partner notification and
improve  compliance  with  treatment,  especially  in  the  exposed  partner.   Treatment
should  be  initiated  as  soon  as  possible  after  diagnosis.  Azithromycin  and  doxycycline
are  highly  effective  for  chlamydial  urethritis;  however,  infections  with  M.  genitalium
respond better to azithromycin (249,250). Single-dose regimens have the advantage of
improved  compliance  and  directly  observed  treatment.  To  maximize  compliance  with
recommended therapies, medications should be dispensed on-site in the clinic, and the
first dose should be directly observed. Recommended Regimens Azithromycin 1 g orally
in  a  single  dose  OR  Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  7  days  Alternative
Regimens  Erythromycin  base  500  mg  orally  four  times  a  day  for  7  days  OR
Erythromycin ethylsuccinate 800 mg orally four times a day for 7 days OR Levofloxacin
500 mg orally once daily for 7 days OR Ofloxacin 300 mg orally twice a day for 7 days
To  minimize  transmission,  men  treated  for  NGU  should  be  instructed  to  abstain  from
sexual intercourse for 7 days after single-dose therapy or until completion of a 7-day
regimen, provided their symptoms have resolved. To minimize the risk for reinfection,
men  should  be  instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  all  of  their  sex
partners are treated.  Persons who have been diagnosed with a new STD should receive
testing for other infections, including syphilis and HIV.  Patients should be instructed to
return  for  evaluation  if  symptoms  persist  or  recur  after  completion  of  therapy.
Symptoms  alone,  without  documentation  of  signs  or  laboratory  evidence  of  urethral
inflammation, are not a sufficient basis for retreatment. Providers should be alert to the
possibility  of  chronic  prostatitis/chronic  pelvic  pain  syndrome  in  male  patients
experiencing  persistent  pain  (perineal,  penile,  or  pelvic),  discomfort,  irritative  voiding
symptoms, pain during or after ejaculation, or new-onset premature ejaculation lasting
for >3 months.  Unless a patient's symptoms persist or therapeutic noncompliance or
reinfection is suspected by the provider, a test-of-cure (i.e., repeat testing 3--4 weeks
after completing therapy) is not recommended for persons with documented chlamydia
or gonococcal infections who have received treatment with recommended or alterative
regimens. However, because men with documented chlamydial or gonococcal infections
have  a  high  rate  of  reinfection  within  6  months  after  treatment  (251,252),  repeat
testing of all men diagnosed with chlamydia or gonorrhea is recommended 3--6 months
after  treatment,  regardless  of  whether  patients  believe  that  their  sex  partners  were
treated (251).  A specific diagnosis might facilitate partner referral. Therefore, testing
for gonorrhea and chlamydia is encouraged. Because a substantial proportion of female
partners  of  males  with  nonchlamydial  NGU  are  infected  with  chlamydia,  partner
management  is  recommended  for  males  with  NGU  regardless  of  whether  a  specific
etiology is identified. All sex partners within the preceding 60 days should be referred
for  evaluation,  testing,  and  empiric  treatment  with  a  drug  regimen  effective  against
chlamydia. Expedited partner treatment and patient referral are alternative approaches
to  treating  partners  (71).   Objective  signs  of  urethritis  should  be  present  before  the
initiation  of  antimicrobial  therapy.  In  persons  who  have  persistent  symptoms  after
treatment without objective signs of urethritis, the value of extending the duration of
antimicrobials  has  not  been  demonstrated.  Persons  who  have  persistent  or  recurrent
urethritis  can  be  retreated  with  the  initial  regimen  if  they  did  not  comply  with  the
treatment  regimen  or  if  they  were  reexposed  to  an  untreated  sex  partner.  Persistent
urethritis  after  doxycycline  treatment  might  be  caused  by  doxycycline-resistant  U.
urealyticum or M. genitalium. T. vaginalis is also known to cause urethritis in men; a
urethral  swab,  first  void  urine,  or  semen  for  culture  or  a  NAAT  (PCR  or  TMA)  on  a
urethral  swab  or  urine  can  be  performed.  If  compliant  with  the  initial  regimen  and
re-exposure can be excluded, the following regimen is recommended while awaiting the
results of the diagnostic tests.  Recommended Regimens Metronidazole 2 g orally in a
single dose OR Tinidazole 2 g orally in a single dose PLUS Azithromycin 1 g orally in a
single  dose  (if  not  used  for  initial  episode)  Studies  involving  a  limited  number  of
patients who experienced NGU treatment failures have demonstrated that Moxifloxacin
400 mg orally once daily for 7 days is highly effective against M. genitalium (253,254).
Men with a low probability of T. vaginalis (e.g., MSM) are unlikely to benefit from the
addition of metronidazole or tinidazole.  Urologic examinations usually do not reveal a
specific  etiology  for  urethritis.  A  four-glass  Meares-Stamey  lower-urinary-tract
localization procedure (or four-glass test) might be helpful in localizing pathogens to the
prostate
 (255).
 A
 substantial
 proportion
 of
 men
 with
 chronic
 nonbacterial
prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome have evidence of urethral inflammation without
any  identifiable  microbial  pathogens.  Estimates  vary  considerably  depending  on  the
source  and  sensitivity  of  the  assay,  but  one  study  demonstrated  that  in  50%  of  men
with this syndrome, ≥5 WBCs per high-power field were detected in expressed prostatic
secretions (256). Referral to a urologist should be considered for men who experience
pain for more than 3 months within a 6-month period. If men require treatment with a
new antibiotic regimen for persistent urethritis and a sexually transmitted agent is the
suspected cause, all partners in the past 60 days before the initial diagnosis and any
interim  partners  should  be  referred  for  evaluation  and  appropriate  treatment.   HIV
Infection
 
 Gonococcal
 urethritis,
 chlamydial
 urethritis,
 and
 nongonococcal,
nonchlamydial urethritis might facilitate HIV transmission. Patients who have NGU and
also are infected with HIV should receive the same treatment regimen as those who are
HIV  negative.   Two  major  diagnostic  signs  characterize  cervicitis:  1)  a  purulent  or
mucopurulent  endocervical  exudate  visible  in  the  endocervical  canal  or  on  an
endocervical  swab  specimen  (commonly  referred  to  as  mucopurulent  cervicitis  or
cervicitis) and 2) sustained endocervical bleeding easily induced by gentle passage of a
cotton swab through the cervical os. Either or both signs might be present. Cervicitis
frequently  is  asymptomatic,  but  some  women  complain  of  an  abnormal  vaginal
discharge and intermenstrual vaginal bleeding (e.g., after sexual intercourse). A finding
of  leukorrhea  (>10  WBC  per  high-power  field  on  microscopic  examination  of  vaginal
fluid) has been associated with chlamydial and gonococcal infection of the cervix. In the
absence of inflammatory vaginitis, leukorrhea might be a sensitive indicator of cervical
inflammation  with  a  high  negative  predictive  value  (257,258).  Although  some
specialists  consider  an  increased  number  of  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  on
endocervical Gram stain as being useful in the diagnosis of cervicitis, this criterion has
not  been  standardized.  In  addition,  it  has  a  low  positive-predictive  value  (PPV)  for
infection with C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae and is not available in most clinical
settings. Finally, although the presence of GNID on Gram stain of endocervical fluid is
specific for the diagnosis of gonococcal cervical infection, it is not a sensitive indicator,
because  it  is  observed  in  only  50%  of  women  with  this  infection.  When  an  etiologic
organism  is  isolated  in  the  presence  of  cervicitis,  it  is  typically  C.  trachomatis  or  N.
gonorrhoeae.  Cervicitis  also  can  accompany  trichomoniasis  and  genital  herpes
(especially primary HSV-2 infection). However, in most cases of cervicitis, no organism
is  isolated,  especially  in  women  at  relatively  low  risk  for  recent  acquisition  of  these
STDs  (e.g.,  women  aged  >30  years).  Limited  data  indicate  that  infection  with  M.
genitalium and BV and frequent douching might cause cervicitis (259--263). For reasons
that  are  unclear,  cervicitis  can  persist  despite  repeated  courses  of  antimicrobial
therapy.  Because  most  persistent  cases  of  cervicitis  are  not  caused  by  relapse  or
reinfection  with  C.  trachomatis  or  N.  gonorrhoeae,  other  factors  (e.g.,  persistent
abnormality of vaginal flora, douching [or exposure to other types of chemical irritants],
or idiopathic inflammation in the zone of ectopy) might be involved. Because cervicitis
might  be  a  sign  of  upper-genital--tract  infection  (endometritis),  women  who  seek
medical treatment for a new episode of cervicitis should be assessed for signs of PID
and should be tested for C. trachomatis and for N. gonorrhoeae with the most sensitive
and  specific  test  available.  Women  with  cervicitis  also  should  be  evaluated  for  the
presence of BV and trichomoniasis, and if these organisms are detected, they should be
treated.  Because  the  sensitivity  of  microscopy  to  detect  T.  vaginalis  is  relatively  low
(approximately 50%), symptomatic women with cervicitis and negative microscopy for
trichomonads should receive further testing (i.e., culture or other FDA-cleared method).
Although  HSV-2  infection  has  been  associated  with  cervicitis,  the  utility  of  specific
testing  (i.e.,  culture  or  serologic  testing)  for  HSV-2  in  this  setting  is  unknown.
Standardized  diagnostic  tests  for  M.  genitalium  are  not  commercially  available.  As
discussed, NAAT should be used for diagnosing C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae in
women with cervicitis; this testing can be performed on either vaginal, cervical, or urine
samples (197). A finding of >10 WBC in vaginal fluid, in the absence of trichomoniasis,
might  indicate  endocervical  inflammation  caused  specifically  by  C.  trachomatis  or  N.
gonorrhoeae  (264,265).  Several  factors  should  affect  the  decision  to  provide
presumptive therapy for cervicitis or to await the results of diagnostic tests. Treatment
with antibiotics for C. trachomatis should be provided for those women at increased risk
for  this  common  STD  (e.g.,  those  aged  ≤25  years,  those  with  new  or  multiple  sex
partners, and those who engage in unprotected sex), especially if follow-up cannot be
ensured  and  if  a  relatively  insensitive  diagnostic  test  is  used  in  place  of  NAAT.
Concurrent therapy for N. gonorrhoeae is indicated if the prevalence of this infection is
>5% (those in younger age groups and those living in certain facilities). Trichomoniasis
and BV should also be treated if detected. For women in whom any component of (or
all)  presumptive  therapy  is  deferred,  the  results  of  sensitive  tests  for  C.  trachomatis
and N. gonorrhoeae (e.g., NAATs) should determine the need for treatment subsequent
to  the  initial  evaluation.  Recommended  Regimens  for  Presumptive  Treatment*
Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose OR Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 7
days  *  Consider  concurrent  treatment  for  gonococcal  infection  if  prevalence  of
gonorrhea is high in the patient population under assessment. Women with persistent
cervicitis  should  be  reevaluated  for  possible  reexposure  to  an  STD.  If  relapse  and/or
reinfection with a specific STD has been excluded, BV is not present, and sex partners
have  been  evaluated  and  treated,  management  options  for  persistent  cervicitis  are
undefined; in addition, the utility of repeated or prolonged administration of antibiotic
therapy  for  persistent  symptomatic  cervicitis  remains  unknown.  Women  who  receive
such  therapy  should  return  after  treatment  so  that  a  determination  can  be  made
regarding  whether  cervicitis  has  resolved.  Research  is  needed  on  the  etiology  of
persistent cervicitis including the potential role of M. genitalium (266). In women with
persistent symptoms that are clearly attributable to cervicitis, referral to a gynecologic
specialist can be considered.  Follow-up should be conducted as recommended for the
infections  for  which  a  woman  is  treated.  If  symptoms  persist,  women  should  be
instructed to return for re-evaluation because women with documented chlamydial or
gonococcal infections have a high rate of reinfection within 6 months after treatment.
Therefore, repeat testing of all women with chlamydia or gonorrhea is recommended
3-6  months  after  treatment,  regardless  of  whether  their  sex  partners  were  treated
(267).  Management  of  sex  partners  of  women  treated  for  cervicitis  should  be
appropriate  for  the  identified  or  suspected  STD.  Partners  should  be  notified  and
examined if chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis was identified or suspected in the
index patient; these partners should then be treated for the STDs for which the index
patient received treatment. To avoid reinfection, patients and their sex partners should
abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  therapy  is  completed  (i.e.,  7  days  after  a
single-dose  regimen  or  after  completion  of  a  7-day  regimen).  Expedited  partner
treatment and patient referral (see Partner Management) are alternative approaches to
treating  male  partners  of  women  that  have  chlamydia  or  gonococcal  infections
(68,69,71).  HIV  Infection  Patients  who  have  cervicitis  and  also  are  infected  with  HIV
should receive the same treatment regimen as those who are HIV negative. Treatment
of  cervicitis  in  HIV-infected  women  is  vital  because  cervicitis  increases  cervical  HIV
shedding. Treatment of cervicitis in HIV-infected women reduces HIV shedding from the
cervix  and  might  reduce  HIV  transmission  to  susceptible  sex  partners  (268--270).
Chlamydial  genital  infection  is  the  most  frequently  reported  infectious  disease  in  the
United  States,  and  prevalence  is  highest  in  persons  aged  ≤25  years  (93).  Several
important sequelae can result from C. trachomatis infection in women, the most serious
of  which  include  PID,  ectopic  pregnancy,  and  infertility.  Some  women  who  have
uncomplicated  cervical  infection  already  have  subclinical  upper-reproductive--tract
infection  upon  diagnosis.  Asymptomatic  infection  is  common  among  both  men  and
women.  To  detect  chlamydial  infections,  health-care  providers  frequently  rely  on
screening  tests.  Annual  screening  of  all  sexually  active  women  aged  ≤25  years  is
recommended, as is screening of older women with risk factors (e.g., those who have a
new sex partner or multiple sex partners). In June 2007, USPSTF reviewed and updated
their  chlamydia  screening  guidance  and  found  that  the  epidemiology  of  chlamydial
infection in the United States had not changed since the last review (81,271). In issuing
recommendations,  USPSTF  made  the  decision  to  alter  the  age  groups  used  to
demonstrate disease incidence (i.e., from persons aged ≤25 years to those aged ≤24
years). CDC has not changed its age cutoff, and thus continues to recommend annual
chlamydia screening of sexually active women aged ≤25 years.  Screening programs
have been demonstrated to reduce both the prevalence of C. trachomatis infection and
rates  of  PID  in  women  (272,273).  Although  evidence  is  insufficient  to  recommend
routine screening for C. trachomatis in sexually active young men because of several
factors  (including  feasibility,  efficacy,  and  cost-effectiveness)  (94),  the  screening  of
sexually  active  young  men  should  be  considered  in  clinical  settings  with  a  high
prevalence  of  chlamydia  (e.g.,  adolescent  clinics,  correctional  facilities,  and  STD
clinics). Among women, the primary focus of chlamydia screening efforts should be to
detect chlamydia and prevent complications, whereas targeted chlamydia screening in
men  should  only  be  considered  when  resources  permit  and  do  not  hinder  chlamydia
screening efforts in women (274 275). An appropriate sexual risk assessment should be
conducted for all persons and might indicate more frequent screening for some women
or  certain  men  (see  MSM).  C.  trachomatis  urogenital  infection  in  women  can  be
diagnosed  by  testing  urine  or  by  collecting  swab  specimens  from  the  endocervix  or
vagina. Diagnosis of C. trachomatis urethral infection in men can be made by testing a
urethral  swab  or  urine  specimen.  Rectal  C.  trachomatis  infections  in  persons  that
engage  in  receptive  anal  intercourse  can  be  diagnosed  by  testing  a  rectal  swab
specimen.  NAATs,  cell  culture,  direct  immunofluorescence,  EIA,  and  nucleic  acid
hybridization  tests  are  available  for  the  detection  of  C.  trachomatis  on  endocervical
specimens and urethral swab specimens from men (197). NAATs are the most sensitive
tests  for  these  specimens  and  are  FDA-cleared  for  use  with  urine.  Some  NAATs  are
cleared for use with vaginal swab specimens, which can be collected by a provider or
self-collected by a patient. Self-collected vaginal swab specimens perform at least as
well  as  with  other  approved  specimens  using  NAATs  (276,277),  and  women  find  this
screening  strategy  highly  acceptable.  Rectal  and  oropharyngeal  C.  trachomatis
infection in persons engaging in receptive anal or oral intercourse can be diagnosed by
testing at the anatomic site of exposure. Most tests, including NAAT and nucleic acid
hybridization  tests,  are  not  FDA-cleared  for  use  with  rectal  or  oropharyngeal  swab
specimens,  and  chlamydia  culture  is  not  widely  available  for  this  purpose.  However,
NAATs have demonstrated improved sensitivity and specificity compared with culture
for the detection of C. trachomatis at rectal sites (278--280) and at oropharyngeal sites
among  men  (278--281).  Some  laboratories  have  met  CLIA  requirements  and  have
validated NAAT testing on rectal swab specimens for C. trachomatis. Recent evidence
suggests that the liquid-based cytology specimens collected for Pap smears might be
acceptable specimens for NAAT testing, although test sensitivity using these specimens
might  be  lower  than  those  resulting  from  the  use  of  cervical  swab  specimens  (282);
regardless,  certain  NAATs  have  been  FDA-cleared  for  use  on  liquid-based  cytology
specimens. Persons who undergo testing and are diagnosed with chlamydia should be
tested  for  other  STDs.  Treating  infected  patients  prevents  sexual  transmission  of  the
disease,  and  treating  all  sex  partners  of  those  testing  positive  for  chlamydia  can
prevent  reinfection  of  the  index  patient  and  infection  of  other  partners.  Treating
pregnant women usually prevents transmission of C. trachomatis to infants during birth.
Chlamydia  treatment  should  be  provided  promptly  for  all  persons  testing  positive  for
infection;  delays  in  receiving  chlamydia  treatment  have  been  associated  with
complications  (e.g.,  PID)  in  a  limited  proportion  of  chlamydia-infected  subjects  (283).
Coinfection with C. trachomatis frequently occurs among patients who have gonococcal
infection;  therefore,  presumptive  treatment  of  such  patients  for  chlamydia  is
appropriate  (see  Gonococcal  Infection,  Dual  Therapy  for  Gonococcal  and  Chlamydial
Infections). The following recommended treatment regimens and alternative regimens
cure infection and usually relieve symptoms. Recommended Regimens Azithromycin 1
g  orally  in  a  single  dose  OR  Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  7  days
Alternative Regimens Erythromycin base 500 mg orally four times a day for 7 days OR
Erythromycin ethylsuccinate 800 mg orally four times a day for 7 days OR Levofloxacin
500 mg orally once daily for 7 days OR Ofloxacin 300 mg orally twice a day for 7 days A
meta-analysis of 12 randomized clinical trials of azithromycin versus doxycycline for the
treatment  of  genital  chlamydial  infection  demonstrated  that  the  treatments  were
equally efficacious, with microbial cure rates of 97% and 98%, respectively (284). These
studies  were  conducted  primarily  in  populations  in  which  follow-up  was  encouraged,
adherence to a 7-day regimen was effective, and culture or EIA (rather than the more
sensitive  NAAT)  was  used  for  determining  microbiological  outcome.  Azithromycin
should always be available to treat patients for whom compliance with multiday dosing
is uncertain. The clinical significance and transmissibility of C. trachomatis detected at
oropharyngeal sites is unclear (285), and the efficacy of different antibiotic regimens in
resolving  oropharyngeal  chlamydia  remains  unknown.   In  patients  who  have  erratic
health-care--seeking behavior, poor treatment compliance, or unpredictable follow-up,
azithromycin might be more cost-effective in treating chlamydia because it enables the
provision  of  a  single-dose  of  directly  observed  therapy  (284).  Erythromycin  might  be
less efficacious than either azithromycin or doxycycline, mainly because of the frequent
occurrence of gastrointestinal side effects that can lead to noncompliance. Levofloxacin
and ofloxacin are effective treatment alternatives but are more expensive and offer no
advantage  in  the  dosage  regimen.  Other  quinolones  either  are  not  reliably  effective
against  chlamydial  infection  or  have  not  been  evaluated  adequately.  To  maximize
compliance with recommended therapies, medications for chlamydial infections should
be  dispensed  on  site,  and  the  first  dose  should  be  directly  observed.  To  minimize
disease  transmission  to  sex  partners,  persons  treated  for  chlamydia  should  be
instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  for  7  days  after  single-dose  therapy  or
until completion of a 7-day regimen. To minimize the risk for reinfection, patients also
should be instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until all of their sex partners are
treated.  Except  in  pregnant  women,  test-of-cure  (i.e.,  repeat  testing  3--4  weeks  after
completing  therapy)  is  not  advised  for  persons  treated  with  the  recommended  or
alterative regimens, unless therapeutic compliance is in question, symptoms persist, or
reinfection is suspected. Moreover, the validity of chlamydial diagnostic testing at <3
weeks after completion of therapy (to identify patients who did not respond to therapy)
has  not  been  established.  False-negative  results  might  occur  in  the  presence  of
persistent  infections  involving  limited  numbers  of  chlamydial  organisms.  In  addition,
NAAT conducted at <3 weeks after completion of therapy in persons who were treated
successfully  could  yield  false-positive  results  because  of  the  continued  presence  of
nonviable  organisms  (197).  A  high  prevalence  of  C.  trachomatis  infection  has  been
observed  in  women  and  men  who  were  treated  for  chlamydial  infection  during  the
preceding  several  months  (251,267,286--288).  Most  post-treatment  infections  result
from reinfection caused by failure of sex partners to receive treatment or the initiation
of sexual activity with a new infected partner. Repeat infections confer an elevated risk
for  PID  and  other  complications.  Unlike  the  test-of-cure,  which  is  not  recommended,
repeat C. trachomatis testing of recently infected women or men should be a priority for
providers.  Chlamydia-infected  women  and  men  should  be  retested  approximately  3
months after treatment, regardless of whether they believe that their sex partners were
treated  (251,267).  If  retesting  at  3  months  is  not  possible,  clinicians  should  retest
whenever  persons  next  present  for  medical  care  in  the  12  months  following  initial
treatment.   Patients  should  be  instructed  to  refer  their  sex  partners  for  evaluation,
testing, and treatment if they had sexual contact with the patient during the 60 days
preceding  onset  of  the  patient's  symptoms  or  chlamydia  diagnosis.  Although  the
exposure  intervals  defined  for  the  identification  of  at-risk  sex  partners  are  based  on
limited evaluation, the most recent sex partner should be evaluated and treated, even
if the time of the last sexual contact was >60 days before symptom onset or diagnosis. 
Among  heterosexual  patients,  if  concerns  exist  that  sex  partners  who  are  referred  to
evaluation  and  treatment  will  not  seek  these  services  (or  if  other  management
strategies are impractical or unsuccessful), patient delivery of antibiotic therapy to their
partners  can  be  considered  (see  Partner  Management).  Compared  with  standard
partner  referral,  this  approach,  which  involves  delivering  a  prescription  or  the
medication  itself,  has  been  associated  with  a  trend  toward  a  decrease  in  rates  of
persistent or recurrent chlamydia (68,69,71). Patients must also inform their partners of
their infection and provide them with written materials about the importance of seeking
evaluation for any symptoms suggestive of complications (e.g., testicular pain in men
and  pelvic  or  abdominal  pain  in  women).  Patient-delivered  partner  therapy  is  not
routinely  recommended  for  MSM  because  of  a  high  risk  for  coexisting  infections,
especially undiagnosed HIV infection, in their partners. Patients should be instructed to
abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  sex  partners  have  completed
treatment. Abstinence should be continued until 7 days after a single-dose regimen or
after  completion  of  a  multiple-dose  regimen.  Timely  treatment  of  sex  partners  is
essential  for  decreasing  the  risk  for  reinfecting  the  index  patient.  Pregnancy
Doxycycline,  ofloxacin,  and  levofloxacin  are  contraindicated  in  pregnant  women.
However,  clinical  experience  and  published  studies  suggest  that  azithromycin  is  safe
and  effective  (289--291).  Repeat  testing  to  document  chlamydial  eradication
(preferably by NAAT) 3 weeks after completion of therapy with the following regimens is
recommended  for  all  pregnant  women  to  ensure  therapeutic  cure,  considering  the
severe  sequelae  that  might  occur  in  mothers  and  neonates  if  the  infection  persists.
Women  aged  <25  years  and  those  at  increased  risk  for  chlamydia  (i.e.,  women  who
have  a  new  or  more  than  one  sex  partner)  also  should  be  retested  during  the  third
trimester to prevent maternal postnatal complications and chlamydial infection in the
infant  (81).  Pregnant  women  diagnosed  with  a  chlamydial  infection  during  the  first
trimester  should  not  only  receive  a  test  to  document  chlamydial  eradication,  but  be
retested 3 months after treatment.  Recommended Regimens Azithromycin 1 g orally in
a  single  dose  OR  Amoxicillin  500  mg  orally  three  times  a  day  for  7  days  Alternative
Regimens  Erythromycin  base  500  mg  orally  four  times  a  day  for  7  days  OR
Erythromycin  base  250  mg  orally  four  times  a  day  for  14  days  OR  Erythromycin
ethylsuccinate  800  mg  orally  four  times  a  day  for  7  days  OR  Erythromycin
ethylsuccinate 400 mg orally four times a day for 14 days The frequent gastrointestinal
side  effects  associated  with  erythromycin  can  result  in  noncompliance  with  the
alternative  regimens.  Although  erythromycin  estolate  is  contraindicated  during
pregnancy because of drug-related hepatotoxicity, the lower dose 14-day erythromycin
regimens  can  be  considered  if  gastrointestinal  tolerance  is  a  concern.  HIV  Infection
Patients who have chlamydial infection and also are infected with HIV should receive
the  same  treatment  regimen  as  those  who  are  HIV  negative.  Prenatal  screening  and
treatment  of  pregnant  women  can  prevent  chlamydial  infection  among  neonates.
Pregnant women aged <25 years are at high risk for infection.  C. trachomatis infection
of neonates results from perinatal exposure to the mother's infected cervix. Although
neonatal ocular prophylaxis with silver nitrate solution or antibiotic ointments does not
prevent  perinatal  transmission  of  C.  trachomatis  from  mother  to  infant,  ocular
prophylaxis  with  these  agents  does  prevent  gonococcal  ophthalmia  and  therefore
should  be  administered  (see  Ophthalmia  Neonatorum  Prophylaxis).  Initial  C.
trachomatis  perinatal  infection  involves  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  eye,
oropharynx, urogenital tract, and rectum, although infection might be asymptomatic in
these  locations.  Instead,  C.  trachomatis  infection  in  neonates  is  most  frequently
recognized  by  conjunctivitis  that  develops  5--12  days  after  birth.  C.  trachomatis  also
can cause a subacute, afebrile pneumonia with onset at ages 1--3 months. Although C.
trachomatis  has  been  the  most  frequent  identifiable  infectious  cause  of  ophthalmia
neonatorum,  perinatal  chlamydial  infections  (including  ophthalmia  and  pneumonia)
have  occurred  less  frequently  because  of  the  institution  of  widespread  prenatal
screening  and  treatment  of  pregnant  women.  A  chlamydial  etiology  should  be
considered  for  all  infants  aged  ≤30  days  who  have  conjunctivitis,  especially  if  the
mother  has  a  history  of  untreated  chlamydia  infection.  Diagnostic  Considerations
Sensitive and specific methods used to diagnose chlamydial ophthalmia in the neonate
include  both  tissue  culture  and  nonculture  tests  (e.g.,  direct  fluorescence  antibody
[DFA] tests, EIA, and NAAT). Most nonculture tests are not FDA-cleared for the detection
of  chlamydia  from  conjunctival  swabs,  and  clinical  laboratories  must  verify  the
procedure according to CLIA regulations. Specimens for culture isolation and nonculture
tests  should  be  obtained  from  the  everted  eyelid  using  a  dacron-tipped  swab  or  the
swab specified by the manufacturer's test kit, and they must contain conjunctival cells,
not exudate alone. Specific diagnosis of C. trachomatis infection confirms the need for
treatment  not  only  for  the  neonate,  but  also  for  the  mother  and  her  sex  partner(s).
Ocular specimens from infants being evaluated for chlamydial conjunctivitis also should
be  tested  for  N.  gonorrhoeae.  Recommended  Regimen  Erythromycin  base  or
ethylsuccinate  50  mg/kg/day  orally  divided  into  4  doses  daily  for  14  days*,†  *  An
association between oral erythromycin and infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHIS)
has been reported in infants aged <6 weeks who were treated with this drug. Infants
treated with erythromycin should be followed for signs and symptoms of IHPS.  † Data
on use of other macrolides (e.g., azithromycin and clarithromycin) for the treatment of
neonatal  chlamydia  infection  are  limited.  The  results  of  one  study  involving  a  limited
number of patients suggest that a short course of azithromycin, 20 mg/kg/day orally, 1
dose  daily  for  3  days,  might  be  effective  (292).  Topical  antibiotic  therapy  alone  is
inadequate  for  treatment  of  chlamydial  infection  and  is  unnecessary  when  systemic
treatment is administered. Follow-Up Because the efficacy of erythromycin treatment is
only  approximately  80%,  a  second  course  of  therapy  might  be  required.  Therefore,
follow-up  of  infants  is  recommended  to  determine  whether  initial  treatment  was
effective. The possibility of concomitant chlamydial pneumonia should be considered.
Management  of  Mothers  and  Their  Sex  Partners  The  mothers  of  infants  who  have
chlamydial  infection  and  the  sex  partners  of  these  women  should  be  evaluated  and
treated  (see  Chlamydial  Infection  in  Adolescents  and  Adults).  Characteristic  signs  of
chlamydial pneumonia in infants include 1) a repetitive staccato cough with tachypnea
and 2) hyperinflation and bilateral diffuse infiltrates on a chest radiograph. In addition,
peripheral  eosinophilia  (≥400  cells/mm3)  occurs  frequently.  Wheezing  is  rare,  and
infants are typically afebrile. Because clinical presentations differ, initial treatment and
diagnostic tests should include C. trachomatis for all infants aged 1--3 months who are
suspected  of  having  pneumonia  (especially  those  whose  mothers  have  untreated
chlamydial  infection).  Diagnostic  Considerations  Specimens  for  chlamydial  testing
should be collected from the nasopharynx. Tissue culture is the definitive standard for
chlamydial  pneumonia.  Nonculture  tests  (e.g.,  EIA,  DFA,  and  NAAT)  can  be  used,
although  nonculture  tests  of  nasopharyngeal  specimens  have  a  lower  sensitivity  and
specificity than nonculture tests of ocular specimens. DFA is the only FDA-cleared test
for the detection of C. trachomatis from nasopharyngeal specimens. Tracheal aspirates
and lung biopsy specimens, if collected, should be tested for C. trachomatis. Because
test  results  for  chlamydia  often  are  not  available  in  a  timely  manner,  the  decision  to
provide treatment for C. trachomatis pneumonia must frequently be based on clinical
and  radiologic  findings.  The  results  of  tests  for  chlamydial  infection  assist  in  the
management  of  an  infant's  illness  and  can  help  determine  the  need  for  treating  the
mother  and  her  sex  partner(s).  Recommended  Regimen  Erythromycin  base  or
ethylsuccinate 50 mg/kg/day orally divided into 4 doses daily for 14 days Follow-Up The
effectiveness  of  erythromycin  in  treating  pneumonia  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  is
approximately 80%; a second course of therapy might be required. Follow-up of infants
is  recommended  to  determine  whether  the  pneumonia  has  resolved,  although  some
infants with chlamydial pneumonia continue to have abnormal pulmonary function tests
later in childhood. Management of Mothers and Their Sex Partners Mothers of infants
who  have  chlamydia  pneumonia  and  the  sex  partners  of  these  women  should  be
evaluated  and  treated  according  to  the  recommended  treatment  of  adults  for
chlamydial infections (see Chlamydial Infection in Adolescents and Adults). Infants Born
to Mothers Who Have Chlamydial Infection Infants born to mothers who have untreated
chlamydia are at high risk for infection; however, prophylatic antibiotic treatment is not
indicated, and the efficacy of such treatment is unknown. Infants should be monitored
to  ensure  appropriate  treatment  if  symptoms  develop.  Sexual  abuse  must  be
considered  a  cause  of  chlamydial  infection  in  preadolescent  children,  although
perinatally  transmitted  C.  trachomatis  infection  of  the  nasopharynx,  urogenital  tract,
and  rectum  might  persist  for  >1  year  (see  Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of  Children).
Nonculture, nonamplified probe tests for chlamydia (EIA and DFA) should not be used
because of the possibility of false-positive test results. With respiratory-tract specimens,
false-positive  results  can  occur  because  of  cross-reaction  of  test  reagents  with  C.
pneumoniae; with genital and anal specimens, false-positive results might occur as a
result  of  cross-reaction  with  fecal  flora.  Recommended  Regimen  for  Children  Who
Weigh <45 kg Erythromycin base or ethylsuccinate 50 mg/kg/day orally divided into 4
doses  daily  for  14  days  Recommended  Regimen  for  Children  Who  Weigh  ≥45  kg  but
Who  Are  Aged  <8  Years  Azithromycin  1  g  orally  in  a  single  dose  Recommended
Regimens  for  Children  Aged  ≥8  years  Azithromycin  1  g  orally  in  a  single  dose  OR
Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  7  days  See  Sexual  Assault  or  Abuse  of
Children. Follow-up cultures are necessary to ensure that treatment has been effective.
In the United States, an estimated 700,000 new N. gonorrhoeae infections occur each
year  (93,293).  Gonorrhea  is  the  second  most  commonly  reported  bacterial  STD.  The
majority  of  urethral  infections  caused  by  N.  gonorrhoeae  among  men  produce
symptoms that cause them to seek curative treatment soon enough to prevent serious
sequelae, but treatment might not be soon enough to prevent transmission to others.
Among women, gonococcal infections might not produce recognizable symptoms until
complications (e.g., PID) have occurred. PID can result in tubal scarring that can lead to
infertility  or  ectopic  pregnancy.  The  prevalence  of  gonorrhea  varies  widely  among
communities  and  populations;  health-care  providers  should  consider  local  gonorrhea
epidemiology when making screening decisions. Although widespread screening is not
recommended
 because
 gonococcal
 infections
 among
 women
 are
 frequently
asymptomatic,  targeted  screening  of  young  women  (i.e.,  those  aged  <25  years)  at
increased risk for infection is a primary component of gonorrhea control in the United
States.  For  sexually  active  women,  including  those  who  are  pregnant,  USPSTF  (82)
recommends that clinicians provide gonorrhea screening only to those at increased risk
for  infection  (e.g.,  women  with  previous  gonorrhea  infection,  other  STDs,  new  or
multiple sex partners, and inconsistent condom use; those who engage in commercial
sex  work  and  drug  use;  women  in  certain  demographic  groups;  and  those  living  in
communities  with  a  high  prevalence  of  disease).  USPSTF  does  not  recommend
screening  for  gonorrhea  in  men  and  women  who  are  at  low  risk  for  infection  (82).
Because of its high specificity (>99%) and sensitivity (>95%), a Gram stain of a male
urethral  specimen  that  demonstrates  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  with  intracellular
Gram-negative  diplococci  can  be  considered  diagnostic  for  infection  with  N.
gonorrhoeae  in  symptomatic  men.  However,  because  of  lower  sensitivity,  a  negative
Gram stain should not be considered sufficient for ruling out infection in asymptomatic
men.  In  addition,  Gram  stain  of  endocervical  specimens,  pharyngeal,  or  rectal
specimens  also  are  not  sufficient  to  detect  infection,  and  therefore  are  not
recommended.  Specific  testing  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  is  recommended  because  of  the
increased  utility  and  availability  of  highly  sensitive  and  specific  testing  methods  and
because a specific diagnosis might enhance partner notification. Specific diagnosis of
infection  with  N.  gonorrhoeae  can  be  performed  by  testing  endocervical,  vaginal,
urethral (men only), or urine specimens. Culture, nucleic acid hybridization tests, and
NAATs  are  available  for  the  detection  of  genitourinary  infection  with  N.  gonorrhoeae
(197). Culture and nucleic acid hybridization tests require female endocervical or male
urethral swab specimens. NAATs allow testing of the widest variety of specimen types
including  endocervical  swabs,  vaginal  swabs,  urethral  swabs  (men),  and  urine  (from
both men and women), and they are FDA-cleared for use. However, product inserts for
each  NAAT  vendor  must  be  carefully  examined,  because  specimen  types  that  are
FDA-cleared for use vary by test. NAAT tests are not FDA-cleared for use in the rectum,
pharynx,  and  conjunctiva;  however,  some  public  and  private  laboratories  have
established performance specifications for using NAAT with rectal and pharyngeal swab
specimens, thereby allowing results to be used for clinical management. Laboratories
that  establish  performance  specifications  for  the  use  of  NAATs  with  nongenital
specimens  must  ensure  that  specificity  is  not  compromised  by  cross-reaction  with
nongonococcal  Neisseria  species.  The  sensitivity  of  NAATs  for  the  detection  of  N.
gonorrhoeae in genital and nongenital anatomic sites is superior to culture but varies
by  NAAT  type  (197,278--281).  Because  nonculture  tests  cannot  provide  antimicrobial
susceptibility results, in cases of suspected or documented treatment failure, clinicians
should perform both culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. All persons found
to have who have gonorrhea also should be tested for other STDs, including chlamydia,
syphilis, and HIV. Patients infected with N. gonorrhoeae frequently are coinfected with
C.  trachomatis;  this  finding  has  led  to  the  recommendation  that  patients  treated  for
gonococcal infection also be treated routinely with a regimen that is effective against
uncomplicated  genital  C.  trachomatis  infection  (294).  Because  most  gonococci  in  the
United  States  are  susceptible  to  doxycycline  and  azithromycin,  routine  cotreatment
might  also  hinder  the  development  of  antimicrobial-resistant  N.  gonorrhoeae.  Limited
data suggest that dual treatment with azithromycin might enhance treatment efficacy
for  pharyngeal  infection  when  using  oral  cephalosporins  (295,296).  Gonorrhea
treatment  is  complicated  by  the  ability  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  to  develop  resistance  to
antimicrobial  therapies  (297).  Quinolone-resistant  N.  gonorrhoeae  strains  are  now
widely disseminated throughout the United States and the world (298). As of April 2007,
quinolones  are  no  longer  recommended  in  the  United  States  for  the  treatment  of
gonorrhea and associated conditions, such as PID (299). Consequently, only one class
of antimicrobials, the cephalosporins, is recommended and available for the treatment
of gonorrhea in the United States. The CDC website (http://www.cdc.gov/std/gisp) and
state health departments can provide the most current information.  The proportion of
isolates  in  CDC's  Gonococcal  Isolate  Surveillance  Project  (GISP)  demonstrating
decreased  susceptibility  to  ceftriaxone  or  cefixime  has  remained  very  low  over  time;
during  1987--2008,  only  four  isolates  were  found  to  have  decreased  susceptibility  to
ceftriaxone,  and  48  isolates  had  decreased  susceptibility  to  cefixime.  In  2008,  no
isolates demonstrated decreased susceptibility to ceftriaxone; cefixime was not part of
test panel during that year (93). Although only two cases of suspected treatment failure
with  ceftriaxone  have  been  reported  (300),  approximately  50  patients  are  thought  to
have  failed  oral  cephalosporin  treatment  (301--304).   Most  of  the  treatment  failures
resulting  from  use  of  oral  cephalosporins  have  been  reported  from  Asian  countries,
although one possible case was reported in Hawaii in 2001 (305). To ensure appropriate
antibiotic  therapy,  clinicians  should  ask  patients  testing  positive  for  gonorrhea  about
recent travel to and sexual activity in these countries.  Decreased susceptibility of N.
gonorrhoeae  to  cephalosporins  and  other  antimicrobials  is  expected  to  continue  to
spread; therefore, state and local surveillance for antimicrobial resistance is crucial for
guiding local therapy recommendations (297). GISP, which samples approximately 3%
of all U.S. men who have gonococcal infections, is a mainstay of surveillance. However,
surveillance  by  clinicians  also  is  critical.  Clinicians  who  diagnose  N.  gonorrhoeae
infection  in  a  patient  with  suspected  cephalosporin  treatment  failure  should  perform
culture and susceptibility testing of relevant clinical specimens, consult a specialist for
guidance in clinical management, and report the case to CDC through state and local
public health authorities. Health departments should prioritize partner notification and
contact tracing of patients with N. gonorrhoeae infection thought to be associated with
cephalosporin treatment failure or associated with patients whose isolates demonstrate
decreased  susceptibility  to  cephalosporin.  Recommended  Regimens  Ceftriaxone  250
mg IM in a single dose OR, IF NOT AN OPTION Cefixime 400 mg orally in a single dose
OR  Single-dose  injectible  cephalosporin  regimens  PLUS  Azithromycin  1g  orally  in  a
single  dose  OR  Doxycycline  100  mg  a  day  for  7  days  To  maximize  compliance  with
recommended therapies, medications for gonococcal infections should be dispensed on
site.  Ceftriaxone  in  a  single  injection  of  250  mg  provides  sustained,  high  bactericidal
levels in the blood. Extensive clinical experience indicates that ceftriaxone is safe and
effective  for  the  treatment  of  uncomplicated  gonorrhea  at  all  anatomic  sites,  curing
99.2% of uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal and 98.9% of pharyngeal infections in
published clinical trials (306,307). A 250-mg dose of ceftriaxone is now recommended
over a 125-mg dose given the 1) increasingly wide geographic distribution of isolates
demonstrating  decreased  susceptibility  to  cephalosporins  in  vitro,  2)  reports  of
ceftriaxone  treatment  failures,  3)  improved  efficacy  of  ceftriaxone  250  mg  in
pharyngeal infection (which is often unrecognized), and 4) the utility of having a simple
and consistent recommendation for treatment regardless of the anatomic site involved. 
A  400-mg  oral  dose  of  cefixime  does  not  provide  as  high,  nor  as  sustained,  a
bactericidal  level  as  that  provided  by  the  250-mg  dose  of  ceftriaxone.  In  published
clinical trials, the 400-mg dose cured 97.5% of uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal
(95%  CI  =  95.4%--99.8%)  and  92.3%  of  pharyngeal  gonococcal  infections  (95%  CI  =
74.9%--99.1%) (306,307). Although cefixime can be administered orally, this advantage
is  offset  by  the  limited  efficacy  of  cefixime  (as  well  as  other  oral  cephalosporins)  for
treating  gonococcal  infections  of  the  pharynx.  Providers  should  inquire  about  oral
sexual exposure and if reported, treat these patients with ceftriaxone because of this
drug's well documented efficacy in treating pharyngeal infection. Single-dose injectible
cephalosporin  regimens  (other  than  ceftriaxone  250  mg  IM)  that  are  safe  and  highly
effective against uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections include
ceftizoxime (500 mg, administered IM), cefoxitin (2 g, administered IM with probenecid
1  g  orally),  and  cefotaxime  (500  mg,  administered  IM).  None  of  the  injectible
cephalosporins  offer  any  advantage  over  ceftriaxone  for  urogenital  infection,  and
efficacy for pharyngeal infection is less certain (306,307). Several other antimicrobials
are  active  against  N.  gonorrhoeae,  but  none  have  substantial  advantages  over  the
recommended  regimens,  and  they  should  not  be  used  if  pharyngeal  infection  is
suspected. Some evidence suggests that cefpodoxime 400-mg orally can be considered
an  alternative  in  the  treatment  of  uncomplicated  urogenital  gonorrhea;  this  regimen
meets  the  minimum  efficacy  criteria  for  alternative  regimens  for  urogenital  infection
(demonstrated efficacy of ≥95% in clinical trials with lower 95% CI of >90%) (307). In
one clinical trial, cefpodoxime 400 mg orally was found to have a urogenital and rectal
cure rate of 96.6% (95% CI = 93.9%), but the efficacy of cefpodoxime 400 mg orally at
the pharyngeal site was poor (70.3%, 95% CI = 53.0%) (Hall, unpublished data, 2010).
Gonococcal  strains  with  decreased  susceptibility  to  oral  cephalosporins  have  been
reported in the United States (308). With a cure rate of 96.5% (95% CI = 93.6%--98.3%)
for  urogenital  and  rectal  infection,  cefpodoxime  proxetil  200  mg  orally  meets  the
criteria for an alternative regimen; however, its use is not advised because of concerns
about  the  pharmacodynamics  of  cefpodoxime  using  this  dose.  Efficacy  in  treating
pharyngeal  infection  with  cefpodoxime  200  mg  is  unsatisfactory  (78.9%;  95%  CI  =
54.5%--94%),  as  with  cefpodoxime  at  the  400-mg  dose.   Treatment  with  cefuroxime
axetil 1 g orally meets the criteria for minimum efficacy as an alternative regimen for
urogenital
 and
 rectal
 infection
 (95.9%;
 95%  CI
 =
 94.3%--97.2%),
 but
 the
pharmacodynamics  of  cefuroxime  axetil  1  g  orally  are  less  favorable  than  those  of
cefpodoxime 400 mg, cefixime 400 mg, or ceftriaxone 125 mg (309). The efficacy of
cefuroxime axetil 1 g orally in treating pharyngeal infection is poor (56.9%; 95% CI =
42.2%--70.7%).  Spectinomycin,  which  is  useful  in  persons  who  cannot  tolerate
cephalosporins, is expensive, must be injected, and is not available in the United States
(updates available at: 
www.cdc.gov/std/treatment)  (310).  However,  it  has  been  effective  in  published
clinical  trials,  curing  98.2%  of  uncomplicated  urogenital  and  anorectal  gonococcal
infections. Spectinomycin has poor efficacy against pharyngeal infection (51.8%; 95%
CI = 38.7%--64.9%) (306).  Azithromycin 2 g orally is effective against uncomplicated
gonococcal infection (99.2%; 95% CI = 97.3%--99.9%), but concerns over the ease with
which  N.  gonorrhoeae  can  develop  resistance  to  macrolides  should  restrict  its  use  to
limited  circumstances.  Although  azithromycin  1  g  meets  alternative  regimen  criteria
(97.6%; 95% CI = 95.7%--98.9%), it is not recommended because several studies have
documented  treatment  failures,  and  concerns  about  possible  rapid  emergence  of
antimicrobial resistance with the 1-g dose of azithromycin are even greater than with
the  2-g  dose  (311--313).  N.  gonorrhoeae  in  the  United  States  is  not  adequately
susceptible  to  penicillins,  tetracyclines,  and  older  macrolides  (e.g.,  erythromycin)  for
these  antimicrobials  to  be  recommended.  Most  gonococcal  infections  of  the  pharynx
are
 asymptomatic
 and
 can
 be
 relatively
 common
 in
 some
 populations
(103,278,279,314). Gonococcal infections of the pharynx are more difficult to eradicate
than  infections  at  urogenital  and  anorectal  sites  (315).  Few  antimicrobial  regimens,
including  those  involving  oral  cephalosporins,  can  reliably  cure  >90%  of  gonococcal
pharyngeal infections (306,307). Providers should ask their patients about oral sexual
exposure;  if  reported,  patients  should  be  treated  with  a  regimen  with  acceptable
efficacy against pharyngeal infection. Chlamydial coinfection of the pharynx is unusual;
however,  because  coinfection  at  genital  sites  sometimes  occurs,  treatment  for  both
gonorrhea and chlamydia is recommended.  Recommended Regimens Ceftriaxone 250
mg IM in a single dose PLUS Azithromycin 1g orally in a single dose OR Doxycycline 100
mg a day for 7 days Patients diagnosed with uncomplicated gonorrhea who are treated
with any of the recommended or alternative regimens do not need a test-of-cure (i.e.,
repeat testing 3-4 weeks after completing therapy). Patients who have symptoms that
persist  after  treatment  should  be  evaluated  by  culture  for  N.  gonorrhoeae,  and  any
gonococci isolated should be tested for antimicrobial susceptibility. Persistent urethritis,
cervicitis,  or  proctitis  also  might  be  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  or  other  organisms.  N.
gonorrhoeae infection is prevalent among patients who have been diagnosed with and
treated  for  gonorrhea  in  the  preceding  several  months  (64,251,252,267).  Most
infections  result  from  reinfection  rather  than  treatment  failure,  indicating  a  need  for
improved  patient  education  and  referral  of  sex  partners.  Clinicians  should  advise
patients with gonorrhea to be retested 3 months after treatment. If patients do not seek
medical care for retesting in 3 months, providers are encouraged to test these patients
whenever  they  next  seek  medical  care  within  the  following  12  months,  regardless  of
whether the patients believe that their sex partners were treated. Retesting is distinct
from  test-of-cure  to  detect  therapeutic  failure,  which  is  not  recommended.   Effective
clinical management of patients with treatable STDs requires treatment of the patients'
recent  sex  partners  to  prevent  reinfection  and  curtail  further  transmission.  Patients
should  be  instructed  to  refer  their  sex  partners  for  evaluation  and  treatment.  Sex
partners of patients with N. gonorrhoeae infection whose last sexual contact with the
patient was within 60 days before onset of symptoms or diagnosis of infection in the
patient  should  be  evaluated  and  treated  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis
infections. If a patient's last sexual intercourse was >60 days before onset of symptoms
or diagnosis, the patient's most recent sex partner should be treated. Patients should
be  instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  therapy  is  completed  and  until
they and their sex partners no longer have symptoms. For heterosexual patients with
gonorrhea  whose  partners'  treatment  cannot  be  ensured  or  is  unlikely,  delivery  of
antibiotic  therapy  for  gonorrhea  (as  well  as  for  chlamydia)  by  the  patients  to  their
partners  can  be  considered  (see  Partner  Management).  Use  of  this  approach  (68,71)
should always be accompanied by efforts to educate partners about symptoms and to
encourage  partners  to  seek  clinical  evaluation.  For  male  patients  informing  female
partners,  educational  materials  should  include  information  about  the  importance  of
seeking medical evaluation for PID (especially if symptomatic). Possible undertreatment
of PID in female partners and possible missed opportunities to diagnose other STDs are
of concern and have not been evaluated in comparison with patient-delivered therapy
and  partner  referral.  This  approach  should  not  be  considered  a  routine  partner
management strategy in MSM because of the high risk for coexisting undiagnosed STDs
or  HIV  infection.  Allergy,  Intolerance,  and  Adverse  Reactions  Reactions  to  first
generation cephalosporins occur in approximately 5%--10% of persons with a history of
penicillin allergy and occur less frequently with third-generation cephalosporins (239).
In those persons with a history of penicillin allergy, the use of cephalosporins should be
contraindicated  only  in  those  with  a  history  of  a  severe  reaction  to  penicillin  (e.g.,
anaphylaxis,  Stevens  Johnson  syndrome,  and  toxic  epidermal  necrolysis)  (316).
Because data are limited regarding alternative regimens for treating gonorrhea among
persons who have severe cephalosporin allergy, providers treating such patients should
consult  infectious  disease  specialists.  Azithromycin  2  g  orally  is  effective  against
uncomplicated  gonococcal  infection,  but  because  of  concerns  over  emerging
antimicrobial  resistance  to  macrolides,  its  use  should  be  limited.  Cephalosporin
treatment following desensitization is impractical in most clinical settings.  Pregnancy
As with other patients, pregnant women infected with N. gonorrhoeae should be treated
with  a  recommended  or  alternate  cephalosporin.  Because  spectinomycin  is  not
available  in  the  United  States,  azithromycin  2  g  orally  can  be  considered  for  women
who
 cannot
 tolerate
 a
 cephalosporin.
 Either
 azithromycin
 or
 amoxicillin
 is
recommended  for  treatment  of  presumptive  or  diagnosed  C.  trachomatis  infection
during  pregnancy  (see  Chlamydial  Infections).  HIV  Infection  Patients  who  have
gonococcal infection and also are infected with HIV should receive the same treatment
regimen as those who are HIV negative. Suspected Cephalosporin Treatment Failure or
Resistance  Suspected  treatment  failure  has  been  reported  among  persons  receiving
oral  and  injectable  cephalosporins  (300--304).  Therefore,  clinicians  of  patients  with
suspected treatment failure or persons infected with a strain found to demonstrate in
vitro  resistance  should  consult  an  infectious  disease  specialist,  conduct  culture  and
susceptibility  testing  of  relevant  clinical  specimens,  retreat  with  at  least  250  mg  of
ceftriaxone IM or IV, ensure partner treatment, and report the situation to CDC through
state and local public health authorities. Gonococcal Conjunctivitis In the only published
study  of  the  treatment  of  gonococcal  conjunctivitis  among  U.S.  adults,  all  12  study
participants responded to a single 1-g IM injection of ceftriaxone (317). Recommended
Regimen Ceftriaxone 1 g IM in a single dose Consider lavage of the infected eye with
saline  solution  once.  Persons  treated  for  gonococcal  conjunctivitis  should  be  treated
presumptively  for  concurrent  C.  trachomatis  infection.  Management  of  Sex  Partners
Patients should be instructed to refer their sex partners for evaluation and treatment
(see  Gonococcal  Infections,  Management  of  Sex  Partners).  DGI  frequently  results  in
petechial or pustular acral skin lesions, asymmetrical arthralgia, tenosynovitis, or septic
arthritis.  The  infection  is  complicated  occasionally  by  perihepatitis  and  rarely  by
endocarditis or meningitis. Some strains of N. gonorrhoeae that cause DGI can cause
minimal genital inflammation. No recent studies have been published on the treatment
of  DGI.  Treatment  Hospitalization  is  recommended  for  initial  therapy,  especially  for
patients  who  might  not  comply  with  treatment,  for  those  in  whom  diagnosis  is
uncertain, and for those who have purulent synovial effusions or other complications.
Examination for clinical evidence of endocarditis and meningitis should be performed.
Persons treated for DGI should be treated presumptively for concurrent C. trachomatis
infection. Recommended Regimen Ceftriaxone 1 g IM or IV every 24 hours Alternative
Regimens Cefotaxime 1 g IV every 8 hours OR Ceftizoxime 1 g IV every 8 hours All of
the  preceding  regimens  should  be  continued  for  24--48  hours  after  improvement
begins, at which time therapy can be switched to cefixime 400 mg orally twice daily to
complete  at  least  1  week  of  antimicrobial  therapy.  No  treatment  failures  have  been
reported  with  the  recommended  regimens.  Management  of  Sex  Partners  Gonococcal
infection frequently is asymptomatic in sex partners of patients who have DGI. As with
uncomplicated  gonococcal  infections,  patients  should  be  instructed  to  refer  their  sex
partners for evaluation and treatment (see Gonococcal Infection, Management of Sex
Partners).  Recommended  Regimen  Ceftriaxone  1--2  g  IV  every  12  hours  Therapy  for
meningitis  should  be  continued  for  10--14  days;  therapy  for  endocarditis  should  be
continued for at least 4 weeks. Treatment of complicated DGI should be undertaken in
consultation with an infectious disease specialist. Management of Sex Partners Patients
should  be  instructed  to  refer  their  sex  partners  for  evaluation  and  treatment  (see
Gonococcal  Infection,  Management  of  Sex  Partners).  Gonococcal  infection  among
infants usually is caused by exposure to infected cervical exudate at birth. It is usually
an acute illness that manifests 2--5 days after birth. The prevalence of infection among
infants  depends  on  the  prevalence  of  infection  among  pregnant  women,  whether
pregnant  women  are  screened  for  gonorrhea,  and  whether  newborns  receive
ophthalmia prophylaxis. The most severe manifestations of N. gonorrhoeae infection in
newborns  are  ophthalmia  neonatorum  and  sepsis,  which  can  include  arthritis  and
meningitis.  Less  severe  manifestations  include  rhinitis,  vaginitis,  urethritis,  and
reinfection  at  sites  of  fetal  monitoring.  Although  N.  gonorrhoeae  causes  ophthalmia
neonatorum  relatively  infrequently  in  the  United  States,  identifying  and  treating  this
infection  is  especially  important  because  ophthalmia  neonatorum  can  result  in
perforation of the globe of the eye and blindness. Diagnostic Considerations Infants at
increased  risk  for  gonococcal  ophthalmia  are  those  who  do  not  receive  ophthalmia
prophylaxis  and  those  whose  mothers  have  had  no  prenatal  care  or  whose  mothers
have  a  history  of  STDs  or  substance  abuse.  Gonococcal  ophthalmia  is  strongly
suspected  when  intracellular  gram-negative  diplococci  are  identified  in  conjunctival
exudate, justifying presumptive treatment for gonorrhea after appropriate cultures for
N.  gonorrhoeae  are  obtained.  Appropriate  chlamydial  testing  should  be  done
simultaneously.  Presumptive  treatment  for  N.  gonorrhoeae  might  be  indicated  for
newborns who are at increased risk for gonococcal ophthalmia and who have increased
WBCs (but not gonococci) in a Gram-stained smear of conjunctival exudate. In all cases
of neonatal conjunctivitis, conjunctival exudates should be cultured for N. gonorrhoeae
and tested for antibiotic susceptibility before a definitive diagnosis is made. A definitive
diagnosis is vital because of the public health and social consequences of a diagnosis of
gonorrhea. Nongonococcal causes of neonatal ophthalmia include Moraxella catarrhalis
and other Neisseria species, organisms that are indistinguishable from N. gonorrhoeae
on  Gram-stained  smear  but  can  be  differentiated  in  the  microbiology  laboratory.
Recommended  Regimen  Ceftriaxone  25--50  mg/kg  IV  or  IM  in  a  single  dose,  not  to
exceed  125  mg  Topical  antibiotic  therapy  alone  is  inadequate  and  is  unnecessary  if
systemic  treatment  is  administered.  Other  Management  Considerations  Simultaneous
infection  with  C.  trachomatis  should  be  considered  when  a  patient  does  not  improve
after treatment. Both mother and infant should be tested for chlamydial infection at the
same time that gonorrhea testing is conducted (see Ophthalmia Neonatorum Caused by
C.  trachomatis).  Ceftriaxone  should  be  administered  cautiously  to  hyperbilirubinemic
infants,  especially  those  born  prematurely.  Follow-Up  Infants  who  have  gonococcal
ophthalmia  should  be  hospitalized  and  evaluated  for  signs  of  disseminated  infection
(e.g., sepsis, arthritis, and meningitis). One dose of ceftriaxone is adequate therapy for
gonococcal  conjunctivitis.  The  mothers  of  infants  who  have  gonococcal  infection  and
the  mothers'  sex  partners  should  be  evaluated  and  treated  according  to  the
recommendations  for  treating  gonococcal  infections  in  adults  (see  Gonococcal
Infections  in  Adolescents  and  Adults).  Sepsis,  arthritis,  and  meningitis  (or  any
combination  of  these  conditions)  are  rare  complications  of  neonatal  gonococcal
infection.  Localized  gonococcal  infection  of  the  scalp  can  result  from  fetal  monitoring
through  scalp  electrodes.  Detection  of  gonococcal  infection  in  neonates  who  have
sepsis, arthritis, meningitis, or scalp abscesses requires cultures of blood, CSF, and joint
aspirate  on  chocolate  agar.  Specimens  obtained  from  the  conjunctiva,  vagina,
oropharynx, and rectum that are cultured on gonococcal selective medium are useful
for  identifying  the  primary  site(s)  of  infection,  especially  if  inflammation  is  present.
Positive Gram-stained smears of exudate, CSF, or joint aspirate provide a presumptive
basis  for  initiating  treatment  for  N.  gonorrhoeae.  Diagnoses  based  on  Gram-stained
smears  or  presumptive  identification  of  cultures  should  be  confirmed  with  definitive
tests on culture isolates. Recommended Regimens Ceftriaxone 25--50 mg/kg/day IV or
IM  in  a  single  daily  dose  for  7  days,  with  a  duration  of  10--14  days,  if  meningitis  is
documented  OR  Cefotaxime  25  mg/kg  IV  or  IM  every  12  hours  for  7  days,  with  a
duration of 10--14 days, if meningitis is documented Infants born to mothers who have
untreated  gonorrhea  are  at  high  risk  for  infection.  Recommended  Regimen  in  the
Absence  of  Signs  of  Gonococcal  Infection  Ceftriaxone  25--50  mg/kg  IV  or  IM,  not  to
exceed 125 mg, in a single dose Both mother and infant should be tested for chlamydial
infection.  Follow-up  examination  is  not  required.  The  mothers  of  infants  who  have
gonococcal  infection  and  the  mothers'  sex  partners  should  be  evaluated  and  treated
according to the recommendations for treatment of gonococcal infections in adults (see
Gonococcal Infections). Sexual abuse is the most frequent cause of gonococcal infection
in preadolescent children (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). For preadolescent
girls,
 vaginitis
 is
 the
 most
 common
 manifestation
 of
 this
 infection;
gonococcal-associated
 PID
 after
 vaginal
 infection
 is
 likely
 less
 common
 in
preadolescents than adults. Among sexually abused children, anorectal and pharyngeal
infections with N. gonorrhoeae are common and frequently asymptomatic. Because of
the  legal  implications  of  a  diagnosis  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  infection  in  a  child,  culture
remains the preferred method for diagnosis. Gram stains are inadequate for evaluating
prepubertal  children  for  gonorrhea  and  should  not  be  used  to  diagnose  or  exlude
gonorrhea.  NAATs  for  the  detection  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  can  be  used  under  certain
circumstances (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children)  Recommended Regimen for
Children Who Weigh >45 kg Treat with one of the regimens recommended for adults
(see  Gonococcal  Infections)  Recommended  Regimen  for  Children  Who  Weigh  ≤45  kg
and  Who  Have  Uncomplicated  Gonococcal  Vulvovaginitis,  Cervicitis,  Urethritis,
Pharyngitis, or Proctitis Ceftriaxone 125 mg IM in a single dose Recommended Regimen
for Children Who Weigh ≤45 kg and Who Have Bacteremia or Arthritis Ceftriaxone 50
mg/kg (maximum dose: 1 g) IM or IV in a single dose daily for 7 days Recommended
Regimen  for  Children  Who  Weigh  >45  kg  and  Who  Have  Bacteremia  or  Arthritis
Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg IM or IV in a single dose daily for 7 days Follow-up cultures are
unnecessary  if  ceftriaxone  is  used.   Only  parenteral  cephalosporins  (i.e.,  ceftriaxone)
are  recommended  for  use  in  children;  cefotaxime  is  approved  for  gonococcal
ophthalmia  only.  No  data  are  available  regarding  the  use  of  oral  cefixime  to  treat
gonococcal  infections  in  children.   All  children  found  to  have  gonococcal  infections
should be evaluated for coinfection with syphilis and C. trachomatis. (For a discussion of
concerns regarding sexual assault, see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children.) To prevent
gonococcal  ophthalmia  neonatorum,  a  prophylactic  agent  should  be  instilled  into  the
eyes of all newborn infants; this procedure is required by law in most states. All of the
recommended  prophylactic  regimens  in  this  section  prevent  gonococcal  ophthalmia.
However, the efficacy of these preparations in preventing chlamydial ophthalmia is less
clear,  and  they  do  not  eliminate  nasopharyngeal  colonization  by  C.  trachomatis.  The
diagnosis and treatment of gonococcal and chlamydial infections in pregnant women is
the  best  method  for  preventing  neonatal  gonococcal  and  chlamydial  disease.  Not  all
women, however, receive prenatal care, and therefore go untreated. Ocular prophylaxis
is  warranted  for  neonates,  because  it  can  prevent  sight-threatening  gonococcal
ophthalmia and because it is safe, easy to administer, and inexpensive. Recommended
Regimen Erythromycin (0.5%) ophthalmic ointment in each eye in a single application
This preparation should be instilled into both eyes of every neonate as soon as possible
after  delivery.  Ideally,  ointment  should  be  applied  using  single-use  tubes  or  ampules
rather than multiple-use tubes. If prophylaxis is delayed (i.e., not administered in the
delivery  room),  a  monitoring  system  should  be  established  to  ensure  that  all  infants
receive prophylaxis. All infants should be administered ocular prophylaxis, regardless of
whether they are delivered vaginally or by cesarean section. Erythromycin is the only
antibiotic  ointment  recommended  for  use  in  neonates.  Silver  nitrate  and  tetracycline
ophthalmic ointment are no longer manufactured in the United States, bacitracin is not
effective,  and  povidone  iodine  has  not  been  studied  adequately.  If  erythromycin
ointment  is  not  available,  infants  at  risk  for  exposure  to  N.  gonorrhoeae  (especially
those  born  to  a  mother  with  untreated  gonococcal  infection  or  who  has  received  no
prenatal care) can be administered ceftriaxone 25-50 mg/kg IV or IM, not to exceed 125
mg  in  a  single  dose.  Most  women  will  have  a  vaginal  infection,  characterized  by
discharge, itching, or odor, during their lifetime. With the availability of complementary
and  alternative  therapies  and  over-the-counter  medications  for  candidiasis,  many
symptomatic  women  seek  these  products  before  or  in  addition  to  an  evaluation  by  a
medical provider.  Obtaining a medical history alone has been shown to be insufficient
for accurate diagnosis of vaginitis and can lead to the inappropriate administration of
medication.  Therefore,  a  careful  history,  examination,  and  laboratory  testing  to
determine  the  etiology  of  vaginal  complaints  are  warranted.  Information  on  sexual
behaviors  and  practices,  gender  of  sex  partners,  menses,  vaginal  hygiene  practices
(such as douching), and other medications should be elicited. The three diseases most
frequently associated with vaginal discharge are BV (caused by the replacement of the
vaginal  flora  by  an  overgrowth  of  anaerobic  bacteria  including  Prevotella  sp.,
Mobiluncus  sp.,  G.  vaginalis,  Ureaplasma,  Mycoplasma,  and  numerous  fastidious  or
uncultivated  anaerobes)  trichomoniasis  (caused  by  T.  vaginalis),  and  candidiasis
(usually  caused  by  Candida  albicans).  Cervicitis  also  can  sometimes  cause  a  vaginal
discharge. Although vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) usually is not transmitted sexually,
it  is  included  in  this  section  because  it  is  frequently  diagnosed  in  women  who  have
vaginal  complaints  or  who  are  being  evaluated  for  STDs.  Various  diagnostic  methods
are  available  to  identify  the  etiology  of  an  abnormal  vaginal  discharge.  Clinical
laboratory testing can identify the cause of vaginitis in most women and is discussed in
detail in the sections of this report dedicated to each condition. In the clinician's office,
the  cause  of  vaginal  symptoms  might  be  determined  by  pH,  a  potassium  hydroxide
(KOH) test, and microscopic examination of fresh samples of the discharge. The pH of
the vaginal secretions can be determined by narrow-range pH paper; an elevated pH
(i.e.,  >4.5)  is  common  with  BV  or  trichomoniasis.  Because  pH  testing  is  not  highly
specific,  discharge  should  be  further  examined  microscopically  by  first  diluting  one
sample in one to two drops of 0.9% normal saline solution on one slide and a second
sample  in  10%  KOH  solution  (samples  that  emit  an  amine  odor  immediately  upon
application of KOH suggest BV or trichomoniasis infection). Cover slips are then placed
on the slides, and they are examined under a microscope at low and high power. The
saline-solution  specimen  might  yield  motile  T.  vaginalis,  or  clue  cells  (i.e.,  epithelial
cells with borders obscured by small bacteria), which are characteristic of BV, whereas
the  presence  of  WBCs  without  evidence  of  trichomonads  or  yeast  in  this  solution  is
suggestive of cervicitis (see Cervicitis). The KOH specimen typically is used to identify
the yeast or pseudohyphae of Candida species. However, the absence of trichomonads
or  pseudohyphae  in  KOH  samples  does  not  rule  out  these  infections,  because  the
sensitivity of microscropy is approximately 50% compared with NAAT (trichomoniasis)
or culture (yeast). In settings where pH paper, KOH, and microscopy are not available,
alternative commercially available point-of-care tests or clinical laboratory testing can
be used to diagnose vaginitis. The presence of objective signs of vulvar inflammation in
the absence of vaginal pathogens after laboratory testing, along with a minimal amount
of  discharge,  suggests  the  possibility  of  mechanical,  chemical,  allergic,  or  other
noninfectious  irritation  of  the  vulva.  BV  is  a  polymicrobial  clinical  syndrome  resulting
from replacement of the normal hydrogen peroxide producing Lactobacillus sp. in the
vagina  with  high  concentrations  of  anaerobic  bacteria  (e.g.,  Prevotella  sp.  and
Mobiluncus  sp.),  G.  vaginalis,  Ureaplasma,  Mycoplasma,  and  numerous  fastidious  or
uncultivated anaerobes. Some women experience transient vaginal microbial changes,
whereas  others  experience  them  for  a  longer  intervals  of  time.  Among  women
presenting  for  care,  BV  is  the  most  prevalent  cause  of  vaginal  discharge  or  malodor;
however,  in  a  nationally  representative  survey,  most  women  with  BV  were
asymptomatic (318). BV is associated with having multiple male or female partners, a
new sex partner, douching, lack of condom use, and lack of vaginal lactobacilli; women
who have never been sexually active can also be affected. The cause of the microbial
alteration that characterizes BV is not fully understood, nor is whether BV results from
acquisition  of  a  sexually  transmitted  pathogen.  Nonetheless,  women  with  BV  are  at
increased  risk  for  the  acquisition  of  some  STDs  (e.g.,  HIV,  N.  gonorrhoeae,  C.
trachomatis,  and  HSV-  2),  complications  after  gynecologic  surgery,  complications  of
pregnancy,  and  recurrence  of  BV.  Treatment  of  male  sex  partners  has  not  been
beneficial in preventing the recurrence of BV. BV can be diagnosed by the use of clinical
criteria (i.e., Amsel's Diagnostic Criteria) (319) or Gram stain. A Gram stain (considered
the  gold  standard  laboratory  method  for  diagnosing  BV)  is  used  to  determine  the
relative concentration of lactobacilli (i.e., long Gram-positive rods), Gram-negative and
Gram-variable  rods  and  cocci  (i.e.,  G.  vaginalis,  Prevotella,  Porphyromonas,  and
peptostreptococci), and curved Gram-negative rods (i.e., Mobiluncus) characteristic of
BV. If a Gram stain is not available, clinical criteria can be used and require three of the
following symptoms or signs: homogeneous, thin, white discharge that smoothly coats
the vaginal walls; presence of clue cells on microscopic examination; pH of vaginal fluid
>4.5; or a fishy odor of vaginal discharge before or after addition of 10% KOH (i.e., the
whiff test). Detection of three of these criteria has been correlated with results by Gram
stain (320). Other tests, including a DNA probe-based test for high concentrations of G.
vaginalis (Affirm VP III, Becton Dickinson, Sparks, Maryland), a prolineaminopeptidase
test card (Pip Activity TestCard, Quidel, San Diego, California), and the OSOM BVBlue
test have acceptable performance characteristics compared with Gram stain. Although
a card test is available for the detection of elevated pH and trimethylamine, it has low
sensitivity and specificity and therefore is not recommended. PCR also has been used in
research  settings  for  the  detection  of  a  variety  of  organisms  associated  with  BV,  but
evaluation  of  its  clinical  utility  is  uncertain.  Detection  of  one  organism  or  group  of
organisms  might  be  predictive  of  BV  by  Gram  stain  (321).  However,  additional
evaluations  are  needed  to  confirm  these  associations.  Culture  of  G.  vaginalis  is  not
recommended as a diagnostic tool because it is not specific. Cervical Pap tests have no
clinical  utility  for  the  diagnosis  of  BV  because  of  their  low  sensitivity.  Treatment  is
recommended  for  women  with  symptoms.  The  established  benefits  of  therapy  in
nonpregnant  women  are  to  relieve  vaginal  symptoms  and  signs  of  infection.  Other
potential benefits to treatment include reduction in the risk for acquiring C. trachomatis
or  N.  gonorrhoeae  (322),  HIV,  and  other  viral  STDs.   Recommended  Regimens
Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day for 7 days* OR Metronidazole gel 0.75%, one
full applicator (5 g) intravaginally, once a day for 5 days OR Clindamycin cream 2%, one
full applicator (5 g) intravaginally at bedtime for 7 days† * Consuming alcohol should be
avoided during treatment and for 24 hours thereafter. † Clindamycin cream is oil-based
and  might  weaken  latex  condoms  and  diaphragms  for  5  days  after  use  (refer  to
clindamycin  product  labeling  for  additional  information).  Providers  should  consider
patient preference, possible side-effects, drug interactions, and other coinfections when
selecting  a  regimen.  Women  should  be  advised  to  refrain  from  intercourse  or  to  use
condoms  consistently  and  correctly  during  the  treatment  regimen.  Douching  might
increase the risk for relapse, and no data support the use of douching for treatment or
relief of symptoms.  Alternative Regimens Tinidazole 2 g orally once daily for 3 days OR
Tinidazole 1 g orally once daily for 5 days  OR Clindamycin 300 mg orally twice daily for
7  days  OR  Clindamycin  ovules  100  mg  intravaginally  once  at  bedtime  for  3  days
Alternative regimens include several tinidazole regimens (323) or clindamycin (oral or
intravaginal)  (324).  Additional  regimens  include  metronidazole  (750-mg  extended
release  tablets  once  daily  for  7  days),  or  a  single  dose  of  clindamycin  intravaginal
cream,  although  data  on  the  performance  of  these  alternative  regimens  are  limited.  
Several  studies  have  evaluated  the  clinical  and  microbiologic  efficacy  of  using
intravaginal lactobacillus formulations to treat BV and restore normal flora (325--327).
Further research efforts to determine the role of these regimens in BV treatment and
prevention are ongoing.  Follow-up visits are unnecessary if symptoms resolve. Because
recurrence  of  BV  is  common,  women  should  be  advised  to  return  for  evaluation  if
symptoms  recur.  Detection  of  certain  BV-associated  organisms  have  been  associated
with antimicrobial resistance and might determine risk for subsequent treatment failure
(328--333).  Limited  data  are  available  regarding  optimal  management  strategies  for
women with early treatment failure. Using a different treatment regimen might be an
option in patients who have a recurrence; however, re-treatment with the same topical
regimen  is  another  acceptable  approach  for  treating  recurrent  BV  during  the  early
stages  of  infection  (334).  For  women  with  multiple  recurrences  after  completion  of  a
recommended regimen, metronidazole gel twice weekly for 4-6 months has been shown
to  reduce  recurrences,  although  this  benefit  might  not  persist  when  suppressive
therapy is discontinued (335). Limited data suggest that oral nitroimidazole followed by
intravaginal boric acid and suppressive metronidazole gel for those women in remission
might  be  an  option  in  women  with  recurrent  BV  (336).  Monthly  oral  metronidazole
administered  with  fluconazole  has  also  been  evaluated  as  suppressive  therapy  (337).
The  results  of  clinical  trials  indicate  that  a  woman's  response  to  therapy  and  the
likelihood of relapse or recurrence are not affected by treatment of her sex partner(s).
Therefore,  routine  treatment  of  sex  partners  is  not  recommended.  Allergy  or
Intolerance to the Recommended Therapy Intravaginal clindamycin cream is preferred
in  case  of  allergy  or  intolerance  to  metronidazole  or  tinidazole.  Intravaginal
metronidazole  gel  can  be  considered  for  women  who  do  not  tolerate  systemic
metronidazole.  Intravaginal  metronidazole  should  not  be  administered  to  women
allergic  to  metronidazole.  Pregnancy  Treatment  is  recommended  for  all  pregnant
women with symptoms. Although BV is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes,
including premature rupture of membranes, preterm labor, preterm birth, intra-amniotic
infection, and postpartum endometritis, the only established benefit of therapy for BV in
pregnant women is the reduction of symptoms and signs of vaginal infection. Additional
potential benefits include reducing the risk for infectious complications associated with
BV  during  pregnancy  and  reducing  the  risk  for  other  infections  (other  STDs  or  HIV).
Several trials have been undertaken to determine the efficacy of BV treatment among
pregnant  women.  Two  trials  demonstrated  that  metronidazole  was  efficacious  during
pregnancy using the 250-mg regimen (338,339); however, metronidazole administered
at 500 mg twice daily can be used. One trial involving a limited number of participants
revealed  that  treatment  with  oral  metronidazole  500  mg  twice  daily  was  equally
effective  as  metronidazole  gel,  with  cure  rates  of  70%  using  Amsel  criteria  to  define
cure (340), and a recent trial demonstrated a cure rate of 85% using Gram stain criteria
after 4 weeks with oral clindamycin (341). Multiple studies and meta-analyses have not
demonstrated  an  association  between  metronidazole  use  during  pregnancy  and
teratogenic or mutagenic effects in newborns (342,343). Regardless of the antimicrobial
agent  used  to  treat  pregnant  women,  oral  therapy  is  preferred  because  of  the
possibility  of  subclinical  upper-genital--tract  infection.  Recommended  Regimens  for
Pregnant Women Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day for 7 days OR Metronidazole
250 mg orally three times a day for 7 days OR Clindamycin 300 mg orally twice a day
for 7 days Treatment of asymptomatic BV among pregnant women who are at high risk
for preterm delivery (i.e., those with a previous preterm birth) has been evaluated by
several  studies,  which  have  yielded  mixed  results.  Seven  trials  have  evaluated
treatment of pregnant women with asymptomatic BV at high risk for preterm delivery;
one  showed  harm  (344),  two  showed  no  benefit  (345,346),  and  four  demonstrated
benefit  (338,339,347,348).  Therefore,  evidence  is  insufficient  to  assess  the  impact  of
screening for BV in pregnant women at high risk for preterm delivery (85).  Similarly,
data  are  inconsistent  regarding  whether  the  treatment  of  asymptomatic  pregnant
women with BV who are at low risk for preterm delivery reduces adverse outcomes of
pregnancy.  Although  USPSTF  recommends  against  screening  these  women  (85),  one
trial demonstrated a 40% reduction in spontaneous preterm birth among women using
oral clindamycin during weeks 13--22 of gestation (348). Several additional trials have
shown  that  intravaginal  clindamycin  given  at  an  average  gestation  of  later  than  20
weeks  did  not  reduce  preterm  birth,  and  in  three  of  these  trials,  intravaginal
clindamycin  cream  administered  at  16--32  weeks'  gestation  was  associated  with  an
increase in adverse events (e.g., low birth weight and neonatal infections) in newborns
(346,349--351). Providers should be aware that intravaginal clindamycin cream might
be  associated  with  adverse  outcomes  if  used  in  the  latter  half  of  pregnancy.  HIV
Infection  BV  appears  to  recur  with  higher  frequency  in  HIV-positive  women  (352).
Patients who have BV and also are infected with HIV should receive the same treatment
regimen as those who are HIV negative.  Trichomoniasis is caused by the protozoan T.
vaginalis.  Some  men  who  are  infected  with  T.  vaginalis  might  not  have  symptoms;
others  have  NGU.  Some  women  have  symptoms  characterized  by  a  diffuse,
malodorous,  yellow-green  vaginal  discharge  with  vulvar  irritation.  However,  many
women  have  minimal  or  no  symptoms.  Because  of  the  high  prevalence  of
trichomoniasis  in  clinical  and  nonclinical  settings  (64,92,353,354),  testing  for  T.
vaginalis should be performed in women seeking care for vaginal discharge. Screening
for  T.  vaginalis  in  women  can  be  considered  in  those  at  high  risk  for  infection  (i.e.,
women who have new or multiple partners, have a history of STDs, exchange sex for
payment,  and  use  injection  drugs).  Diagnosis  of  vaginal  trichomoniasis  is  usually
performed by microscopy of vaginal secretions, but this method has a sensitivity of only
approximately  60%--70%  and  requires  immediate  evaluation  of  wet  preparation  slide
for  optimal  results.  FDA-cleared  tests  for  trichomoniasis  in  women  include  OSOM
Trichomonas  Rapid  Test  (Genzyme  Diagnostics,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts),  an
immunochromatographic  capillary  flow  dipstick  technology,  and  the  Affirm  VP  III
(Becton Dickenson, San Jose, California), a nucleic acid probe test that evaluates for T.
vaginalis,  G.  vaginalis,  and  C.  albicans.  Each  of  these  tests,  which  are  performed  on
vaginal secretions, have a sensitivity of >83% and a specificity of >97%. Both tests are
considered point-of-care diagnostics. The results of the OSOM Trichomonas Rapid Test
are  available  in  approximately  10  minutes,  whereas  results  of  the  Affirm  VP  III  are
available within 45 minutes. Although these tests tend to be more sensitive than those
requiring vaginal wet preparation, false positives might occur, especially in populations
with  a  low  prevalence  of  disease.  Culture  is  another  sensitive  and  highly  specific
commercially available method of diagnosis. Among women in whom trichomoniasis is
suspected but not confirmed by microscopy, vaginal secretions should be cultured for T.
vaginalis. While the sensitivity of a Pap test for T. vaginalis diagnosis is poor, use of a
liquid-based  testing  has  demonstrated  enhanced  sensitivity;  however,  false-positive
tests  can  occur,  and  confirmatory  testing  might  be  needed  in  some  circumstances
(355).  An  FDA-cleared  PCR  assay  for  detection  of  gonorrhea  and  chlamydial  infection
(Amplicor, manufactured by Roche Diagnostic Corp.) has been modified for T. vaginalis
detection  in  vaginal  or  endocervical  swabs  and  in  urine  from  women  and  men;
sensitivity  ranges  from  88%--97%  and  specificity  from  98%--99%  (356).  APTIMA  T.
vaginalis  Analyte  Specific  Reagents  (ASR;  manufactured  by  Gen-Probe,  Inc.)  also  can
detect  T.  vaginalis  RNA  by  transcription-mediated  amplification  using  the  same
instrumentation  platforms  available  for  the  FDA-cleared  APTIMA  Combo2  assay  for
diagnosis  of  gonorrhea  and  chlamydial  infection;  published  validation  studies  of  T.
vaginalis  ASR  found  sensitivity  ranging  from  74%--98%  and  specificity  of  87%--98%
(357--359). Laboratories that use the Gen-Probe APTIMA Combo2 test for detection of N.
gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  can  consider  adding  the  T.  vaginalis  ASR  to  their
testing  armentarium,  as  long  as  the  necessary  CLIA  verification  studies  have  been
conducted.   In  men,  wet  preparation  is  not  a  sensitive  test,  and  no  approved
point-of-care tests are available. Culture testing of urethral swab, urine, or semen is one
diagnostic  option;  however,  NAATs  (i.e.,  PCR  or  transcription-mediated  amplification
[TMA]) have superior sensitivity for T. vaginalis diagnosis in men (356,359). T. vaginalis
has not been found to infect oral sites, and rectal prevalence appears low in MSM (360).
Therefore, oral and rectal testing for T. vaginalis is not recommended. Recommended
Regimens Metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose OR Tinidazole 2 g orally in a single
dose  Alternative  Regimen  Metronidazole  500  mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  7  days*  *
Patients  should  be  advised  to  avoid  consuming  alcohol  during  treatment  with
metronidazole or tinidazole. Abstinence from alcohol use should continue for 24 hours
after  completion  of  metronidazole  or  72  hours  after  completion  of  tinidazole.  The
nitroimidazoles  comprise  the  only  class  of  drugs  useful  for  the  oral  or  parenteral
therapy of trichomoniasis. Of these drugs, metronidazole and tinidazole are available in
the  United  States  and  are  cleared  by  the  FDA  for  the  treatment  of  trichomoniasis.  In
randomized clinical trials, the recommended metronidazole regimens have resulted in
cure rates of approximately 90%--95%, and the recommended tinidazole regimen has
resulted in cure rates of approximately 86%--100%. The appropriate treatment of sex
partners might increase these reported rates. Randomized controlled trials comparing
single 2-g doses of metronidazole and tinidazole suggest that tinidazole is equivalent or
superior to metronidazole in achieving parasitologic cure and resolution of symptoms
(361).  Treatment  of  patients  and  sex  partners  results  in  relief  of  symptoms,
microbiologic  cure,  and  reduction  of  transmission.  Metronidazole  gel  is  considerably
less  efficacious  for  the  treatment  of  trichomoniasis  (<50%)  than  oral  preparations  of
metronidazole. Topically applied antimicrobials (e.g., metronidazole gel) are unlikely to
achieve therapeutic levels in the urethra or perivaginal glands; therefore, use of this gel
is  not  recommended.  Several  other  topically  applied  antimicrobials  occasionally  have
been  used  for  treatment  of  trichomoniasis;  however,  these  preparations  likely  are  no
more effective than metronidazole gel. Because of the high rate of reinfection among
patients in whom trichomoniasis was diagnosed (17% were reinfected within 3 months
in one study), rescreening for T. vaginalis at 3 months following initial infection can be
considered for sexually active women with trichomoniasis; the benefit of this approach,
however,  has  not  been  fully  evaluated  (64).  No  data  support  rescreening  in  men
diagnosed with T. vaginalis. While most recurrent T. vaginalis infections are thought to
result  from  having  sex  with  an  untreated  partner  (i.e.,  reinfection),  some  recurrent
cases  can  be  attributed  to  diminished  susceptibility  to  metronidazole.  Low-level
metronidazole  resistance  has  been  identified  in  2%--5%  of  cases  of  vaginal
trichomoniasis  (362,363),  but  high-level  resistance  only  rarely  occurs.  Fortunately,
infections caused by most of these organisms respond to tinidazole or higher doses of
metronidazole.  Tinidazole  has  a  longer  serum  half-life  and  reaches  higher  levels  in
genitourinary tissues than metronidazole. In addition, many T. vaginalis isolates have
lower  minimal  lethal  concentrations  (MLCs)  to  tinidazole  than  metronidazole.  If
treatment failure occurs with metronidazole 2-g single dose and reinfection is excluded,
the patient can be treated with metronidazole 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days. For
patients failing this regimen, treatment with tinidazole or metronidazole at 2 g orally for
5 days should be considered. If these therapies are not effective, further management
should  be  discussed  with  a  specialist.  The  consultation  should  ideally  include
determination  of  the  susceptibility  of  T.  vaginalis  to  metronidazole  and  tinidazole.
Consultation  and  T.  vaginalis  susceptibility  testing  is  available  from  CDC  (telephone:
404-718-4141;  website:  http://www.cdc.gov/std).  Sex  partners  of  patients  with  T.
vaginalis should be treated. Patients should be instructed to abstain from sex until they
and their sex partners are cured (i.e., when therapy has been completed and patient
and partner[s] are asymptomatic). Existing data suggest that patient-delivered partner
therapy might have a role in partner management for trichomoniasis; however, no one
partner  management  intervention  has  shown  superiority  over  another  in  reducing
reinfection rates (72,73). Although no data are available to guide treatment of the male
partners of women with nitroimidazole treatment failure, on the basis of expert opinion,
male partners should be evaluated and treated with either tinidazole in a single dose of
2 g orally or metronidazole twice a day at 500 mg orally for 7 days. Allergy, Intolerance,
and Adverse Reactions Metronidazole and tinidazole are both nitroimidazoles. Patients
with an immediate-type allergy to a nitroimidazole can be managed by metronidazole
desensitization in consultation with a specialist (364--366). Topical therapy with drugs
other than nitroimidazoles can be attempted, but cure rates are low (<50%). Pregnancy
Vaginal  trichomoniasis  has  been  associated  with  adverse  pregnancy  outcomes,
particularly premature rupture of membranes, preterm delivery, and low birth weight.
However, metronidazole treatment has not been shown to reduce perinatal morbidity.
Although some trials suggest the possibility of increased prematurity or low birth weight
after metronidazole treatment, limitations of the studies prevent definitive conclusions
regarding  risks  for  treatment  (367,368).  Treatment  of  T.  vaginalis  might  relieve
symptoms  of  vaginal  discharge  in  pregnant  women  and  might  prevent  respiratory  or
genital  infection  of  the  newborn  and  further  sexual  transmission.  Clinicians  should
counsel  patients  regarding  the  potential  risks  and  benefits  of  treatment  and
communicate  the  option  of  therapy  deferral  in  asymptomatic  pregnant  women  until
after  37  weeks'  gestation.  All  symptomatic  pregnant  women  should  not  only  be
considered  for  treatment  regardless  of  pregnancy  stage,  but  be  provided  careful
counseling  regarding  condom  use  and  the  continued  risk  of  sexual  transmission.
Women  can  be  treated  with  2  g  metronidazole  in  a  single  dose  at  any  stage  of
pregnancy. Multiple studies and meta-analyses have not demonstrated an association
between metronidazole use during pregnancy and teratogenic or mutagenic effects in
infants  (342,343,369).  The  safety  of  tinidazole  in  pregnant  women,  however,  has  not
been  well  evaluated.  In  lactating  women  who  are  administered  metronidazole,
withholding breastfeeding during treatment and for 12--24 hours after the last dose will
reduce the exposure of the infant to metronidazole. For women treated with tinidazole,
interruption of breastfeeding is recommended during treatment and for 3 days after the
last  dose.  HIV  Infection  There  is  increasing  evidence  for  epidemiologic  and  biologic
interaction  between  HIV  and  T.  vaginalis  (370--375).  T.  vaginalis  infection  in
HIV-infected women might enhance HIV transmission by increasing genital shedding of
the  virus  (376,377),  and  treatment  for  T.  vaginalis  has  been  shown  to  reduce  HIV
shedding  (376,377).  For  sexually  active  women  who  are  HIV-positive,  screening  for
trichomoniasis at entry into care with subsequent screening performed at least annually
is  recommended  based  on  the  reported  prevalence  of  T.  vaginalis,  the  effect  of
treatment  at  reducing  vaginal  HIV  shedding,  and  the  potential  complications  of
upper-genital-tract  infections  among  women  who  are  left  untreated  (130,370--375).
Rescreening  3  months  after  completion  of  therapy  should  be  considered  among
HIV-positive  women  with  trichomoniasis,  a  recommendation  based  on  the  high
proportion of recurrent or persistent infection and the association between HIV and T.
vaginalis  infection  (64,374,378).  A  recent  randomized  clinical  trial  involving  women
coinfected  with  trichomoniasis  and  HIV  demonstrated  that  a  single  dose  of
metronidazole 2 gm orally was not as effective as 500 mg twice daily for 7 days (379).
Therefore,  a  multi-dose  treatment  regimen  for  T.  vaginalis  can  be  considered  in
HIV-infected women.  VVC usually is caused by C. albicans, but occasionally is caused
by  other  Candida  sp.  or  yeasts.  Typical  symptoms  of  VVC  include  pruritus,  vaginal
soreness,  dyspareunia,  external  dysuria,  and  abnormal  vaginal  discharge.  None  of
these symptoms is specific for VVC. An estimated 75% of women will have at least one
episode of VVC, and 40%--45% will have two or more episodes within their lifetime. On
the basis of clinical presentation, microbiology, host factors, and response to therapy,
VVC can be classified as either uncomplicated or complicated (Box 3). Approximately
10%--20%  of  women  will  have  complicated  VVC  that  necessitates  diagnostic  and
therapeutic considerations. Diagnostic Considerations A diagnosis of Candida vaginitis
is  suggested  clinically  by  the  presence  of  external  dysuria  and  vulvar  pruritus,  pain,
swelling,  and  redness.  Signs  include  vulvar  edema,  fissures,  excoriations,  or  thick,
curdy  vaginal  discharge.  The  diagnosis  can  be  made  in  a  woman  who  has  signs  and
symptoms  of  vaginitis  when  either  1)  a  wet  preparation  (saline,  10%  KOH)  or  Gram
stain  of  vaginal  discharge  demonstrates  yeasts,  hyphae,  or  pseudohyphae  or  2)  a
culture  or  other  test  yields  a  yeast  species.  Candida  vaginitis  is  associated  with  a
normal vaginal pH (<4.5), and therefore, pH testing is not a useful diagnostic tool. Use
of  10%  KOH  in  wet  preparations  improves  the  visualization  of  yeast  and  mycelia  by
disrupting cellular material that might obscure the yeast or pseudohyphae. Examination
of  a  wet  mount  with  KOH  preparation  should  be  performed  for  all  women  with
symptoms or signs of VVC, and women with a positive result should receive treatment.
For  women  with  negative  wet  mounts  who  are  symptomatic,  vaginal  cultures  for
Candida  should  be  considered.  If  the  wet  mount  is  negative  and  Candida  cultures
cannot be done, empiric treatment can be considered for symptomatic women with any
sign of VVC on examination. Identifying Candida by culture in the absence of symptoms
or signs is not an indication for treatment, because approximately 10%--20% of women
harbor Candida sp. and other yeasts in the vagina. VVC can occur concomitantly with
STDs. Most healthy women with uncomplicated VVC have no identifiable precipitating
factors. Treatment Short-course topical formulations (i.e., single dose and regimens of
1--3  days)  effectively  treat  uncomplicated  VVC.  The  topically  applied  azole  drugs  are
more effective than nystatin. Treatment with azoles results in relief of symptoms and
negative  cultures  in  80%--90%  of  patients  who  complete  therapy.  Recommended
Regimens  Over-the-Counter  Intravaginal  Agents:  Butoconazole  2%  cream  5  g
intravaginally for 3 days OR Clotrimazole 1% cream 5 g intravaginally for 7--14 days OR
Clotrimazole  2%  cream  5  g  intravaginally  for  3  days  OR  Miconazole  2%  cream  5  g
intravaginally  for  7  days  OR  Miconazole  4%  cream  5  g  intravaginally  for  3  days  OR
Miconazole 100 mg vaginal suppository, one suppository for 7 days OR Miconazole 200
mg  vaginal  suppository,  one  suppository  for  3  days  OR  Miconazole  1,200  mg  vaginal
suppository, one suppository for 1 day OR Tioconazole 6.5% ointment 5 g intravaginally
in a single application Prescription Intravaginal Agents: Butoconazole 2% cream (single
dose  bioadhesive  product),  5  g  intravaginally  for  1  day  OR  Nystatin  100,000-unit
vaginal tablet, one tablet for 14 days OR Terconazole 0.4% cream 5 g intravaginally for
7 days OR Terconazole 0.8% cream 5 g intravaginally for 3 days OR Terconazole 80 mg
vaginal  suppository,  one  suppository  for  3  days  Oral  Agent:  Fluconazole  150  mg  oral
tablet,  one  tablet  in  single  dose  The  creams  and  suppositories  in  this  regimen  are
oil-based  and  might  weaken  latex  condoms  and  diaphragms.  Patients  and  providers
should  refer  to  condom  product  labeling  for  further  information.  Intravaginal
preparations  of  butaconazole,  clotrimazole,  miconazole,  and  tioconazole  are  available
over-the-counter  (OTC).  Women  whose  condition  has  previously  been  diagnosed  with
VVC are not necessarily more capable of diagnosing themselves; therefore, any woman
whose  symptoms  persist  after  using  an  OTC  preparation  or  who  has  a  recurrence  of
symptoms within 2 months should be evaluated with office-based testing. Unnecessary
or  inappropriate  use  of  OTC  preparations  is  common  and  can  lead  to  a  delay  in  the
treatment  of  other  vulvovaginitis  etiologies,  which  can  result  in  adverse  clinical
outcomes. Follow-Up Patients should be instructed to return for follow-up visits only if
symptoms  persist  or  recur  within  2  months  of  onset  of  the  initial  symptoms.
Management of Sex Partners VVC is not usually acquired through sexual intercourse; no
data support the treatment of sex partners. A minority of male sex partners might have
balanitis,  which  is  characterized  by  erythematous  areas  on  the  glans  of  the  penis  in
conjunction  with  pruritus  or  irritation.  These  men  benefit  from  treatment  with  topical
antifungal agents to relieve symptoms. Special Considerations Allergy, Intolerance, and
Adverse Reactions Topical agents usually cause no systemic side effects, although local
burning  or  irritation  might  occur.  Oral  agents  occasionally  cause  nausea,  abdominal
pain,  and  headache.  Therapy  with  the  oral  azoles  has  been  associated  rarely  with
abnormal elevations of liver enzymes. Clinically important interactions can occur when
these  oral  agents  are  administered  with  other  drugs,  including  astemizole,  calcium
channel  antagonists,  cisapride,  cyclosporin  A,  oral  hypoglycemic  agents,  phenytoin,
protease  inhibitors,  tacrolimus,  terfenadine,  theophylline,  trimetrexate,  rifampin,  and
warfarin.  Recurrent  Vulvovaginal  Candidiasis  (RVVC)  RVVC,  usually  defined  as  four  or
more  episodes  of  symptomatic  VVC  in  1  year,  affects  a  small  percentage  of  women
(<5%).  The  pathogenesis  of  RVVC  is  poorly  understood,  and  most  women  with  RVVC
have  no  apparent  predisposing  or  underlying  conditions.  Vaginal  cultures  should  be
obtained  from  patients  with  RVVC  to  confirm  the  clinical  diagnosis  and  to  identify
unusual  species  (including  nonalbicans  species),  particularly  Candida  glabrata.
Although C. glabrata and other nonalbicans Candidia species are observed in 10%--20%
of patients with RVVC, C. glabrata does not form pseudohyphae or hyphae and is not
easily  recognized  on  microscopy.  Conventional  antimycotic  therapies  are  not  as
effective  against  these  species  as  they  are  against  C.  albicans.  Treatment  Each
individual episode of RVVC caused by C. albicans responds well to short-duration oral or
topical  azole  therapy.  However,  to  maintain  clinical  and  mycologic  control,  some
specialists  recommend  a  longer  duration  of  initial  therapy  (e.g.,  7--14  days  of  topical
therapy or a 100-mg, 150-mg, or 200-mg oral dose of fluconazole every third day for a
total of 3 doses [day 1, 4, and 7]) to attempt mycologic remission before initiating a
maintenance antifungal regimen. Maintenance Regimens Oral fluconazole (i.e., 100-mg,
150-mg,  or  200-mg  dose)  weekly  for  6  months  is  the  first  line  of  treatment.  If  this
regimen  is  not  feasible,  topical  treatments  used  intermittently  as  a  maintenance
regimen can be considered. Suppressive maintenance antifungal therapies are effective
in  reducing  RVVC.  However,  30%--50%  of  women  will  have  recurrent  disease  after
maintenance  therapy  is  discontinued.  Routine  treatment  of  sex  partners  is
controversial. C. albicans azole resistance is rare in vaginal isolates, and susceptibility
testing is usually not warranted for individual treatment guidance. Severe VVC Severe
vulvovaginitis  (i.e.,  extensive  vulvar  erythema,  edema,  excoriation,  and  fissure
formation) is associated with lower clinical response rates in patients treated with short
courses  of  topical  or  oral  therapy.  Either  7--14  days  of  topical  azole  or  150  mg  of
fluconazole  in  two  sequential  doses  (second  dose  72  hours  after  initial  dose)  is
recommended.  Nonalbicans  VVC  The  optimal  treatment  of  nonalbicans  VVC  remains
unknown. Options include longer duration of therapy (7--14 days) with a nonfluconazole
azole drug (oral or topical) as first-line therapy. If recurrence occurs, 600 mg of boric
acid  in  a  gelatin  capsule  is  recommended,  administered  vaginally  once  daily  for  2
weeks. This regimen has clinical and mycologic eradication rates of approximately 70%
(380). If symptoms recur, referral to a specialist is advised. Compromised Host Women
with underlying debilitating medical conditions (e.g., those with uncontrolled diabetes
or  those  receiving  corticosteroid  treatment)  do  not  respond  as  well  to  short-term
therapies. Efforts to correct modifiable conditions should be made, and more prolonged
(i.e.,  7--14  days)  conventional  antimycotic  treatment  is  necessary.  Pregnancy  VVC
frequently  occurs  during  pregnancy.  Only  topical  azole  therapies,  applied  for  7  days,
are recommended for use among pregnant women. HIV Infection The incidence of VVC
in  HIV-infected  women  is  unknown.  Vaginal  Candida  colonization  rates  among
HIV-infected women are higher than among those for seronegative women with similar
demographic  characteristics  and  high-risk  behaviors,  and  the  colonization  rates
correlate  with  increasing  severity  of  immunosuppression.  Symptomatic  VVC  is  more
frequent
 in
 seropositive
 women
 and
 similarly
 correlates
 with
 severity
 of
immunodeficiency. In addition, among HIV-infected women, systemic azole exposure is
associated with the isolation of nonalbicans Candida species from the vagina. On the
basis of available data, therapy for VVC in HIV-infected women should not differ from
that for seronegative women. Although long-term prophylactic therapy with fluconazole
at a dose of 200 mg weekly has been effective in reducing C. albicans colonization and
symptomatic  VVC  (381),  this  regimen  is  not  recommended  for  routine  primary
prophylaxis  in  HIV-infected  women  in  the  absence  of  recurrent  VVC  (129).  Given  the
frequency  at  which  RVVC  occurs  in  the  immmunocompetent  healthy  population,  the
occurrence  of  RVVC  should  not  be  considered  an  indication  for  HIV  testing  among
women previously testing HIV negative. Although VVC is associated with increased HIV
seroconversion  in  HIV-negative  women  and  increased  HIV  cervicovaginal  levels  in
HIV-positive  women,  the  effect  of  treatment  for  VVC  on  HIV  acquisition  and
transmission remains unknown. PID comprises a spectrum of inflammatory disorders of
the upper female genital tract, including any combination of endometritis, salpingitis,
tubo-ovarian  abscess,  and  pelvic  peritonitis  (382).  Sexually  transmitted  organisms,
especially N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, are implicated in many cases; however,
microorganisms  that  comprise  the  vaginal  flora  (e.g.,  anaerobes,  G.  vaginalis,
Haemophilus  influenzae,  enteric  Gram-negative  rods,  and  Streptococcus  agalactiae)
also  have  been  associated  with  PID  (383).  In  addition,  cytomegalovirus  (CMV),  M.
hominis, U. urealyticum, and M. genitalium might be associated with some cases of PID
(263,384--386). All women who have acute PID should be tested for N. gonorrhoeae and
C.  trachomatis  and  should  be  screened  for  HIV  infection.  Acute  PID  is  difficult  to
diagnose because of the wide variation in the symptoms and signs. Many women with
PID  have  subtle  or  mild  symptoms.  Delay  in  diagnosis  and  treatment  probably
contributes to inflammatory sequelae in the upper reproductive tract. Laparoscopy can
be  used  to  obtain  a  more  accurate  diagnosis  of  salpingitis  and  a  more  complete
bacteriologic diagnosis. However, this diagnostic tool frequently is not readily available,
and  its  use  is  not  easy  to  justify  when  symptoms  are  mild  or  vague.  Moreover,
laparoscopy  will  not  detect  endometritis  and  might  not  detect  subtle  inflammation  of
the  fallopian  tubes.  Consequently,  a  diagnosis  of  PID  usually  is  based  on  clinical
findings. The clinical diagnosis of acute PID is imprecise (387,388). Data indicate that a
clinical diagnosis of symptomatic PID has a positive predictive value (PPV) for salpingitis
of 65%--90% compared with laparoscopy. The PPV of a clinical diagnosis of acute PID
depends  on  the  epidemiologic  characteristics  of  the  population,  with  higher  PPVs
among sexually active young women (particularly adolescents), patients attending STD
clinics, and those who live in other settings where the rates of gonorrhea or chlamydia
are high. Regardlesss of PPV, however, in all settings, no single historical, physical, or
laboratory  finding  is  both  sensitive  and  specific  for  the  diagnosis  of  acute  PID.
Combinations  of  diagnostic  findings  that  improve  either  sensitivity  (i.e.,  detect  more
women who have PID) or specificity (i.e., exclude more women who do not have PID) do
so  only  at  the  expense  of  the  other.  For  example,  requiring  two  or  more  findings
excludes  more  women  who  do  not  have  PID  but  also  reduces  the  number  of  women
with  PID  who  are  identified.  Many  episodes  of  PID  go  unrecognized.  Although  some
cases  are  asymptomatic,  others  are  not  diagnosed  because  the  patient  or  the
health-care provider fails to recognize the implications of mild or nonspecific symptoms
or signs (e.g., abnormal bleeding, dyspareunia, and vaginal discharge). Because of the
difficulty of diagnosis and the potential for damage to the reproductive health of women
(even  by  apparently  mild  or  subclinical  PID),  health-care  providers  should  maintain  a
low  threshold  for  the  diagnosis  of  PID  (382).  The  optimal  treatment  regimen  and
long-term outcome of early treatment of women with asymptomatic or subclinical PID
are unknown. The following recommendations for diagnosing PID are intended to help
health-care providers recognize when PID should be suspected and when they need to
obtain  additional  information  to  increase  diagnostic  certainty.  Diagnosis  and
management  of  other  common  causes  of  lower  abdominal  pain  (e.g.,  ectopic
pregnancy,  acute  appendicitis,  and  functional  pain)  are  unlikely  to  be  impaired  by
initiating  empiric  antimicrobial  therapy  for  PID.  Empiric  treatment  for  PID  should  be
initiated in sexually active young women and other women at risk for STDs if they are
experiencing pelvic or lower abdominal pain, if no cause for the illness other than PID
can be identified, and if one or more of the following minimum criteria are present on
pelvic examination: cervical motion tenderness
or uterine tenderness
or  adnexal  tenderness.  The  requirement  that  all  three  minimum  criteria  be
present before the initiation of empiric treatment could result in insufficient sensitivity
for  the  diagnosis  of  PID.  The  presence  of  signs  of  lower-genital--tract  inflammation
(predominance  of  leukocytes  in  vaginal  secretions,  cervical  exudates,  or  cervical
friability), in addition to one of the three minimum criteria, increases the specificity of
the  diagnosis.  Upon  deciding  whether  to  initiate  empiric  treatment,  clinicians  should
also  consider  the  risk  profile  of  the  patient  for  STDs.  More  elaborate  diagnostic
evaluation  frequently  is  needed  because  incorrect  diagnosis  and  management  of  PID
might cause unnecessary morbidity. One or more of the following additional criteria can
be used to enhance the specificity of the minimum criteria and support a diagnosis of
PID: oral temperature >101° F (>38.3° C); abnormal cervical or vaginal mucopurulent
discharge; presence of abundant numbers of WBC on saline microscopy of vaginal fluid;
elevated  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate;  elevated  C-reactive  protein;  and  laboratory
documentation of cervical infection with
N.  gonorrhoeae  or  C.  trachomatis.  Most  women  with  PID  have  either
mucopurulent cervical discharge or evidence of WBCs on a microscopic evaluation of a
saline  preparation  of  vaginal  fluid  (i.e.,  wet  prep).  If  the  cervical  discharge  appears
normal and no WBCs are observed on the wet prep of vaginal fluid, the diagnosis of PID
is unlikely, and alternative causes of pain should be considered. A wet prep of vaginal
fluid  offers  the  ability  to  detect  the  presence  of  concomitant  infections  (e.g.,  BV  and
trichomoniasis).  The  most  specific  criteria  for  diagnosing  PID  include:   endometrial
biopsy  with  histopathologic  evidence  of  endometritis;  transvaginal  sonography  or
magnetic  resonance  imaging  techniques  showing  thickened,  fluid-filled  tubes  with  or
without free pelvic fluid or tubo-ovarian complex, or Doppler studies suggesting pelvic
infection  (e.g.,  tubal  hyperemia);  or  laparoscopic  abnormalities  consistent  with  PID.  A
diagnostic evaluation that includes some of these more extensive procedures might be
warranted  in  some  cases.  Endometrial  biopsy  is  warranted  in  women  undergoing
laparoscopy who do not have visual evidence of salpingitis, because endometritis is the
only sign of PID for some women.  PID treatment regimens must provide empiric, broad
spectrum  coverage  of  likely  pathogens.  Several  antimicrobial  regimens  have  been
effective in achieving clinical and microbiologic cure in randomized clinical trials with
short-term follow-up. However, only a limited number of investigations have assessed
and  compared  these  regimens  with  regard  to  elimination  of  infection  in  the
endometrium  and  fallopian  tubes  or  determined  the  incidence  of  long-term
complications (e.g., tubal infertility and ectopic pregnancy) after antimicrobial regimens
(389--391).  All  regimens  used  to  treat  PID  should  also  be  effective  against  N.
gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  because  negative  endocervical  screening  for  these
organisms does not rule out upper-reproductive-tract infection. The need to eradicate
anaerobes from women who have PID has not been determined definitively. Anaerobic
bacteria have been isolated from the upper-reproductive tract of women who have PID,
and  data  from  in  vitro  studies  have  revealed  that  some  anaerobes  (e.g.,  Bacteroides
fragilis) can cause tubal and epithelial destruction. BV also is present in many women
who have PID (383,391). Until treatment regimens that do not adequately cover these
microbes have been demonstrated to prevent long-term sequelae (e.g., infertility and
ectopic  pregnancy)  as  successfully  as  the  regimens  that  are  effective  against  these
microbes, the use of regimens with anaerobic activity should be considered. Treatment
should  be  initiated  as  soon  as  the  presumptive  diagnosis  has  been  made  because
prevention of long-term sequelae is dependent on early administration of appropriate
antibiotics. When selecting a treatment regimen, health-care providers should consider
availability, cost, patient acceptance, and antimicrobial susceptibility (392). In women
with  PID  of  mild  or  moderate  clinical  severity,  outpatient  therapy  yields  short-  and
long-term  clinical  outcomes  similar  to  inpatient  therapy.  The  decision  of  whether
hospitalization  is  necessary  should  be  based  on  the  judgment  of  the  provider  and
whether the patient meets any of the following suggested criteria: surgical emergencies
(e.g.,  appendicitis)  cannot  be  excluded;  the  patient  is  pregnant;  the  patient  does  not
respond  clinically  to  oral  antimicrobial  therapy;  the  patient  is  unable  to  follow  or
tolerate  an  outpatient  oral  regimen;  the  patient  has  severe  illness,  nausea  and
vomiting,  or  high  fever;  or  the  patient  has  a  tubo-ovarian  abscess.  No  evidence  is
available to suggest that adolescents benefit from hospitalization for treatment of PID.
The  decision  to  hospitalize  adolescents  with  acute  PID  should  be  based  on  the  same
criteria used for older women. Younger women with mild-to-moderate acute PID have
similar  outcomes  with  either  outpatient  or  inpatient  therapy,  and  clinical  response  to
outpatient treatment is similar among younger and older women.  For women with PID
of  mild  or  moderate  severity,  parenteral  and  oral  therapies  appear  to  have  similar
clinical  efficacy.  Many  randomized  trials  have  demonstrated  the  efficacy  of  both
parenteral and oral regimens (390,391,393). Clinical experience should guide decisions
regarding transition to oral therapy, which usually can be initiated within 24--48 hours
of  clinical  improvement.  In  women  with  tubo-ovarian  abscesses,  at  least  24  hours  of
direct  inpatient  observation  is  recommended.  Recommended  Parenteral  Regimen  A
Cefotetan 2 g IV every 12 hours OR Cefoxitin 2 g IV every 6 hours PLUS Doxycycline
100  mg  orally  or  IV  every  12  hours  Because  of  the  pain  associated  with  intravenous
infusion,  doxycycline  should  be  administered  orally  when  possible.  Oral  and  IV
administration of doxycycline provide similar bioavailability. Parenteral therapy can be
discontinued  24  hours  after  clinical  improvement,  but  oral  therapy  with  doxycycline
(100  mg  twice  a  day)  should  continue  to  complete  14  days  of  therapy.  When
tubo-ovarian abscess is present, clindamycin or metronidazole with doxycycline can be
used  for  continued  therapy  rather  than  doxycycline  alone  because  this  regimen
provides more effective anaerobic coverage. Limited data are available to support the
use of other second- or third-generation cephalosporins (e.g., ceftizoxime, cefotaxime,
and  ceftriaxone),  which  also  might  be  effective  therapy  for  PID  and  could  potentially
replace  cefotetan  or  cefoxitin.  However,  these  cephalosporins  are  less  active  than
cefotetan or cefoxitin against anaerobic bacteria. Recommended Parenteral Regimen B
Clindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hours PLUS Gentamicin loading dose IV or IM (2 mg/kg
of  body  weight),  followed  by  a  maintenance  dose  (1.5  mg/kg)  every  8  hours.  Single
daily  dosing  (3--5  mg/kg)  can  be  substituted.  Although  use  of  a  single  daily  dose  of
gentamicin  has  not  been  evaluated  for  the  treatment  of  PID,  it  is  efficacious  in
analogous  situations.  Parenteral  therapy  can  be  discontinued  24  hours  after  clinical
improvement; ongoing oral therapy should consist of doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a
day, or clindamycin 450 mg orally four times a day to complete a total of 14 days of
therapy. When tubo-ovarian abscess is present, clindamycin should be continued rather
than  doxycycline,  because  clindamycin  provides  more  effective  anaerobic  coverage.
Alternative Parenteral Regimens Limited data are available to support the use of other
parenteral  regimens.  The  following  regimen  has  been  investigated  in  at  least  one
clinical trial and has broad-spectrum coverage (394). Alternative Parenteral Regimens
Ampicillin/Sulbactam 3 g IV every 6 hours PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every
12 hours Ampicillin/sulbactam plus doxycycline is effective against C.  trachomatis,  N.
gonorrhoeae,  and  anaerobes  in  women  with  tubo-ovarian  abscess.  One  trial
demonstrated  high  short-term  clinical  cure  rates  with  azithromycin,  either  as
monotherapy for 1 week (500 mg IV for 1 or 2 doses followed by 250 mg orally for 5--6
days)  or  combined  with  a  12-day  course  of  metronidazole  (395).   Outpatient,  oral
therapy  can  be  considered  for  women  with  mild-to-moderately  severe  acute  PID,
because the clinical outcomes among women treated with oral therapy are similar to
those treated with parenteral therapy (390). The following regimens provide coverage
against  the  frequent  etiologic  agents  of  PID.  Patients  who  do  not  respond  to  oral
therapy within 72 hours should be reevaluated to confirm the diagnosis and should be
administered  parenteral  therapy  on  either  an  outpatient  or  inpatient  basis.
Recommended Regimen  Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM in a single dose PLUS Doxycycline 100
mg orally twice a day for 14 days WITH or WITHOUT Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice
a  day  for  14  days  OR  Cefoxitin  2  g  IM  in  a  single  dose  and  Probenecid,  1  g  orally
administered concurrently in a single dose PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day
for 14 days WITH or WITHOUT Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day for 14 days OR
Other parenteral third-generation cephalosporin (e.g., ceftizoxime or cefotaxime) PLUS
Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 14 days WITH or WITHOUT Metronidazole 500
mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  14  days  The  optimal  choice  of  a  cephalosporin  is  unclear;
although  cefoxitin  has  better  anaerobic  coverage,  ceftriaxone  has  better  coverage
against N. gonorrhoeae. A single dose of cefoxitin is effective in obtaining short-term
clinical  response  in  women  who  have  PID.  However,  the  theoretical  limitations  in
coverage  of  anaerobes  by  recommended  cephalosporin  antimicrobials  might  require
the  addition  of  metronidazole  to  the  treatment  regimen  (393).  Adding  metronidazole
also will effectively treat BV, which is frequently associated with PID. No data have been
published regarding the use of oral cephalosporins for the treatment of PID.  Alternative
Oral  Regimens  Although  information  regarding  other  outpatient  regimens  is  limited,
other regimens have undergone at least one clinical trial and have demonstrated broad
spectrum coverage. In a single clinical trial, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and doxycycline
were  effective  together  in  obtaining  short-term  clinical  response  (394);  however,
gastrointestinal symptoms might limit compliance with this regimen. Azithromycin has
demonstrated  short-term  effectiveness  in  one  randomized  trial  (395),  and  in  another
study, it was effective when used combination with ceftriaxone 250 mg IM single dose
and  azithromycin  1  g  orally  once  a  week  for  2  weeks  (396).  When  considering
alternative  regimens,  the  addition  of  metronidazole  should  be  considered  because
anaerobic organisms are suspected in the etiology of PID and metronidazole will also
treat  BV.  As  a  result  of  the  emergence  of  quinolone-resistant  Neisseria  gonorrhoeae,
regimens that include a quinolone agent are no longer recommended for the treatment
of  PID.  If  parenteral  cephalosporin  therapy  is  not  feasible,  use  of  fluoroquinolones
(levofloxacin 500 mg orally once daily or ofloxacin 400 mg twice daily for 14 days) with
or without metronidazole (500 mg orally twice daily for 14 days) can be considered if
the community prevalence and individual risk for gonorrhea are low. Diagnostic tests
for gonorrhea must be performed before instituting therapy and the patient managed
as follows if the test is positive. If the culture for gonorrhea is positive, treatment should
be  based  on  results  of  antimicrobial  susceptibility.  If  the  isolate  is  determined  to  be
quinolone-resistant
N. gonorrhoeae (QRNG) or if antimicrobial susceptibility cannot be assessed (e.g.,
if only NAAT testing is available), parenteral cephalosporin is recommended. However,
if  cephalosporin  therapy  is  not  feasible,  the  addition  of  azithromycin  2  g  orally  as  a
single  dose  to  a  quinolone-based  PID  regimen  is  recommended.  Patients  should
demonstrate substantial clinical improvement (e.g., defervescence; reduction in direct
or  rebound  abdominal  tenderness;  and  reduction  in  uterine,  adnexal,  and  cervical
motion  tenderness)  within  3  days  after  initiation  of  therapy.  Patients  who  do  not
improve  within  this  period  usually  require  hospitalization,  additional  diagnostic  tests,
and surgical intervention. If no clinical improvement has occurred within 72 hours after
outpatient  oral  or  parenteral  therapy,  further  assessment  should  be  performed.
Subsequent  hospitalization  and  an  assessment  of  the  antimicrobial  regimen  and
diagnostics  (including  the  consideration  of  diagnostic  laparoscopy  for  alternative
diagnoses)  are  recommended  in  women  without  clinical  improvement.  Women  with
documented chlamydial or gonococcal infections have a high rate of reinfection within 6
months  of  treatment.  Repeat  testing  of  all  women  who  have  been  diagnosed  with
chlamydia  or  gonorrhea  is  recommended  3--6  months  after  treatment,  regardless  of
whether  their  sex  partners  were  treated  (267).  All  women  diagnosed  with  acute  PID
should be offered HIV testing. Male sex partners of women with PID should be examined
and treated if they had sexual contact with the patient during the 60 days preceding
the  patient's  onset  of  symptoms.  If  a  patient's  last  sexual  intercourse  was  >60  days
before onset of symptoms or diagnosis, the patient's most recent sex partner should be
treated. Patients should be instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until therapy is
completed and until they and their sex partners no longer have symptoms. Evaluation
and treatment are imperative because of the risk for reinfection of the patient and the
strong likelihood of urethral gonococcal or chlamydial infection in the sex partner. Male
partners  of  women  who  have  PID  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  and/or  N.  gonorrhoeae
frequently are asymptomatic.  Sex partners should be treated empirically with regimens
effective against both of these infections, regardless of the etiology of PID or pathogens
isolated  from  the  infected  woman.  Even  in  clinical  settings  in  which  only  women  are
treated, arrangements should be made to provide care or appropriate referral for male
sex  partners  of  women  who  have  PID  (see  Partner  Management).  Expedited  partner
treatment  and  enhanced  patient  referral  (see  Partner  Management)  are  alternative
approaches  to  treating  male  partners  of  women  who  have  chlamydia  or  gonococcal
infections (68,69). Screening and treating sexually active women for chlamydia reduces
their risk for PID (272). Although BV is associated with PID, whether the incidence of PID
can  be  reduced  by  identifying  and  treating  women  with  BV  is  unclear  (383,391).
Because of the high risk for maternal morbidity and preterm delivery, pregnant women
who have suspected PID should be hospitalized and treated with parenteral antibiotics.
Differences  in  the  clinical  manifestations  of  PID  between  HIV-infected  women  and
HIV-negative women have not been well delineated. In previous observational studies,
HIV-infected  women  with  PID  were  more  likely  to  require  surgical  intervention;  more
comprehensive  observational  and  controlled  studies  now  have  demonstrated  that
HIV-infected women with PID have similar symptoms when compared with uninfected
controls (397--399), except they were more likely to have a tubo-ovarian abscess; both
groups  of  women  responded  equally  well  to  standard  parenteral  and  oral  antibiotic
regimens.  The  microbiologic  findings  for  HIV-positive  and  HIV-negative  women  were
similar,  except  HIV-infected  women  had  higher  rates  of  concomitant  M.  hominis,
candida,  streptococcal,  and  HPV  infections  and  HPV-related  cytologic  abnormalities.
Regardlesss of these data, whether the management of immunodeficient HIV-infected
women  with  PID  requires  more  aggressive  interventions  (e.g.,  hospitalization  or
parenteral  antimicrobial  regimens)  has  not  been  determined.  IUDs  are  popular
contraceptive  choices  for  women.  Both  levonorgestrel  and  copper-containing  devices
are marketed in the United States. The risk for PID associated with IUD use is primarily
confined  to  the  first  3  weeks  after  insertion  and  is  uncommon  thereafter  (400,401).
Given the popularity of IUDs, practitioners might encounter PID in IUD users. Evidence
is insufficient to recommend that the removal of IUDs in women diagnosed with acute
PID. However, caution should be exercised if the IUD remains in place, and close clinical
follow-up  is  mandatory.  The  rate  of  treatment  failure  and  recurrent  PID  in  women
continuing  to  use  an  IUD  is  unknown,  and  no  data  have  been  collected  regarding
treatment outcomes by type of IUD (e.g., copper or levonorgestrel). Acute epididymitis
is a clinical syndrome consisting of pain, swelling, and inflammation of the epididymis
that lasts <6 weeks (402). Chronic epididymitis is characterized by a ≥6 week history of
symptoms  of  discomfort  and/or  pain  in  the  scrotum,  testicle,  or  epididymis.  In  most
cases  of  acute  epididymitis,  the  testis  is  also  involved  in  the  process  ---  a  condition
referred  to  as  epididymo-orchitis.  Chronic  epididymitis  has  been  subcategorized  into
inflammatory  chronic  epididymitis,  obstructive  chronic  epididymitis,  and  chronic
epididymalgia (403).  Among sexually active men aged <35 years, acute epididymitis is
most frequently caused by C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae. Acute epididymitis caused
by  sexually  transmitted  enteric  organisms  (e.g.,  Escherichia  coli  and  Pseudomonas
spp.)  also  occurs  among  men  who  are  the  insertive  partner  during  anal  intercourse.
Sexually  transmitted  acute  epididymitis  usually  is  accompanied  by  urethritis,  which
frequently is asymptomatic. In men aged >35 years, sexually transmitted epididymitis
is  uncommon,  whereas  bacteriuria  secondary  to  obstructive  urinary  disease  (e.g.,
benign  prostatic  hyperplasia)  is  more  common.  In  this  older  population,  nonsexually
transmitted  epididymitis  is  associated  with  urinary  tract  instrumentation  or  surgery,
systemic  disease,  and  immunosuppression.   Chronic  infectious  epididymitis  is  most
frequently seen in conditions associated with granulomatous reaction; Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (TB) is the most common granulomatous disease affecting the epididymis.
Up  to  25%  of  patients  can  have  bilateral  disease,  with  ultrasound  demonstrating  an
enlarged  hyperemic  epididymis  with  multiple  cysts  and  calcifications.  Tuberculous
epididymitis  should  be  suspected  in  all  patients  with  a  known  history  of  or  recent
exposure  to  TB  or  in  patients  whose  clinical  status  worsens  despite  appropriate
antibiotic  treatment.  Men  who  have  acute  epididymitis  typically  have  unilateral
testicular  pain  and  tenderness;  hydrocele  and  palpable  swelling  of  the  epididymis
usually are present. Although the inflammation and swelling usually begin in the tail of
the epididymis, they can spread to involve the rest of the epididymis and testicle. The
spermatic cord is usually tender and swollen. Testicular torsion, a surgical emergency,
should be considered in all cases, but it occurs more frequently among adolescents and
in  men  without  evidence  of  inflammation  or  infection.  Emergency  testing  for  torsion
might be indicated when the onset of pain is sudden, pain is severe, or the test results
available  during  the  initial  examination  do  not  support  a  diagnosis  of  urethritis  or
urinary-tract infection. If the diagnosis is questionable, a urologist should be consulted
immediately because testicular viability might be compromised. Radionuclide scanning
of  the  scrotum  is  the  most  accurate  radiologic  method  of  diagnosis,  but  it  is  not
routinely  available.  Although  ultrasound  is  primarily  used  for  ruling  out  torsion  of  the
spermatic cord in cases of acute scrotum swelling, it will often demonstrate epididymal
hyperemia  and  swelling  in  men  with  epididymitis.  However,  differentiation  between
testicular  torsion  and  epididymitis  must  be  made  on  the  basis  of  clinical  evaluation,
because  partial  spermatic  cord  torsion  can  mimic  epididymitis  on  scrotal  ultrasound.
Ultrasound provides minimal utility for men with a clinical presentation consistent with
epididymitis;  a  negative  ultrasound  does  not  alter  physician  management  of  clinical
epididymitis.  Ultrasound,  therefore,  should  be  reserved  for  patients  with  scrotal  pain
who  cannot  be  diagnosed  accurately  by  physical  examination,  history,  and  objective
laboratory findings.  The evaluation of men for epididymitis should include one of the
following:  Gram stain of urethral secretions demonstrating ≥5 WBC per oil immersion
field. Gram stain is the preferred rapid diagnostic test for evaluating urethritis because
it is highly sensitive and specific for documenting both urethritis and the presence or
absence  of  gonococcal  infection.  Gonococcal  infection  is  established  by  documenting
the  presence  of  WBC  containing  intracellular  Gram-negative  diplococci  on  urethral
Gram  stain.  Positive  leukocyte  esterase  test  on  first-void  urine  or  microscopic
examination of first-void urine sediment demonstrating ≥10 WBC per high power field.
 Culture,  nucleic  acid  hybridization  tests,  and  NAATs  are  available  for  the
detection  of  both  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis.  Culture  and  nucleic  acid
hybridization tests require urethral swab specimens, whereas amplification tests can be
performed  on  urine  or  urethral  specimens.  Because  of  their  higher  sensitivity,
amplification tests are preferred for the detection of C. trachomatis. Depending on the
risk,  patients  whose  conditions  are  associated  with  acquiring  an  STD  should  receive
testing for other STDs.  Empiric therapy is indicated before laboratory test results are
available. The goals of treatment of acute epididymitis caused by C. trachomatis or N.
gonorrhoeae  are  1)  microbiologic  cure  of  infection,  2)  improvement  of  signs  and
symptoms,  3)  prevention  of  transmission  to  others,  and  4)  a  decrease  in  potential
complications  (e.g.,  infertility  or  chronic  pain).  As  an  adjunct  to  therapy,  bed  rest,
scrotal elevation, and analgesics are recommended until fever and local inflammation
have  subsided.  Because  empiric  therapy  is  often  initiated  before  laboratory  tests  are
available, all patients should receive ceftriaxone plus doxycycline for the initial therapy
of epididymitis. Additional therapy can include a fluoroquinolone if acute epididymitis is
not found to be caused by gonorrhea by NAAT or if the infection is most likely caused
by enteric organisms. For men who are at risk for both sexually transmitted and enteric
organisms  (e.g.,  MSM  who  report  insertive  anal  intercourse),  ceftriaxone  with  a
fluoroquinolone are recommended.  Recommended Regimens  Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM
in  a  single  dose  PLUS  Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  10  days  For  acute
epididymitis most likely caused by enteric organisms  Levofloxacin 500 mg orally once
daily for 10 days OR Ofloxacin 300 mg orally twice a day for 10 days Although most
patients  can  be  treated  on  an  out-patient  basis,  hospitalization  should  be  considered
when  severe  pain  suggests  other  diagnoses  (e.g.,  torsion,  testicular  infarction,  or
abscess)  or  when  patients  are  unable  or  unlikely  to  comply  with  an  antimicrobial
regimen. Because high fever is uncommon and indicates a complicated infection, these
patients  should  be  admitted  for  further  evaluation.   Patients  should  be  instructed  to
return to their health-care providers if their symptoms fail to improve within 48 hours of
the  initiation  of  treatment.  Signs  and  symptoms  of  epididymitis  that  do  not  subside
within  3  days  requires  re-evaluation  of  the  diagnosis  and  therapy.  Swelling  and
tenderness that persist after completion of antimicrobial therapy should be evaluated
comprehensively.  Differential  diagnoses  include  tumor,  abscess,  infarction,  testicular
cancer,  TB,  and  fungal  epididymitis.  Patients  who  have  acute  epididymitis  that  is
confirmed  or  suspected  to  be  caused  by  N.  gonorrhoeae  or  C.  trachomatis  should  be
instructed to refer sex partners for evaluation and treatment if their contact with the
index patient was within the 60 days preceding onset of their own symptoms. Patients
should be instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until they and their sex partners
have been adequately treated (i.e., until therapy is completed and patient and partners
no longer have symptoms).  Patients who have uncomplicated acute epididymitis and
also are infected with HIV should receive the same treatment regimen as those who are
HIV negative. Other etiologic agents have been implicated in acute epididymitis in HIV
infection
 including
 CMV,
 salmonella,
 toxoplasmosis,
 Ureaplasma
 urealyticum,
Corynebacterium sp., Mycoplasma sp., and Mima polymorpha. Fungi and mycobacteria
are  also  more  likely  to  cause  acute  epididymitis  in  immunosuppressed  men  than  in
immunocompetent men. More than 100 types of HPV exist, more than 40 of which can
infect  the  genital  area.  Most  HPV  infections  are  asymptomatic,  unrecognized,  or
subclinical.  Oncogenic,  or  high-risk  HPV  types  (e.g.,  HPV  types  16  and  18),  are  the
cause of cervical cancers. These HPV types are also associated with other anogenital
cancers in men and women, including penile, vulvar, vaginal, and anal cancer, as well a
subset of oropharyngeal cancers (404). Nononcogenic, or low-risk HPV types (e.g., HPV
types 6 and 11), are the cause of genital warts and recurrent respiratory papillomatosis.
Asymptomatic genital HPV infection is common and usually self-limited; it is estimated
that more than 50% of sexually active persons become infected at least once in their
lifetime  (405).  Persistent  oncogenic  HPV  infection  is  the  strongest  risk  factor  for
development of precancers and cancers.  HPV tests are available for women aged >30
years undergoing cervical cancer screening. These tests should not be used for men,
for women <20 years of age, or as a general test for STDs. These HPV tests detect viral
nucleic acid (i.e., DNA or RNA) or capsid protein. Four tests have been approved by the
FDA for use in the United States: the HC II High-Risk HPV test (Qiagen), HC II Low-Risk
HPV test (Qiagen), Cervista HPV 16/18 test, and Cervista HPV High-Risk test (Hologics).
Treatment  is  directed  to  the  macroscopic  (i.e.,  genital  warts)  or  pathologic  (i.e,
precancerous)  lesions  caused  by  infection.  Subclinical  genital  HPV  infection  typically
clears  spontaneously,  and  therefore  specific  antiviral  therapy  is  not  recommended  to
eradicate HPV infection. In the absence of lesions, treatment is not recommended for
subclinical  genital  HPV  infection  whether  it  is  diagnosed  by  colposcopy,  acetic  acid
application, or by laboratory tests for HPV DNA. Treatment also is not recommended for
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 1 (CIN1). Two HPV vaccines are licensed in the United
States:  a  bivalent  vaccine  (Cervarix)  containing  HPV  types  16  and  18  and  a
quadrivalent vaccine (Gardasil) vaccine containing HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18. Both
vaccines offer protection against the HPV types that cause 70% of cervical cancers (i.e.,
types 16 and 18), and the quadrivalent HPV vaccine also protects against the types that
cause 90% of genital warts (i.e., types 6 and 11). Either vaccine can be administered to
girls aged 11--12 years and can be administered to those as young as 9 years of age
(15,16);  girls  and  women  ages  13--26  years  who  have  not  started  or  completed  the
vaccine series also should receive the vaccine. HPV vaccine is indicated for girls in this
age group, because benefit is greatest if it is administered before the onset of sexual
activity. The quadrivalent (Gardasil) HPV vaccine can also be used in males aged 9--26
years to prevent genital warts (17). Administering the vaccine to boys before the onset
of sexual activity is optimal. Both HPV vaccines are administered as a 3-dose series of
IM  injections  over  a  6-month  period,  with  the  second  and  third  doses  given  1--2  and
then 6 months after the first dose. Ideally, the same vaccine product should be used for
the entire 3-dose series. HPV vaccine is available for eligible children and adolescents
aged <19 years through the Vaccines for Children (VFC) program (available by calling
CDC  INFO  [800-232-4636]).  Women  who  have  received  HPV  vaccine  should  continue
routine cervical cancer screening because 30% of cervical cancers are caused by HPV
types  other  than  16  or  18.  In  the  United  States,  the  vaccines  are  not  licensed  or
recommended for use in women >26 years of age. No published data are available on
the  effectiveness,  programmatic  requirements,  or  cost-effectiveness  of  administering
the HPV vaccine in STD clinic settings. Of genital warts, 90% are caused by HPV 6 or 11.
HPV types 6 or 11 are commonly found before, or at the time of, detection of genital
warts (406). HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, and 35 are found occasionally in visible genital
warts  (usually  as  coinfections  with  HPV  6  or  11)  and  can  be  associated  with  foci  of
high-grade  intraepithelial  neoplasia,  particularly  in  persons  who  are  infected  with  HIV
infection.  In  addition  to  warts  on  genital  areas,  HPV  types  6  and  11  have  been
associated with conjunctival, nasal, oral, and laryngeal warts. Genital warts are usually
asymptomatic, but depending on the size and anatomic location, they can be painful or
pruritic. Genital warts are usually flat, papular, or pedunculated growths on the genital
mucosa. Genital warts occur commonly at certain anatomic sites, including around the
introitus in women, under the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and on the shaft of
the circumcised penis. Genital warts can also occur at multiple sites in the anogenital
epithelium  or  within  the  anogenital  tract  (e.g.,  cervix,  vagina,  urethra,  perineum,
perianal  skin,  and  scrotum).  Intra-anal  warts  are  observed  predominantly  in  persons
who have had receptive anal intercourse, but they can also occur in men and women
who do not have a history of anal sexual contact.  Diagnosis of genital warts is usually
clinical,  made  by  visual  inspection.  Genital  warts  can  be  confirmed  by  biopsy,  which
might  be  indicated  if  1)  the  diagnosis  is  uncertain;  2)  the  lesions  do  not  respond  to
standard therapy; 3) the disease worsens during therapy; 4) the lesion is atypical; 5)
the patient has comprised immunity; or 6) the warts are pigmented, indurated, fixed,
bleeding, or ulcerated. Genital warts are usually asymptomatic, but depending on the
size  and  anatomic  location,  they  might  be  painful  or  pruritic.  The  use  of  HPV  DNA
testing for genital wart diagnosis is not recommended, because test results would not
alter clinical management of the condition. The application of 3%--5% acetic acid, which
causes  skin  color  to  turn  white,  has  been  used  by  some  providers  to  detect
HPV-infected genital mucosa. However, acetic acid application is not a specific test for
HPV  infection.  Therefore,  the  routine  use  of  this  procedure  for  screening  to  detect
mucosal changes attributed to HPV infection is not recommended.  The primary reason
for treating genital warts is the amelioration of symptoms (including relieving cosmetic
concerns) and ultimately, removal of the warts. In most patients, treatment can induce
wart-free  periods.  If  left  untreated,  visible  genital  warts  can  resolve  on  their  own,
remain unchanged, or increase in size or number. Available therapies for genital warts
likely reduce, but probably do not eradicate, HPV infectivity. Whether the reduction in
HPV  viral  DNA  resulting  from  treatment  reduces  future  transmission  remains  unclear.
No  evidence  indicates  that  the  presence  of  genital  warts  or  their  treatment  is
associated with the development of cervical cancer. Treatment of genital warts should
be guided by the preference of the patient, available resources, and the experience of
the  health-care  provider.  No  definitive  evidence  suggests  that  any  of  the  available
treatments are superior to any other, and no single treatment is ideal for all patients or
all warts. The use of locally developed and monitored treatment algorithms has been
associated  with  improved  clinical  outcomes  and  should  be  encouraged.  Because  of
uncertainty  regarding  the  effect  of  treatment  on  future  transmission  of  HPV  and  the
possibility of spontaneous resolution, an acceptable alternative for some persons is to
forego treatment and wait for spontaneous resolution. Factors that influence selection
of  treatment  include  wart  size,  wart  number,  anatomic  site  of  the  wart,  wart
morphology, patient preference, cost of treatment, convenience, adverse effects, and
provider experience. Factors that might affect response to therapy include the presence
of  immunosuppression  and  compliance  with  therapy,  which  can  consist  of  either  a
single treatment or complete course of treatment. In general, warts located on moist
surfaces  or  in  intertriginous  areas  respond  best  to  topical  treatment.  The  treatment
modality should be changed if a patient has not improved substantially after a complete
course of treatment or if side effects are severe. Most genital warts respond within 3
months of therapy. The response to treatment and any side effects should be evaluated
throughout  the  course  of  therapy.  Complications  occur  rarely  when  treatment  is
administered properly. Patients should be warned that persistent hypopigmentation or
hyperpigmentation  occurs  commonly  with  ablative  modalities  and  has  also  been
described with immune modulating therapies (imiquimod). Depressed or hypertrophic
scars are uncommon but can occur, especially if the patient has had insufficient time to
heal  between  treatments.  Rarely,  treatment  can  result  in  disabling  chronic  pain
syndromes (e.g., vulvodynia and hyperesthesia of the treatment site) or, in the case of
anal  warts,  painful  defecation  or  fistulas.  A  limited  number  of  case  reports  of  severe
systemic  effects  resulting  from  treatment  with  podophyllin  resin  and  interferon  have
been  documented.  Treatment  regimens  are  classified  into  patient-applied  and
provider-applied modalities. Patient-applied modalities are preferred by some patients
because they can be administered in the privacy of the patient's home. To ensure that
patient-applied  modalities  are  effective,  patients  must  comply  with  the  treatment
regimen  and  must  be  capable  of  identifying  and  reaching  all  genital  warts.  Follow-up
visits  are  not  required  for  persons  using  patient-applied  therapy.  However,  follow-up
visits after several weeks of therapy enable providers to answer any questions patients
might  have  about  the  use  of  the  medication  and  any  side  effects  they  have
experienced;  follow-up  visits  also  facilitate  the  assessment  of  a  patient's  response  to
treatment.   Recommended  Regimens  for  External  Genital  Warts  Patient-Applied:
Podofilox 0.5% solution or gel OR Imiquimod 5% cream OR Sinecatechins 15% ointment
Provider--Administered:  Cryotherapy  with  liquid  nitrogen  or  cryoprobe.  Repeat
applications every 1--2 weeks.  OR Podophyllin resin 10%--25% in a compound tincture
of  benzoin   OR  Trichloroacetic  acid  (TCA)  or  Bichloroacetic  acid  (BCA)  80%--90%   OR
Surgical  removal  either  by  tangential  scissor  excision,  tangential  shave  excision,
curettage,  or  electrosurgery.   Podofilox  is  an  antimitotic  drug  that  destroys  warts,  is
relatively inexpensive, easy to use, safe, and self-applied. Podofilox solution should be
applied with a cotton swab, or podofilox gel with a finger, to visible genital warts twice
a  day  for  3  days,  followed  by  4  days  of  no  therapy.  This  cycle  can  be  repeated,  as
necessary, for up to four cycles. The total wart area treated should not exceed 10 cm2,
and the total volume of podofilox should be limited to 0.5 mL per day. If possible, the
health-care  provider  should  apply  the  initial  treatment  to  demonstrate  the  proper
application technique and identify which warts should be treated. Mild to moderate pain
or  local  irritation  might  develop  after  treatment.  The  safety  of  podofilox  during
pregnancy has not been established.  Imiquimod is a topically active immune enhancer
that stimulates production of interferon and other cytokines. Imiquimod cream should
be  applied  once  daily  at  bedtime,  three  times  a  week  for  up  to  16  weeks  (407).  The
treatment area should be washed with soap and water 6--10 hours after the application.
Local
 inflammatory
 reactions,
 including
 redness,
 irritation,
 induration,
ulceration/erosions,  and  vesicles,  are  common  with  the  use  of  imiquimod,  and
hypopigmentation  has  also  been  described  (408).  Imiquimod  might  weaken  condoms
and  vaginal  diaphragms.  The  safety  of  imiquimod  during  pregnancy  has  not  been
established.   Sinecatechin  ointment,  a  green-tea  extract  with  an  active  product
(catechins),  should  be  applied  three  times  daily  (0.5-cm  strand  of  ointment  to  each
wart)  using  a  finger  to  ensure  coverage  with  a  thin  layer  of  ointment  until  complete
clearance  of  warts.  This  product  should  not  be  continued  for  longer  than  16  weeks
(409--411).  The  medication  should  not  be  washed  off  after  use.  Sexual  (i.e.,  genital,
anal,  or  oral)  contact  should  be  avoided  while  the  ointment  is  on  the  skin.  The  most
common  side  effects  of  sinecatechins  15%  are  erythema,  pruritis/burning,  pain,
ulceration,  edema,  induration,  and  vesicular  rash.  This  medication  may  weaken
condoms and diaphragms. No clinical data are available regarding the efficacy or safety
of sinecatechins compared with other available anogenital wart treatment modalities.
The  medication  is  not  recommended  for  HIV-infected  persons,  immunocompromised
persons,  or  persons  with  clinical  genital  herpes  because  the  safety  and  efficacy  of
therapy in these settings has not been established. The safety of sinecatechins during
pregnancy also is unknown.  Cryotherapy destroys warts by thermal-induced cytolysis.
Health-care providers must be trained on the proper use of this therapy because over-
and undertreatment can result in complications or low efficacy. Pain after application of
the  liquid  nitrogen,  followed  by  necrosis  and  sometimes  blistering,  is  common.  Local
anesthesia  (topical  or  injected)  might  facilitate  therapy  if  warts  are  present  in  many
areas or if the area of warts is large. Pedophyllin resin 10%--25% should be applied to
each  wart  and  allowed  to  air-dry  before  the  treated  area  comes  into  contact  with
clothing;  overapplication  or  failure  to  air  dry  can  result  in  local  irritation  caused  by
spread of the compound to adjacent areas. The treatment can be repeated weekly, if
necessary. To avoid the possibility of complications associated with systemic absorption
and toxicity, two guidelines should be followed: 1) application should be limited to <0.5
mL of podophyllin or an area of <10 cm2 of warts per session and 2) the area to which
treatment  is  administered  should  not  contain  any  open  lesions  or  wounds.  The
preparation should be thoroughly washed off 1--4 hours after application to reduce local
irritation.  The  safety  of  podophyllin  during  pregnancy  has  not  been  established.
Podophyllin  resin  preparations  differ  in  the  concentration  of  active  components  and
contaminants. The shelf life and stability of podophyllin preparations are unknown. Both
TCA and BCA are caustic agents that destroy warts by chemical coagulation of proteins.
Although  these  preparations  are  widely  used,  they  have  not  been  investigated
thoroughly. TCA solutions have a low viscosity comparable with that of water and can
spread  rapidly  if  applied  excessively;  therefore,  they  can  damage  adjacent  tissues.  A
small amount should be applied only to the warts and allowed to dry before the patient
sits or stands, at which time a white frosting develops. If pain is intense, the acid can be
neutralized with soap or sodium bicarbonate. If an excess amount of acid is applied, the
treated area should be powdered with talc, sodium bicarbonate (i.e., baking soda), or
liquid  soap  preparations  to  remove  unreacted  acid.  This  treatment  can  be  repeated
weekly, if necessary.  Surgical therapy has the advantage of usually eliminating warts
at a single visit. However, such therapy requires substantial clinical training, additional
equipment, and a longer office visit. After local anesthesia is applied, the visible genital
warts  can  be  physically  destroyed  by  electrocautery,  in  which  case  no  additional
hemostasis  is  required.  Care  must  be  taken  to  control  the  depth  of  electrocautery  to
prevent scarring. Alternatively, the warts can be removed either by tangential excision
with a pair of fine scissors or a scalpel, by laser, or by curettage. Because most warts
are  exophytic,  this  procedure  can  be  accomplished  with  a  resulting  wound  that  only
extends into the upper dermis. Hemostasis can be achieved with an electrocautery unit
or a chemical styptic (e.g., an aluminum chloride solution). Suturing is neither required
nor indicated in most cases if surgical removal is performed properly. Surgical therapy
is most beneficial for patients who have a large number or area of genital warts. Both
carbon dioxide laser and surgery might be useful in the management of extensive warts
or intraurethral warts, particularly for those persons who have not responded to other
treatments. Because all available treatments have shortcomings, some clinics employ
combination therapy (simultaneous use of two or more modalities on the same wart at
the  same  time).  Data  are  limited  regarding  the  efficacy  or  risk  of  complications
associated  with  use  of  such  combinations.  Alternative  regimens  include  treatment
options  that  might  be  associated  with  more  side  effects  and/or  less  data  on  efficacy.
Alternative regimens include intralesional interferon, photodynamic therapy, and topical
cidofovir.  Recommended Regimen for Cervical Warts  For women who have exophytic
cervical warts, a biopsy evaluation to exclude high-grade SIL must be performed before
treatment  is  initiated.  Management  of  exophytic  cervical  warts  should  include
consultation with a specialist. Recommended Regimens for Vaginal Warts Cryotherapy
with liquid nitrogen. The use of a cryoprobe in the vagina is not recommended because
of  the  risk  for  vaginal  perforation  and  fistula  formation.  OR  TCA  or  BCA  80%--90%
applied to warts. A small amount should be applied only to warts and allowed to dry, at
which time a white frosting develops. If an excess amount of acid is applied, the treated
area should be powdered with talc, sodium bicarbonate, or liquid soap preparations to
remove  unreacted  acid.  This  treatment  can  be  repeated  weekly,  if  necessary.
Recommended  Regimens  for  Urethral  Meatus  Warts  Cryotherapy  with  liquid  nitrogen
OR  Podophyllin  10%--25%  in  compound  tincture  of  benzoin.  The  treatment  area  and
adjacent normal skin must be dry before contact with podophyllin. This treatment can
be repeated weekly, if necessary. The safety of podophyllin during pregnancy has not
been established. Data are limited on the use of podofilox and imiquimod for treatment
of distal meatal warts. Recommended Regimens for Anal Warts Cryotherapy with liquid
nitrogen OR TCA or BCA 80%--90% applied to warts. A small amount should be applied
only to warts and allowed to dry, at which time a white frosting develops. If an excess
amount  of  acid  is  applied,  the  treated  area  should  be  powdered  with  talc,  sodium
bicarbonate, or liquid soap preparations to remove unreacted acid. This treatment can
be  repeated  weekly,  if  necessary.  OR  Surgical  removal  Intra-anal  warts  should  be
managed in consultation with a specialist. Many persons with warts on the anal mucosa
also  have  warts  on  the  rectal  mucosa,  so  persons  with  anal  and/or  intra-anal  warts
might benefit from an inspection of the rectal mucosa by digital examination, standard
anoscopy, or high-resolution anoscopy.  The following key counseling messages should
be conveyed to all patients diagnosed with HPV infection: Genital HPV infection is very
common. Many types of HPV are passed on through genital contact, most often during
vaginal and anal sexual contact. HPV can also be spread by oral sexual contact. Most
sexually active adults will get HPV at some point in their lives, though most will never
know it because HPV infection usually has no signs or symptoms. In most cases, HPV
infection  clears  spontaneously,  without  causing  any  health  problems.  Nevertheless,
some infections do progress to genital warts, precancers, and cancers.
 The types of HPV that cause genital warts are different from the types that can
cause  anogenital  cancers.  Within  an  ongoing  sexual  relationship,  both  partners  are
usually infected at the time one person is diagnosed with HPV infection, even though
signs of infection might not be apparent. A diagnosis of HPV in one sex partner is not
indicative  of  sexual  infidelity  in  the  other  partner.  Treatments  are  available  for  the
conditions caused by HPV (e.g., genital warts), but not for the virus itself. HPV does not
affect a woman's fertility or ability to carry a pregnancy to term.
 Correct and consistent male condom use might lower the chances of giving or
getting genital HPV, but such use is not fully protective, because HPV can infect areas
that are not covered by a condom. Sexually active persons can lower their chances of
getting HPV by limiting their number of partners. However, HPV is common and often
goes unrecognized; persons with only one lifetime sex partner can have the infection.
For this reason, the only definitive method to avoid giving and getting HPV infection and
genital warts is to abstain from sexual activity.
 Tests for HPV are now available to help providers screen for cervical cancer in
certain women. These tests are not useful for screening adolescent females for cervical
cancer, nor are they useful for screening for other HPV-related cancers or genital warts
in men or women. HPV tests should not be used to screen:
-- men;
-- partners of women with HPV; 
-- adolescent females; or
--  for  health  conditions  other  than  cervical  cancer.  Two  HPV  vaccines  are
available,  both  of  which  offer  protection  against  the  HPV  types  that  cause  70%  of
cervical  cancers  (i.e.,  types  16  and  18);  the  quadrivalent  vaccine  (Gardasil)  also
protects against the types that cause 90% of genital warts (i.e., types 6 and 11). These
vaccines  are  most  effective  when  all  doses  are  administered  before  sexual  contact.
Either  vaccine  is  recommended  for  11-  and  12-year-old  girls  and  for  females  aged
13--26  years  who  did  not  receive  or  complete  the  vaccine  series  when  they  were
younger.  The  quadrivalent  HPV  vaccine  can  be  used  in  males  aged  9--26  years  to
prevent genital warts.
 The following are specific counseling messages for those persons diagnosed with
genital warts and their partners:  Genital warts are not life threatening. If left untreated,
genital warts might go away, stay the same, or grow in size or number. Except in very
rare and unusual cases, genital warts will not turn into cancer. It is difficult to determine
how or when a person became infected with HPV; genital warts can be transmitted to
others even when no visible signs of warts are present, even after warts are treated. It
is not known how long a person remains contagious after warts are treated. It is also
unclear  whether  informing  subsequent  sex  partners  about  a  past  diagnosis  of  genital
warts is beneficial to the health of those partners.
 Genital warts commonly recur after treatment, especially in the first 3 months.
 Women should get regular Pap tests as recommended, regardless of vaccination
or genital wart history. Women with genital warts do not need to get Pap tests more
often than recommended.
 HPV  testing  is  unnecessary  in  sexual  partners  of  persons  with  genital  warts.  If
one sex partner has genital warts, both sex partners benefit from getting screened for
other STDs. Persons with genital warts should inform current sex partner(s) because the
warts can be transmitted to other partners. In addition, they should refrain from sexual
activity until the warts are gone or removed. Correct and consistent male condom use
can  lower  the  chances  of  giving  or  getting  genital  warts,  but  such  use  is  not  fully
protective  because  HPV  can  infect  areas  that  are  not  covered  by  a  condom.  The
Gardasil  vaccine,  which  has  been  approved  for  use  in  males  and  females  aged  9--26
years, protects against the HPV types that cause 90% of genital warts (i.e., types 6 and
11).  Imiquimod,  sinecatechins,  podophyllin,  and  podofilox  should  not  be  used  during
pregnancy.  Genital  warts  can  proliferate  and  become  friable  during  pregnancy.
Although  removal  of  warts  during  pregnancy  can  be  considered,  resolution  might  be
incomplete or poor until pregnancy is complete. Rarely, HPV types 6 and 11 can cause
respiratory  papillomatosis  in  infants  and  children,  although  the  route  of  transmission
(i.e.,  transplacental,  perinatal,  or  postnatal)  is  not  completely  understood.  Whether
cesarean  section  prevents  respiratory  papillomatosis  in  infants  and  children  also  is
unclear (412); therefore, cesarean delivery should not be performed solely to prevent
transmission of HPV infection to the newborn. Cesarean delivery is indicated for women
with genital warts if the pelvic outlet is obstructed or if vaginal delivery would result in
excessive  bleeding.  Pregnant  women  with  genital  warts  should  be  counseled
concerning the low risk for warts on the larynx (recurrent respiratory papillomatosis) in
their  infants  or  children.   Persons  who  are  HIV-infected  are  more  likely  to  develop
genital warts then persons who are not HIV-infected (413); moreover, lesions are more
recalcitrant  to  treatment  due  to  depressed  cell-mediated  immunity.  No  data  suggest
that treatment modalities for external genital warts should be different for HIV-infected
persons.  However,  persons  who  are  immunosuppressed  because  of  HIV  or  other
reasons  might  have  larger  or  more  numerous  warts,  might  not  respond  as  well  as
immunocompetent persons to therapy for genital warts, and might have more frequent
recurrences  after  treatment  (414--416).  Squamous  cell  carcinomas  arising  in  or
resembling  genital  warts  might  occur  more  frequently  among  immunosuppressed
persons, therefore requiring biopsy for confirmation of diagnosis for suspicious cases.
Because of the increased incidence of anal cancer in HIV-infected MSM, screening for
anal intraepithelial neoplasia by cytology can be considered (417). However, evidence
is limited concerning the natural history of anal intraepithelial neoplasias, the reliability
of  screening  methods,  the  safety  and  response  to  treatments,  and  the  programmatic
considerations that would support this screening approach. Persons in whom squamous
cell carcinoma in situ of the genitalia is diagnosed should be referred to a specialist for
treatment. Ablative modalities usually are effective, but careful follow-up is essential for
patient  management.   Women  attending  STD  clinics  for  the  treatment  of  genital
infection with high-risk types of Human Papillomavirus (HR-HPV) might be at increased
risk  for  cervical  cancer;  persistence  of  HR-HPV  can  cause  cervical  cancer  and  its
precancerous lesions. One study demonstrated an HR-HPV prevalence of 27% among
women  receiving  treatment  in  an  STD  clinic  setting;  prevalence  was  highest  among
persons  aged  14--19  and  decreased  with  increasing  age  (418).  In  an  evaluation  of
women  attending  STD  clinics,  over  half  of  women  were  at  increased  risk  for  cervical
cancer  as  a  result  of  HPV  infection,  cervical  disease,  or  history  of  cervical  disease
compared with women without these characteristics (419). Cervical cytology (i.e., a Pap
test) is an effective, low-cost screening test for preventing invasive cervical cancer. In a
2004  survey,  49%  of  all  STD  clinics  in  the  United  States  reported  providing  cervical
screening services, and 20% reported use of HPV DNA testing (419).  Current guidelines
from  USPSTF  and  ACOG  recommend  that  cervical  screening  begin  at  age  21  years
(96,97).  This  recommendation  is  based  on  the  low  incidence  of  cervical  cancer  and
limited utility of screening in younger women (98). ACS recommends that women start
cervical  screening  with  Pap  tests  after  3  years  of  initiating  sexual  activity  but  by  no
later
 than
 age
 21
 years
 (98).
 Recommended
 screening
 intervals
(http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/cervical/pdf/guidelines.pdf)  should  continue  through  65
years according to USPSTF (http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/uspstf/uspscerv.htm) or 70 years
according
 to
 ACS
 (http://cancer.org/docroot/ped/content/ped_2_3x_acs_cancer
detection_guidelines_36.asp).   STD  clinics  that  provide  routine  cervical  screening
services  should  follow  the  available  guidelines.  However,  to  ensure  the  provision  of
adequate  care,  follow-up  and  referral  sources  must  be  in  place.  Cervical  screening
should be performed using either conventional or liquid-based cytologic tests (i.e., Pap
tests)  and  can  include  HR-HPV  DNA  tests  in  specific  circumstances  (420).  For
cythopathologic and HPV/DNA testing, STD clinics should use CLIA certified laboratories
(421) and those that report cytopathology findings according to the following Bethesda
2001  terminology  (422):  atypical  squamous  cells  (ASC),  low-grade  squamous
intraepithelial  lesions  (LSIL),  and  high-grade  intraepithelial  lesions  (HSIL).  The  ASC
category  is  subdivided  into  atypical  squamous  cells  of  undetermined  significance
(ASC-US)  and  atypical  squamous  cells---cannot  exclude  HSIL  (ASC-H).   During
appointments  in  which  a  pelvic  examination  for  STD  screening  is  performed,  the
health-care  provider  should  inquire  about  the  result  of  the  patient's  most  recent  Pap
test and discuss the following information with the patient: the purpose and importance
of a Pap test; the need for regularly scheduled Pap tests between 21--65 years of age;
whether a Pap test will be obtained during this clinic visit; and if a Pap test will not be
obtained during this examination, the names of local providers or referral clinics that
can perform Pap tests and adequately follow up results. If a woman has not had a Pap
test during the previous 12 months (2-year intervals for women aged 21--29 years and
3-year intervals for women aged ≥30 years with a history of three normal Pap tests)
and cervical screening is indicated, a Pap test should be obtained as part of the routine
pelvic  examination.  Health-care  providers  should  be  aware  that  many  women
frequently equate having a pelvic examination with having a Pap test; they erroneously
believe  that  a  sample  for  Pap  testing  was  taken,  when  in  reality,  only  a  pelvic
examination was performed. Because self-reports of Pap tests often are not accurate,
STD  clinics  should  have  a  protocol  for  conducting  cervical  cancer  screening  and
obtaining a Pap test during the routine clinical evaluation of women who do not have
clinical-record documentation of a normal Pap test within the preceding 12 months and
do not have another provider for screening services. HPV tests are available for clinical
use and are recommended for the triage of women aged ≥21 years who have abnormal
Pap test results (ASC-US). Additionally, these tests can be used in conjunction with a
Pap  test  (adjunct  testing)  for  cervical  cancer  screening  of  women  aged  ≥30  years.
These  tests  should  not  be  used  for  women  aged  <20  years  for  screening  or
management of abnormal Pap tests or for STD screening. Current FDA-approved HPV
tests  detect  viral  nucleic  acid  (DNA).  Several  FDA-approved  tests  for  high-risk  HPV
testing are available for use in the United States. The Hybrid Capture 2 High-Risk HPV
DNA  test  (Qiagen,  Gaithersburg,  Maryland)  and  the  Cervista  HPV  High-Risk  test
(Hologics,  Beford,  Massachusetts)  detect  any  of  13--14  high-risk  HPV  types,  whereas
the Cervista HPV 16/18 test detects type-specific infection with HPV types 16 and 18.
The  Digene  HC2  HPV  DNA  test  (Qiagen,  Gaithersburg,  Maryland)  detects  any  of  13
high-risk or five low-risk HPV types, although use of this test is not indicated in the STD
clinic  setting  (i.e.,  only  high-risk  HPV  DNA  testing  is  necessary)  (423).   High-risk  HPV
DNA tests are recommended for the triage of women aged ≥21 years who have ASC-US
cytology  results.  In  addition,  these  tests  are  recommended  for  routine  adjunctive
testing (along with cervical cytology) used to screen women aged ≥30 years (424). HPV
DNA  testing  (including  HR  HPV  and  HPV  16/18  tests)  is  not  recommended  for  the
following situations (425--427): deciding whether to vaccinate for HPV; conducting STD
screening for HPV; triaging LSIL;  testing adolescents aged <21 years; and screening for
primary cervical cancer as a stand-alone test (i.e., without a Pap test). Women might
benefit from receiving printed information about the value of and indication for cervical
cancer  screening  (i.e.,  Pap  testing),  and  they  should  be  provided  a  clinic  visit  report
that states whether a Pap test was obtained during the clinic visit. When available, a
copy  of  the  Pap  test  result  should  be  provided.  Women  with  abnormal  screening  or
diagnostic  tests  should  be  referred  to  clinic  settings  that  employ  providers  who  are
experienced  in  managing  these  cases  (see  Follow-Up).  Cervical  screening  programs
should  screen  women  who  have  received  HPV  vaccination  in  the  same  manner  as
unvaccinated  women.   Among  women  aged  ≥30  years  with  normal  Pap  tests  and
negative tests for HR-HPV, the screening interval can be increased to 3 years. At that
time,  routine  testing  with  either  a  Pap  test  or  a  Pap  and  HR-HPV  testing  can  resume
(428).  If  the  results  of  the  Pap  test  are  abnormal,  follow-up  care  should  be  provided
according  to  the  ASCCP  2006  Consensus  Guidelines  for  Management  of  Abnormal
Cervical  Cytology  (429)  (information  regarding  management  and  follow-up  care  is
available at http://www.asccp.org). If resources in STD clinics do not allow for follow-up
of  women  with  abnormal  results,  protocols  for  referral  for  follow-up  and  case
management  should  be  in  place.   According  to  American  Society  for  Colposcopy  and
Cervical Pathology (ASCCP) guidelines, women with Pap tests results indicating ASC-H,
low- or high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion should be referred to a clinician who
can  perform  a  colposcopic  examination  of  the  lower  genital  tract  and,  if  indicated,
conduct  a  colposcopically  directed  biopsy.  For  women  aged  <21  years,  referral  to
colposcopy  for  ASC-US  and  LSIL  is  not  recommended,  because  rates  of  spontaneous
clearance  are  high  in  this  population;  repeat  Pap  testing  at  12  and  24  months  is
recommended for these women. For women aged ≥21 years with a Pap test report of
ASC-US, three options are available for follow-up management: 1) prompt colposcopy,
2) repeat Pap tests at 6 and 12 months,
and  3)  a  high-risk  HR  HPV  DNA  test.  Colposcopy  is  appropriate  if  the  provider  has
concerns  about  adherence  with  recommended  follow-up  or  concerns  about  other
clinical  indications.  High-grade  histological  changes  (i.e.,  CIN  2  or  higher)  after
colposcopic  evaluation  for  ASC-US  Pap  test  reports  is  typically  detected  in  <12%  of
cases.  If  repeat  Pap  tests  are  used  (instead  of  prompt  colposcopy)  to  follow  ASC-US
results, tests should be performed at 6- and 12-month intervals until two consecutive
negative results are noted, at which time cervical cancer screening at a normal interval
for age can be resumed. If subsequent Pap tests demonstrate ASC or a more serious
condition,  follow-up  should  be  conducted  according  to  ASCCP  2006  Consensus
Guidelines (424). A third strategy for managing patients with ASC-US Pap test results
involves testing for high-risk HPV DNA (423,424,430,431). Whereas conducting high-risk
HPV testing might not be possible in some STD clinics because of resource limitations,
such testing might be appropriate in other public health clinic settings. HPV tests that
detect low-risk HPV types are not recommended for use in STD clinics, because they are
not beneficial in this setting.
 If  indicated,  high-risk  HPV  DNA  testing  can  be  performed  by  1)  collecting  a
specimen for Pap test and HPV DNA on the same swab, 2) using a supplied swab at the
time of the Pap test, if conventional cytology is used, 3) reflex testing (if liquid-based
cytology is used and enough residual material is available in the cytology test vial), or
4) scheduling a separate follow-up appointment when the Pap test report results are
known. If the high-risk HPV DNA test is negative, a repeat Pap test should be performed
at  12  months.  If  the  test  is  positive,  the  patient  should  be  referred  immediately  for
colposcopy, and if indicated, directed cervical biopsy.
 Because many public health clinics (including most STD clinics) cannot provide
clinical follow-up of abnormal Pap tests, women with Pap tests demonstrating low- or
high-grade SIL or ASC-US usually need a referral to other local health-care providers or
clinics for colposcopy and biopsy. Clinics and health-care providers who offer cervical
screening  services  but  cannot  provide  appropriate  colposcopic  follow-up  of  abnormal
Pap tests should arrange referral to health-care facilities that will promptly evaluate and
treat  patients  and  report  evaluation  results  to  the  referring  clinic  or  health-care
provider.  Clinics  and  health-care  providers  should  develop  protocols  that  identify
women  who  miss  follow-up  appointments  so  that  these  women  can  be  located  and
scheduled  for  needed  studies  and  management,  and  they  should  reevaluate  these
protocols routinely. Pap-test results, type and location of follow-up appointments, and
results of follow-up appointment should be clearly documented in the clinic record. The
establishment of colposcopy and biopsy services in local health departments, especially
in  circumstances  in  which  referrals  are  difficult  and  follow-up  is  unlikely,  should  be
considered  if  resources  are  available.  The  following  additional  considerations  are
associated  with  performing  Pap  tests:  The  Pap  test  should  not  be  considered  a
screening  test  for  STDs.  All  women  receiving  care  in  an  STD-clinic  setting  should  be
considered  for  cervical  cancer  screening,  regardless  of  sexual  orientation  (i.e.,
heterosexual  women  and  those  who  identify  themselves  as  lesbian  or  bisexual).  If  a
woman is menstruating, a conventional cytology Pap test should be postponed, and the
woman  should  be  advised  to  have  a  Pap  test  at  the  earliest  opportunity.  If  specific
infections other than HPV are identified, the patient might need to have a repeat Pap
test after appropriate treatment for those infections. However, in most instances (even
in the presence of some severe infections), Pap tests will be reported as satisfactory for
evaluation, and reliable final reports can be produced without the need to repeat the
Pap test after treatment is received.
 When it is necessary to repeat the Pap test because the report was interpreted
as  unsatisfactory,  the  repeat  test  must  be  determined  by  the  laboratory  to  be
satisfactory  and  negative  before  screening  can  be  resumed  at  regularly  scheduled
intervals. The presence of a mucopurulent discharge should not delay the Pap test. The
test  can  be  performed  after  careful  removal  of  the  discharge  with  a  saline-soaked
cotton  swab.  In  the  absence  of  other  indications,  women  who  have  external  genital
warts do not need Pap tests more frequently than women who do not have warts. The
sequence of Pap testing in relation to collection of other cervicovaginal specimens has
not been shown to influence Pap test results or their interpretation (432). Women who
have  had  a  total  hysterectomy  do  not  require  a  routine  Pap  test  unless  the
hysterectomy  was  performed  because  of  cervical  cancer  or  its  precursor  lesions.  As
recommended by ACOG, for women with hysterectomy resulting from CIN 2 or higher,
cervical or vaginal cuff screening can be discontinued once three normal Pap tests have
been documented. In these situations, women should be advised to continue follow-up
with  the  physician(s)  who  provided  health  care  at  the  time  of  the  hysterectomy,  if
possible.  In  women  whose  cervix  remains  intact  after  a  hysterectomy,  regularly
scheduled Pap tests should be performed as indicated (433--435). Health-care providers
who receive basic retraining on Pap-test collection and clinics that use simple quality
assurance measures are more likely to obtain satisfactory test results as determined by
the  laboratory.  The  use  of  cytobrushes  and  brooms  also  improves  the  number  of
satisfactory  Pap  tests.  Although  evidence  supports  the  option  of  HPV  testing  for  the
triage of women with ASC-US Pap test results, this option might not be feasible in an
STD clinic because of limited resources.
 iquid-based cytology is an acceptable alternative to conventional Pap tests, as it
has  similar  test-performance  characteristics.  Pregnant  women  should  be  screened  at
the  same  frequency  as  nonpregnant  women;  however,  recommendations  for
management differ in this population (83,84,424). A swab and an Ayre's spatula can be
used  for  obtaining  Pap  tests  in  pregnant  women,  but  cytobrushes  are  not
recommended.  Several  studies  have  documented  an  increased  prevalence  of  SIL  in
HIV-infected women (416,436). The following recommendations for Pap test screening
among HIV-infected women are consistent with most of the guidelines published by the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) (129) and are based partially on
the  opinions  of  professionals  knowledgeable  about  the  care  and  management  of
cervical  cancer  and  HIV  infection  in  women.  HIV-positive  women  should  be  provided
cervical cytology screening twice (every 6 months) within the first year after initial HIV
diagnosis and, if both tests are normal, annual screening can be resumed thereafter.
HIV-positive  women  with  ASC-H,  LSIL,  or  HSIL  on  cytologic  screening  should  undergo
colposcopic evaluation. Recommendations for management of HIV-positive women with
ASC-US  vary.  HHS  recommends  a  more  conservative  management  approach  (i.e.,
immediate  colposcopy),  whereas  ASCCP  recommends  that  these  women  be  managed
like  HIV-negative  women  with  ASC-US  (i.e.,  tested  for  HR  HPV  DNA)  (424,429).
Prevalence of HR HPV is high among adolescents aged <21 years (425). Infections in
adolescent patients tend to clear rapidly, and lesions caused by these infections also
have high rates of regression to normal. Therefore, ASCCP and ACOG recommend that
adolescents with ASC-US or low-grade SIL be managed with repeat cytologic testing at
12 months and 24 months. Only those with HSIL at either follow-up visit or persistence
of ASC-US or LSIL at 24 months should be referred for colposcopic evaluation.  When a
woman  receives  abnormal  cervical  cytology  test  results,  she  might  experience
considerable  anxiety,  distress,  fear,  and  confusion,  which  can  serve  as  barriers  to
follow-up  care.  Furthermore,  a  positive  HPV  DNA  test  result  might  exacerbate  these
feelings and might also elicit partner concerns, worry about disclosure, and feelings of
guilt, anger, and stigmatization. Health-care providers are the most trusted source of
information  about  HPV  and  abnormal  cervical  cytology  test  results.  Therefore,  they
have an important role to play in educating women about high-risk HPV and moderating
the  psychosocial  impact  of  the  diagnosis.  STD  clinic  providers  should  offer  patients
counseling and information both verbally and in print when delivering HPV and Pap test
results.
 Print
 materials
 are
 available
 at
 several
 websites
(http://www.cdc.gov/std/hpv/common/;
http://www.ashastd.org/hpv/hpv_publications.cfm).
 The
 manner
 in
 which
 this
information is communicated to patients can influence the psychological effect of this
diagnosis,  as  well  as  a  woman's  likelihood  of  following  up  with  necessary  testing  or
treatment. Providers should frame high-risk HPV in a neutral, nonstigmatizing context
and  emphasize  its  common,  asymptomatic,  and  transient  nature.  Also,  the  provider
should emphasize that HPV is often shared between partners and can lie dormant for
many  years;  having  HPV  does  not  imply  infidelity,  nor  should  it  necessarily  raise
concerns about a partner's health.  In counseling women with high-risk HPV infections
about  partner  management,  messages  should  be  tailored  to  the  individual  woman's
circumstances.  While  no  evidence  supports  either  partner  notification  (PN)  or
clinical-evaluation  referral  for  partners  of  patients  with  high-risk  HPV,  some  women
might  benefit  from  having  an  informed  discussion  about  their  diagnosis  with  their
partners. This type of communication can foster partner support and ensure the sharing
of information that can inform decision-making (e.g., decisions regarding condom use).
The  following  specific  key  messages  should  be  communicated  to  patients  receiving
cervical  screening:  The  purpose  of  regular,  lifelong  cervical  cancer  screening  is  to
identify cervical cancer precursors, which can be treated before progression to cervical
cancer. A positive high-risk HPV DNA test or an abnormal cervical cytology test is not
indicative of cervical cancer. Appropriate follow-up is necessary to ensure that cervical
abnormalities do not progress.
 Some women might have a normal Pap test and a positive high-risk HPV test.
A positive high risk HPV DNA test indicates a HPV infection of the cervix, but does
not indicate cervical cancer. A normal cervical cytology test indicates that no cellular
abnormalities were detected at the time of testing, but women who have HPV infection
of the cervix have a higher likelihood of developing cell changes, which could lead to
cervical cancer over time. Follow-up evaluation is essential to monitor cervical cytology.
A Pap test that reveals ASC-US indicates
some abnormal areas on the cervix that may require close follow-up or treatment
so  that  they  do  not  progress.  Additional  testing  might  be  required  to  confirm  these
results. 
It  is  essential  that  patients  return  for  all  follow-up  appointments  and
recommended tests. Discussion concerning disclosure of a positive high-risk HPV test to
sex partners might be appropriate and can include the following information:  HPV is
very common. It can infect the genital areas of both men and women. It usually has no
signs or symptoms. Most sexually active persons get HPV at some time in their lives,
though most will never know it. Even persons with only one lifetime sex partner can get
HPV if their partner was infected. While the immune system clears HPV infection most
of the time, in some persons, HPV infection does not resolve. No clinically validated test
exists  for  men  to  determine  if  they  have  HPV  infection.  The  most  common
manifestation  of  HPV  infection  in  men  is  genital  warts.  High-risk  HPV  types  seldom
cause  genital  warts.  Partners  who  are  in  a  long-term  relationship  tend  to  share  HPV.
Sexual partners of HPV-infected patients also likely have HPV, even though they might
have no signs or symptoms of infection. Detection of high-risk HPV infection in a woman
does not mean that the woman or her partner is engaging in sexual activity outside of a
relationship. HPV infection can be present for many years before it is detected, and no
method can accurately confirm when HPV infection was acquired.
 Prevention measures for current and subsequent sex partners and risk reduction
should be discussed. Providers should counsel women about condom use depending on
their current circumstances. Consistent condom use by male partners of sexually active
women  can  reduce  the  risk  for  cervical  and  vulvovaginal  HPV  infection  (25),  and
condom use by couples in long-term partnerships might decrease the time required to
clear HPV in the infected woman. Skin not covered by a condom remains vulnerable to
HPV infection. HPV vaccines are available and recommended for girls and young women
aged  9--26  years,  even  those  who  have  been  diagnosed  with  HPV  infection.  Male
partners can be vaccinated with the quadrivalent vaccine (Gardasil) to prevent genital
warts.  Several  STDs  can  be  effectively  prevented  through  pre-exposure  vaccination
with widely available vaccines, including HAV, HBV, and HPV. Vaccines for other STDs
(e.g.,  HIV  and  HSV)  are  under  development  or  are  undergoing  clinical  trials.  This
guidance  focuses  largely  on  integrating  the  use  of  available  vaccines  into  STD
prevention and treatment activities. Every person being evaluated or treated for an STD
should  receive  hepatitis  B  vaccination  unless  already  vaccinated.  In  addition,  some
persons  (e.g.,  MSM  and  IDUs)  should  receive  hepatitis  A  vaccination.   Hepatitis  A,
caused  by  infection  with  HAV,  has  an  incubation  period  of  approximately  28  days
(range: 15--50 days). HAV replicates in the liver and is shed in high concentrations in
feces from 2 weeks before to 1 week after the onset of clinical illness. HAV infection
produces a self-limited disease that does not result in chronic infection or chronic liver
disease  (CLD).  However,  10%--15%  of  patients  experience  a  relapse  of  symptoms
during  the  6  months  after  acute  illness.  Acute  liver  failure  from  hepatitis  A  is  rare
(overall case-fatality rate: 0.5%). The risk for symptomatic infection is directly related to
age, with >80% of adults having symptoms compatible with acute viral hepatitis and
most  children  having  either  asymptomatic  or  unrecognized  infection.  Antibody
produced in response to HAV infection persists for life and confers protection against
reinfection.  HAV  infection  is  primarily  transmitted  by  the  fecal-oral  route,  by  either
person-to-person  contact  or  through  consumption  of  contaminated  food  or  water.
Although viremia occurs early in infection and can persist for several weeks after onset
of  symptoms,  bloodborne  transmission  of  HAV  is  uncommon.  HAV  occasionally  is
detected in saliva in experimentally infected animals, but transmission by saliva has not
been  demonstrated.  In  the  United  States,  almost  half  of  all  persons  with  hepatitis  A
report having no risk factor for the disease. Among adults with identified risk factors,
most  cases  occur  among  international  travelers,  household  or  sexual  contacts,
nonhousehold contacts (e.g., those encountered through play and daycare), and IDUs
(437).  Because  transmission  of  HAV  during  sexual  activity  probably  results  from
fecal-oral contact, measures typically used to prevent the transmission of other STDs
(e.g., use of condoms) do not prevent HAV transmission. In addition, efforts to promote
good personal hygiene have not been successful in interrupting outbreaks of hepatitis
A.  Vaccination  is  the  most  effective  means  of  preventing  HAV  transmission  among
persons at risk for infection (e.g., MSM, illegal drug users, and persons with CLD), many
of  whom  might  seek  services  in  STD  clinics.  The  diagnosis  of  hepatitis  A  cannot  be
made on clinical grounds alone; serologic testing also is required. The presence of IgM
antibody to HAV is diagnostic of acute HAV infection. A positive test for total anti-HAV
indicates  immunity  to  HAV  infection  but  does  not  differentiate  current  from  previous
HAV  infection.  Although  usually  not  sensitive  enough  to  detect  the  low  level  of
protective  antibody  after  vaccination,  anti-HAV  tests  also  might  be  positive  after
hepatitis A vaccination. Patients with acute hepatitis A usually require only supportive
care,  with  no  restrictions  in  diet  or  activity.  Hospitalization  might  be  necessary  for
patients  who  become  dehydrated  because  of  nausea  and  vomiting  and  is  critical  for
patients  with  signs  or  symptoms  of  acute  liver  failure.  Medications  that  might  cause
liver  damage  or  are  metabolized  by  the  liver  should  be  used  with  caution  among
persons with hepatitis A. Two products are available for the prevention of HAV infection:
hepatitis A vaccine (Table 2) and immune globulin (IG) for IM administration. Hepatitis A
vaccines  are  prepared  from  formalin-inactivated,  cell-culture--derived  HAV  and  have
been available in the United States since 1995, initially for persons aged ≥2 years. In
2005,  the  vaccines  were  approved  by  FDA  for  persons  aged  ≥12  months,  and  the
vaccine is available for eligible children and adolescents aged <19 years through the
VFC program (telephone: 800-232-4636). Administered IM in a 2-dose series at 0 and
6--12 months, these vaccines induce protective antibody levels in virtually all adults. By
1  month  after  the  first  dose,  94%--100%  of  adults  have  protective  antibody  levels;
100%  of  adults  develop  protective  antibody  after  a  second  dose.  In  randomized
controlled  trials,  the  equivalent  of  1  dose  of  hepatitis  A  vaccine  administered  before
exposure  has  been  94%--100%  effective  in  preventing  clinical  hepatitis  A  (2).  Kinetic
models of antibody decline indicate that protective levels of antibody persist for at least
20 years. IG is a sterile solution of concentrated immunoglobulins prepared from pooled
human  plasma  processed  by  cold  ethanol  fractionation.  In  the  United  States,  IG  is
produced  only  from  plasma  that  has  tested  negative  for  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen,
antibodies to HIV and HCV, and HCV RNA. In addition, the process used to manufacture
IG inactivates viruses (e.g., HBV, HCV, and HIV). When administered IM before or within
2 weeks after exposure to HAV, IG is >85% effective in preventing HAV infections. A
combined hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccine has been developed and licensed for use
as a 3-dose series in adults aged ≥18 years (Table 3). When administered IM on a 0-,
1-,  and  6-month  schedule,  the  vaccine  has  equivalent  immunogenicity  to  that  of  the
monovalent  vaccines.   Pre-exposure  Vaccination  Persons  in  the  following  groups  who
are likely to be treated in STD clinic settings should be offered hepatitis A vaccine: 1) all
MSM;  2)  illegal  drug  users  (of  both  injection  and  noninjection  drugs);  and  3)  persons
with CLD, including persons with chronic HBV and HCV infection who have evidence of
CLD. Prevaccination Serologic Testing for Susceptibility Approximately one third of the
U.S. population has serologic evidence of previous HAV infection, which increases with
age  and  reaches  75%  among  persons  aged  >70  years.  Screening  for  HAV  infection
might be cost-effective in populations where the prevalence of infection is likely to be
high (e.g., persons aged >40 years and persons born in areas of high HAV endemicity).
The  potential  cost-savings  of  testing  should  be  weighed  against  the  cost  and  the
likelihood that testing will interfere with initiating vaccination. Vaccination of a person
who
 is
 already
 immune
 is
 not
 harmful.
 Postvaccination
 Serologic
 Testing
Postvaccination serologic testing is not indicated because most persons respond to the
vaccine. In addition, the commercially available serologic test is not sensitive enough to
detect  the  low,  but  protective,  levels  of  antibody  produced  by  vaccination.
Postexposure  Prophylaxis  Persons  who  recently  have  been  exposed  to  HAV  and  who
previously have not received hepatitis A vaccine should be administered a single dose
of single-antigen vaccine or IG (0.02 mL/kg) as soon as possible. Information about the
relative efficacy of vaccine compared with IG postexposure is limited, and no data are
available  for  persons  aged  >40  years  or  those  with  underlying  medical  conditions.
Therefore,  decisions  to  use  vaccine  or  IG  should  take  into  account  patient
characteristics  associated  with  more  severe  manifestations  of  hepatitis  A,  including
older  age  and  CLD.  For  healthy  persons  aged  12  months  to  40  years,  single-antigen
hepatitis A vaccine at the age-appropriate dose is preferred over IG because of vaccine
advantages,  including  long-term  protection  and  ease  of  administration.  For  persons
aged  >40  years,  IG  is  preferred  because  of  the  absence  of  information  regarding
vaccine  performance  and  the  more  severe  manifestations  of  hepatitis  A  in  this  age
group; vaccine can be used if IG cannot be obtained. The magnitude of the risk for HAV
transmission from the exposure should be considered in decisions to use IG or vaccine.
IG  should  be  used  for  children  aged  <12  months,  immunocompromised  persons,
persons  who  have  had  diagnosed  CLD,  and  persons  for  whom  vaccine  is
contraindicated. If IG is administered to persons for whom hepatitis A vaccine also is
recommended,  a  dose  of  vaccine  should  be  provided  simultaneously  with  IG.  The
second  vaccine  dose  should  be  administered  according  to  the  licensed  schedule  to
complete the series. The efficacy of IG or vaccine when administered >2 weeks after
exposure  has  not  been  established  (438).  Limited  data  indicate  that  vaccination  of
persons  with  CLD  and  of  persons  with  advanced  HIV  infection  results  in  lower
seroprotection rates and antibody concentrations (4). In HIV-infected persons, antibody
response  might  be  directly  related  to  CD4+  levels.  Hepatitis  B  is  caused  by  infection
with  the  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV).  The  incubation  period  from  the  time  of  exposure  to
onset  of  symptoms  is  6  weeks  to  6  months.  The  highest  concentrations  of  HBV  are
found  in  blood,  with  lower  concentrations  found  in  other  body  fluids  including  wound
exudates, semen, vaginal secretions, and saliva (439,440). HBV is more infectious and
relatively  more  stable  in  the  environment  than  other  bloodborne  pathogens  like  HCV
and HIV. HBV infection can be self-limited or chronic. In adults, only approximately half
of newly acquired HBV infections are symptomatic, and approximately 1% of reported
cases  result  in  acute  liver  failure  and  death.  Risk  for  chronic  infection  is  inversely
related to age at acquisition; approximately 90% of infected infants and 30% of infected
children aged <5 years become chronically infected, compared with 2%--6% of persons
who become infected as adults. Among persons with chronic HBV infection, the risk for
premature death from cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is 15%--25%. HBV is
efficiently  transmitted  by  percutaneous  or  mucous  membrane  exposure  to  blood  or
body fluids that contain blood. The primary risk factors associated with infection among
adolescents and adults are unprotected sex with an infected partner, unprotected sex
with more than one partner, MSM, history of other STDs, and illegal injection-drug use.
In  addition,  several  studies  have  demonstrated  the  horizontal  transmission  of  HBV,
including through premastication, as a less common source of transmission (441,442).
CDC's  national  strategy  to  eliminate  transmission  of  HBV  infection  includes  1)
prevention of perinatal infection through routine screening of all pregnant women for
HBsAg  and  immunoprophylaxis  of  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers  or  mothers
whose  HBsAg  status  is  unknown,  2)  routine  infant  vaccination,  3)  vaccination  of
previously  unvaccinated  children  and  adolescents  through  age  18  years,  and  4)
vaccination of previously unvaccinated adults at increased risk for infection (3,4). High
vaccination  coverage  rates,  with  subsequent  declines  in  acute  hepatitis  B  incidence,
have  been  achieved  among  infants  and  adolescents  (4,437,443).  In  contrast,
vaccination coverage among most high-risk adult groups (e.g., persons with more than
one sex partner in the previous 6 months, MSM, and IDUs) has remained low, and most
new infections occur in these high-risk groups (3,108,444--446). STD clinics and other
settings  that  provide  services  to  high-risk  adults  are  ideal  sites  in  which  to  provide
hepatitis  B  vaccination  to  adults  at  risk  for  HBV  infection.  All  unvaccinated  adults
seeking services in these settings should be assumed to be at risk for hepatitis B and
should be offered hepatitis B vaccination. Diagnosis of acute or chronic HBV infection
requires serologic testing (Table 4). Because HBsAg is present in both acute and chronic
infection,  the  presence  of  IgM  antibody  to  hepatitis  B  core  antigen  (IgM  anti-HBc)  is
diagnostic of acute or recently acquired HBV infection. Antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) is
produced after a resolved infection and is the only HBV antibody marker present after
vaccination.  The  presence  of  HBsAg  and  total  anti-HBc,  with  a  negative  test  for  IgM
anti-HBc, indicates chronic HBV infection. The presence of anti-HBc alone might indicate
a  false-positive  result  or  acute,  resolved,  or  chronic  infection.  No  specific  therapy  is
available  for  persons  with  acute  hepatitis  B;  treatment  is  supportive.  Persons  with
chronic HBV infection should be referred for evaluation to a physician experienced in
the management of CLD. Therapeutic agents cleared by FDA for treatment of chronic
hepatitis B can achieve sustained suppression of HBV replication and remission of liver
disease  in  some  persons.  In  addition,  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B  might  benefit
from screening to detect HCC at an early stage. Two products have been approved for
hepatitis  B  prevention:  hepatitis  B  immune  globulin  (HBIG)  and  hepatitis  B  vaccine
(3,4). HBIG provides temporary (i.e., 3--6 months) protection from HBV infection and is
typically  used  as  PEP  either  as  an  adjunct  to  hepatitis  B  vaccination  in  previously
unvaccinated persons or alone in persons who have not responded to vaccination. HBIG
is  prepared  from  plasma  known  to  contain  high  concentrations  of  anti-HBs.  The
recommended  dose  of  HBIG  is  0.06  mL/kg.  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  contains  HBsAg
produced in yeast by recombinant DNA technology and provides protection from HBV
infection  when  used  for  both  pre-exposure  vaccination  and  PEP.  The  two  available
monovalent hepatitis B vaccines for use in adolescents and adults are Recombivax HB
(Merck and Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, New Jersey) and Engerix-B (GlaxoSmithKline
Biologicals, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania). A combination vaccine (hepatitis A and hepatitis
B)  for  use  in  adults,  Twinrix  (GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania),
also is available. The recommended HBV dose varies by product and age of recipient
(Table 3). When selecting a hepatitis B vaccination schedule, the health-care provider
should  consider  the  need  to  achieve  completion  of  the  vaccine  series.  Approved
adolescent and adult schedules for both monovalent hepatitis B vaccine (i.e., Engerix-B
and Recombivax HB) include the following: 0, 1, and 6 months; 0, 1, and 4 months; and
0, 2, and 4 months. A 4-dose schedule of Engerix-B at 0, 1, 2, and 12 months is licensed
for  all  age  groups.  A  2-dose  schedule  of  Recombivax  HB  adult  formulation  (10  µg)  is
licensed  for  adolescents  aged  11--15  years.  When  scheduled  to  receive  the  second
dose, adolescents aged >15 years should be switched to a 3-dose series, with doses
two  and  three  consisting  of  the  pediatric  formulation  (5  µg)  administered  on  an
appropriate schedule. Twinrix can be administered to persons aged ≥18 years at risk
for both HAV and HBV infections at 0, 1, and 6 months. Hepatitis B vaccine should be
administered  IM  in  the  deltoid  muscle  and  can  be  administered  simultaneously  with
other  vaccines.  For  adolescents  and  adults,  the  needle  length  should  be  1--2  inches,
depending on the recipient's weight (1 inch for females weighing <70 kg, 1.5 inches for
males weighing <120 kg, and 2 inches for males and females weighing >120 kg and
>100 kg, respectively). A 22- to 25-gauge needle is recommended. If the vaccine series
is  interrupted  after  the  first  or  second  dose  of  vaccine,  the  missed  dose  should  be
administered  as  soon  as  possible.  The  series  does  not  need  to  be  restarted  after  a
missed  dose.  In  adolescents  and  healthy  adults  aged  <40  years,  approximately
30%--55% acquire a protective antibody response (anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL) after the first
vaccine  dose,  75%  after  the  second,  and  >90%  after  the  third.  Vaccine-induced
immune memory has been demonstrated to persist for at least 15--20 years. Periodic
testing  to  determine  antibody  levels  after  routine  vaccination  in  immunocompetent
persons is not necessary, and booster doses of vaccine are not currently recommended.
Hepatitis  B  vaccination  is  generally  well-tolerated  by  most  recipients.  Pain  at  the
injection site and low-grade fever are reported by a minority of recipients. For children
and adolescents, a causal association exists between receipt of hepatitis B vaccination
and anaphylaxis: for each 1.1 million doses of vaccine administered, approximately one
vaccinee will experience this type of reaction. No deaths have been reported in these
patients (3,4,447). Vaccine is contraindicated in persons with a history of anaphylaxis
after a previous dose of hepatitis B vaccine and in persons with a known anaphylactic
reaction  to  any  vaccine  component.  No  evidence  for  a  causal  association  has  been
demonstrated  for  other  adverse  events  after  administration  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine.
Pre-exposure Vaccination Hepatitis B vaccination is recommended for all unvaccinated
adolescents,  all  unvaccinated  adults  at  risk  for  HBV  infection,  and  all  adults  seeking
protection from HBV infection. For adults, acknowledgement of a specific risk factor is
not a requirement for vaccination. Hepatitis B vaccine should be routinely offered to all
unvaccinated  persons  attending  STD  clinics  and  to  all  unvaccinated  persons  seeking
treatment  for  STDs  in  other  settings.  Other  settings  where  all  unvaccinated  adults
should  be  assumed  to  be  at  risk  for  hepatitis  B  and  should  receive  hepatitis  B
vaccination include correctional facilities, facilities providing drug abuse treatment and
prevention services, health-care settings serving MSM, and HIV testing and treatment
facilities. All persons who receive clinical services in these settings should be offered
hepatitis B vaccine unless they have a reliable vaccination history (i.e., a written, dated
record of each dose of a complete series). In all settings, vaccination should be initiated
even  when  completion  of  the  vaccine  series  cannot  be  ensured.  Prevaccination
Antibody  Screening  Prevaccination  serologic  testing  for  susceptibility  might  be
considered to reduce the cost of vaccinating adult populations that have an expected
high prevalence (20%--30%) of HBV infection (e.g., IDUs and MSM, especially those in
older age groups). In addition, prevaccination testing for susceptibility is recommended
for  unvaccinated  household,  sexual,  and  needle-sharing  contacts  of  HBsAg-positive
persons (108). Anti-HBc is the test of choice for prevaccination testing; persons who are
anti-HBc--positive should be tested for HBsAg. If persons are determined to be HBsAg
negative, no further action is required. If persons are determined to be HBsAg positive,
the  person  should  be  referred  for  medical  follow-up  to  include  counseling  and
evaluation  for  antiviral  treatment  (see  Management  of  HBsAg-Positive  Persons).  In
addition,  all  household  members,  sex  partners,  and  needle-sharing  partners  of
HBsAg-positive persons should be vaccinated. Serologic testing should not be a barrier
to  vaccination  of  susceptible  persons,  especially  in  populations  that  are  difficult  to
access. In most cases, the first vaccine dose should be administered immediately after
collection  of  the  blood  sample  for  serologic  testing.  Vaccination  of  persons  who  are
immune to HBV infection because of current or previous infection or vaccination does
not increase the risk for adverse events. Postvaccination Testing for Serologic Response
Serologic testing for immunity is not necessary after routine vaccination of adolescents
or adults. However, such testing is recommended for persons whose subsequent clinical
management depends on knowledge of their immune status (e.g., health-care workers
or public safety workers at high risk for continued percutaneous or mucosal exposure to
blood  or  body  fluids).  In  addition,  postvaccination  testing  is  recommended  for  1)
HIV-infected persons and other immunocompromised persons to determine the need for
revaccination and the type of follow-up testing and 2) sex and needle-sharing partners
of  HBsAg-positive  persons  to  determine  the  need  for  revaccination  and  for  other
methods  to  protect  themselves  from  HBV  infection.  If  indicated,  testing  should  be
performed  1--2  months  after  administration  of  the  last  dose  of  the  vaccine  series  by
using  a  method  that  allows  determination  of  a  protective  level  of  anti-HBs  (i.e.,  ≥10
mIU/mL). Persons determined to have anti-HBs levels of <10 mIU/mL after the primary
vaccine series should be revaccinated with a 3-dose series and provided with anti-HBs
testing 1--2 months after the third dose. Persons who do not respond to revaccination
should  be  tested  for  HBsAg.  If  HBsAg  positive,  the  person  should  receive  appropriate
management  (see  Management  of  HBsAg-Positive  Persons);  if  HBsAg  negative,  the
person  should  be  considered  susceptible  to  HBV  infection  and  counseled  concerning
precautions  to  prevent  HBV  infection  and  the  need  for  HBIG  PEP  for  any  known
exposure
 (see
 Postexposure
 Prophylaxis).
 Postexposure
 Prophylaxis
 
 Both
passive-active  PEP  (the  administration  of  HBIG  and  hepatitis  B  vaccine  at  separate
sites)  and  active  PEP  (the  administration  of  hepatitis  B  vaccination  alone)  have  been
demonstrated to be highly effective in preventing transmission after exposure to HBV
(4).  HBIG  alone  also  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  effective  in  preventing  HBV
transmission, but with the availability of hepatitis B vaccine, HBIG typically is used as
an adjunct to vaccination. Exposure to HBsAg-Positive Source Unvaccinated persons or
persons known not to have responded to a complete hepatitis B vaccine series should
receive  both  HBIG  and  hepatitis  vaccine  as  soon  as  possible  (preferably  ≤24  hours)
after a discrete, identifiable exposure to blood or body fluids that contain blood from an
HBsAg-positive  source  (Table  5).  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  should  be  administered
simultaneously with HBIG at a separate injection site, and the vaccine series should be
completed by using the age-appropriate vaccine dose and schedule (Table 3). Exposed
persons who are in the process of being vaccinated but who have not completed the
vaccine series should receive the appropriate dose of HBIG (i.e., 0.06 mL/kg) and should
complete  the  vaccine  series.  Exposed  persons  who  are  known  to  have  responded  to
vaccination  are  considered  protected;  therefore,  they  need  no  additional  doses  of
vaccine.  Persons  who  have  written  documentation  of  a  complete  hepatitis  B  vaccine
series  who  did  not  receive  postvaccination  testing  should  receive  a  single  vaccine
booster dose. Alternatively, these persons can be managed according to guidelines for
management of persons with occupational exposure to blood or body fluids that contain
blood  (446).  Exposure  to  Source  with  Unknown  HBsAg  Status  Unvaccinated  persons
who have a discrete, identifiable exposure to blood or body fluids containing blood from
a source with unknown HBsAg status should receive the hepatitis B vaccine series, with
the first dose initiated as soon as possible after exposure (preferably within 24 hours)
and  the  series  completed  by  using  the  age-appropriate  dose  and  schedule.  Exposed
persons  who  are  not  fully  vaccinated  should  complete  the  vaccine  series.  Exposed
persons with written documentation of a complete hepatitis B vaccine series require no
further  treatment.  Pregnancy  All  pregnant  women  receiving  STD  services  should  be
tested  for  HBsAg,  regardless  of  whether  they  have  been  previously  tested  or
vaccinated. All HBsAg-positive pregnant women should be reported to state and local
perinatal  hepatitis  B  prevention  programs.  HBsAg-negative  pregnant  women  seeking
STD  treatment  who  have  not  been  previously  vaccinated  should  receive  hepatitis  B
vaccination. Additional information regarding management of HBsAg-positive pregnant
women  and  their  infants  is  available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/rr/rr5416.pdf.
HIV  Infection  HIV  infection  can  impair  the  response  to  hepatitis  B  vaccination.
HIV-infected persons should be tested for anti-HBs 1--2 months after the third vaccine
dose (see Postvaccination Testing for Serologic Response). Modified dosing regimens,
including  a  doubling  of  the  standard  antigen  dose  and  administration  of  additional
doses, might increase the response rate (130). Management of HBsAg-Positive Persons
This section provides recommendations for management of all HBsAg-positive persons.
Additional  recommendations  for  management  of  HBsAg-positive  persons  who  are
coinfected  with  HIV  are  available  (130).  All  persons  with  HBsAg-positive  laboratory
results  should  be  reported  to  the  state  or  local  health  department.  To  verify  the
presence  of  chronic  HBV  infection,  HBsAg-positive  persons  should  be  retested.  The
absence  of  IgM  anti-HBc  or  the  persistence  of  HBsAg  for  6  months  indicates  chronic
HBV infection. Persons with chronic HBV infection should be referred for evaluation to a
physician experienced in the management of CLD. Some patients with chronic hepatitis
B  will  benefit  from  early  intervention  with  antiviral  treatment  or  screening  to  detect
HCC  at  an  early  stage.  Household,  sexual,  and  needle-sharing  contacts  of  chronically
infected  persons  should  be  identified.  Unvaccinated  sex  partners  and  household  and
needle-sharing  contacts  should  be  tested  for  susceptibility  to  HBV  infection  (see
Prevaccination Antibody Screening)
and should receive the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine immediately after collection of
the  blood  sample  for  serologic  testing.  Susceptible  persons  should  complete  the
vaccine series by using an age-appropriate vaccine dose and schedule. 
 Sex  partners  of  HBsAg-positive  persons  should  be  counseled  to  use  latex
condoms (448)
to protect themselves from sexual exposure to infectious body fluids (e.g., semen and
vaginal  secretions),  unless  they  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  immune  after
vaccination  (anti-HBs  ≥10  mIU/mL)  or  previously  infected  (anti-HBc  positive).  To
prevent or reduce the risk for transmission to others, HBsAg-positive persons should be
advised  about  the  risk  for  transmission  to  household,  sexual,  and  needle-sharing
contacts  and  the  need  for  such  contacts  to  receive  hepatitis  B  vaccination.
HBsAg-positive persons also should be advised to:
--  use  methods  (e.g.,  condoms)  to  protect  nonimmune  sex  partners  from
acquiring  HBV  infection  from  sexual  activity  until  the  partner  can  be  vaccinated  and
immunity documented;
-- cover cuts and skin lesions to prevent spread by infectious secretions or blood;
-- refrain from donating blood, plasma, body organs, other tissue, or semen; an
-- refrain from sharing household articles (e.g., toothbrushes, razors, or personal
injection  equipment)  that  could  become  contaminated  with  blood.  In  addition,
HBsAg-positive persons should refrain from premasticating food provided to susceptible
persons.  To  protect  the  liver  from  further  harm,  HBsAg-positive  persons  should  be
advised to:
-- avoid or limit alcohol consumption because of the effects of alcohol on the liver;
-- refrain from starting any new medicines, including OTC and herbal medicines,
without checking with their health-care provider; and
--  obtain  vaccination  against  hepatitis  A  if  liver  disease  is  determined  to  be
present.  When  seeking  medical  or  dental  care,  HBsAg-positive  persons  should  be
advised to inform their health-care providers of their HBsAg status so that they can be
appropriately  evaluated  and  managed.  The  following  counseling  messages  should  be
considered for HBsAg-positive persons: HBV is not usually spread by hugging, coughing,
food  or  water,  sharing  eating  utensils  or  drinking  glasses,  or  casual  contact.  Persons
should not be excluded from work, school, play, child care, or other settings because
they are infected with HBV. Involvement with a support group might help patients cope
with  chronic  HBV  infection.  Hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV)  infection  is  the  most  common
chronic bloodborne infection in the United States; an estimated 3.2 million persons are
chronically infected (449). Although HCV is not efficiently transmitted sexually, persons
at  risk  for  infection  through  injection-drug  use  might  seek  care  in  STD  treatment
facilities,  HIV  counseling  and  testing  facilities,  correctional  facilities,  drug  treatment
facilities,  and  other  public  health  settings  where  STD  and  HIV  prevention  and  control
services  are  available.  Persons  newly  infected  with  HCV  typically  are  either
asymptomatic or have a mild clinical illness. HCV RNA can be detected in blood within
1--3  weeks  after  exposure.  The  average  time  from  exposure  to  antibody  to  HCV
(anti-HCV)  seroconversion  is  8--9  weeks,  and  anti-HCV  can  be  detected  in  >97%  of
persons  by  6  months  after  exposure.  Chronic  HCV  infection  develops  in  70%--85%  of
HCV-infected  persons;  60%--70%  of  chronically  infected  persons  develop  evidence  of
active liver disease. Most infected persons remain unaware of their infection because
they are not clinically ill. However, infected persons serve as a source of transmission to
others and are at risk for CLD and other HCV-related chronic diseases for decades after
infection.  HCV  is  transmitted  through  parenteral  exposures  to  contaminated  blood,
usually  through  use  of  injection  drugs  (sharing  of  needles  or  works)  and  to  a  lesser
extent  through  exposures  in  health-care  settings  as  a  consequence  of  inadequate
infection-control  practices.  Transmission  rarely  follows  receipt  of  blood,  tissues,  and
organs  from  HCV-infected  donors  who  were  not  identified  during  routine  screening
activities,  which  have  been  mandated  in  the  United  States  since  1992.  Occupational
and perinatal exposures, although less efficient, also can result in transmission of HCV.
Sexual transmission of HCV had been considered to occur rarely. However, recent data
indicate  that  sexual  transmission  of  HCV  can  occur,  especially  among  HIV-infected
persons.  CDC  surveillance  data  demonstrate  that  10%  of  persons  with  acute  HCV
infection  report  contact  with  a  known  HCV-infected  sex  partner  as  their  only  risk  for
infection  (437).  Specific  studies  of  HCV  transmission  between  heterosexual  or
homosexual  couples  have  yielded  mixed  results,  but  generally  have  found  low  but
increased  rates  of  HCV  infection  in  partners  of  persons  with  HCV  infection  compared
with  those  whose  partners  are  not  HCV-infected  (450--455).  Several  studies  have
revealed  that  risk  increases  commensurate  with  increasing  numbers  of  sex  partners
among  heterosexual  persons  (450,451,456--458)  and  MSM  (459--462),  especially  if
those  partners  are  coinfected  with  HIV  (459--465).   Apparent  sexual  transmission  of
HCV  has  recently  been  reported  among  HIV-infected  MSM  in  multiple  European  cities
(464,465) and New York City (466). Common practices associated with these clusters of
infection include serosorting (i.e., HIV-infected men having sex with one another), group
sex, and the use of cocaine and other nonintravenous drugs during sex. All persons with
HIV infection should undergo serologic testing for HCV at initial evaluation (130,131).
HIV-infected  MSM  can  also  acquire  HCV  after  initial  screening.  Liver  function  tests
should  be  serially  monitored  for  abnormalities  that  could  be  caused  by  acute  viral
hepatitis  or  medication  toxicity.  HIV-infected  persons  with  new  and  unexplained
increases in ALT should be tested for acute HCV infection. To ensure the detection of
acute  HCV  infection  among  HIV-infected  MSM  with  high-risk  sexual  behaviors  or
concomitant  ulcerative  STDs,  routine  HCV  testing  of  HIV-infected  MSM  should  be
considered. Acute hepatitis C is a reportable condition in 49 states, and matching viral
hepatitis and HIV surveillance registries can facilitate early detection of social networks
of  HCV  transmission  among  HIV-infected  MSM.  Suspected  clusters  of  acute  infection
should  be  reported  to  the  appropriate  public  health  authorities.  Unprotected  sexual
contact between HIV-infected partners can facilitate spread of HCV, as the virus can be
recovered  from  the  semen  of  men  coinfected  with  HIV  (467).  Specific  prevention
practices  (e.g.,  barrier  precautions  that  limit  contact  with  body  fluids  during  sexual
contact  with  other  MSM)  should  be  discussed  with  patients.  Anti-HCV  testing  is
recommended  for  routine  screening  of  asymptomatic  persons  based  on  their  risk  for
infection  or  based  on  a  recognized  exposure  (see  Hepatitis  C,  Prevention).  For  such
persons,  testing  for  HCV  infection  should  include  the  use  of  an  FDA-cleared  test  for
antibody to HCV (i.e., immunoassay, EIA, or enhanced chemiluminescence imunoassay
and,  if  recommended,  a  supplemental  antibody  test)  (468).  Persons  counseled  and
tested for HCV infection and determined to be anti-HCV positive should be evaluated
(by referral or consultation, if appropriate) for the presence of active infection, presence
or development of CLD, and possible treatment. Nucleic acid testing, including reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to detect HCV RNA, is necessary to
confirm the diagnosis of current HCV infection, and an elevated ALT level is biochemical
evidence  of  CLD.  Combination  therapy  with  pegylated  interferon  and  ribavirin  is  the
treatment of choice for patients with chronic hepatitis C. Providers should consult with
specialists  knowledgeable  about  management  of  hepatitis  C  infection  because  these
experts  remain  cognizant  of  the  latest  advances  in  the  field  of  antiviral  therapy  for
acute and chronic hepatitis C.  No vaccine for hepatitis C is available, and prophylaxis
with  immune  globulin  is  not  effective  in  preventing  HCV  infection  after  exposure.
Reducing  the  burden  of  HCV  infection  and  disease  in  the  United  States  requires
implementation  of  both  primary  and  secondary  prevention  activities.  Primary
prevention  reduces  or  eliminates  HCV  transmission,  whereas  secondary  prevention
activities  are  aimed  at  reducing  CLD  and  other  chronic  diseases  in  HCV-infected
persons by first identifying them and then providing medical management and antiviral
therapy,  if  appropriate.  Most  scientific  evidence  demonstrates  that  although  HCV  can
be transmitted sexually, such transmission happens rarely. Because incident HCV has
not  been  demonstrated  to  occur  in  heterosexual  partner-pairs  followed  over  time
(452--454),  condom  use  might  not  be  necessary  in  such  circumstances.  However,
heterosexual and homosexual persons, especially those with concurrent HIV infection or
with  more  than  one  partner,  should  protect  themselves  and  their  partners  against
transmission  of  HCV,  HBV,  HIV,  and  other  pathogens  by  use  of  male  latex  condoms.
Condom  use  is  especially  important  for  HIV-infected  men,  who  might  spread  HCV  to
other men though unprotected sexual activity (464--466). Providers in STD clinics and
other primary-care settings should identify those persons who should be offered HCV
counseling and testing. In STD clinics and other settings that serve large numbers of
persons at high risk for bloodborne infections (e.g., correctional settings), the major risk
factor  necessitating  screening  for  HCV  infection  is  past  or  current  injection  of  illegal
drugs.  Because  both  HCV  and  HIV  are  transmitted  through  injection-drug  use,  about
one fourth of all HIV patients are also coinfected with HCV. For this reason, all persons
with HIV infection should be offered HCV counseling and testing. Other risk factors for
which routine HCV testing is recommended include: having had a blood transfusion or
solid  organ  transplant  before  July  1992;  having  received  clotting  factor  concentrates
produced  before  1987;  having  been  on  long-term  dialysis;  and  having  signs  and
symptoms of liver disease (e.g., abnormal ALT). Persons who test negative for anti-HCV
who had an exposure previously should be reassured that they are not infected. Those
who  test  positive  for  anti-HCV  (see  Diagnosis  and  Treatment)  should  be  provided
information  regarding  how  to  protect  their  liver  from  further  harm;  for  instance,
HCV-positive persons should be advised to avoid drinking alcohol and taking any new
medicines (including OTC and herbals) without checking with their clinician. To reduce
the  risk  for  transmission  to  others,  HCV-positive  persons  should  be  advised  to  1)  not
donate blood, body organs, other tissue, or semen; 2) not share any personal items that
might have blood on them (e.g., toothbrushes and razors); and 3) cover cuts and sores
on  the  skin  to  keep  the  virus  from  spreading  by  blood  or  secretions.  HCV-positive
persons  with  one  long-term,  steady  sex  partner  do  not  need  to  change  their  sexual
practices.  They  should  discuss  the  low  but  present  risk  for  transmission  with  their
partner  and  discuss  the  need  for  counseling  and  testing.  HCV-positive  women  do  not
need to avoid pregnancy or breastfeeding. HCV-positive persons should be evaluated
(by  referral  or  consultation,  if  appropriate)  to  detect  active  HCV  infection  and  the
presence  of  CLD.  Evaluation  should  involve  testing  for  liver  function,  additional
assessment of the severity of liver disease, possible treatment, and the determination
for the need of hepatitis A and B vaccination.  Regardless of test results, persons who
use or inject illegal drugs should be counseled to stop using and injecting drugs and to
enter and complete substance abuse treatment (including relapse prevention). Persons
who  continue  to  inject  drugs  despite  counseling  should  be  encouraged  to  take  the
following  steps  to  reduce  personal  and  public  health  risks:  never  reuse  or  share
syringes,  water,  or  drug  preparation  equipment;  only  use  syringes  obtained  from  a
reliable  source  (e.g.,  pharmacies);  use  a  new,  sterile  syringe  to  prepare  and  inject
drugs; if possible, use sterile water to prepare drugs; otherwise, use clean water from a
reliable source (e.g., fresh tap water); use a new or disinfected container (i.e., cooker)
and a new filter (i.e., cotton) to prepare drugs; clean the injection site before injection
with a new alcohol swab; safely dispose of syringes after one use; get vaccinated for
hepatitis  A  and  B  if  nonimmune;  and  get  tested  for  HIV  infection.  No  PEP  has  been
demonstrated to be effective against HCV. Testing to determine whether HCV infection
has  developed  is  recommended  for  health-care  workers  after  percutaneous  or
permucosal exposures to HCV-positive blood. Children born to HCV-positive women also
should be tested for HCV. Prompt identification of acute infection is important, because
outcomes  are  improved  when  treatment  is  initiated  earlier  in  the  course  of  illness.  
Routine testing for HCV infection is not recommended for all pregnant women. Pregnant
women  with  a  known  risk  factor  for  HCV  infection  should  be  offered  counseling  and
testing. Patients should be advised that approximately six of every 100 infants born to
HCV-infected  woman  become  infected;  this  infection  occurs  predominantly  during  or
near  delivery,  and  no  treatment  or  delivery  method---such  as  caesarian  section---has
been  demonstrated  to  decrease  this  risk.  The  risk  is  increased,  however,  by  the
presence  of  maternal  HCV  viremia  at  delivery  and  also  is  greater  (2--3  times)  if  the
woman  is  coinfected  with  HIV.  HCV  has  not  been  shown  to  be  transmitted  through
breast  milk,  although  HCV-positive  mothers  should  consider  abstaining  from
breastfeeding  if  their  nipples  are  cracked  or  bleeding.  Infants  born  to  HCV-positive
mothers should be tested for HCV infection and, if positive, evaluated for the presence
of CLD. Because of the high prevalence of HIV/HCV coinfection and because of critical
clinical management issues for coinfected persons, all persons with HIV infection should
undergo  serologic  testing  for  HCV.  Providers  should  be  aware  of  the  likelihood  that
HIV-infected MSM will acquire HCV after initial screening. Liver function tests should be
serially  monitored,  and  those  persons  with  new  and  unexplained  increases  in  ALT
should  be  tested  for  acute  HCV  infection.  To  detect  acute  HCV  infection  among
HIV-infected  MSM  with  high-risk  sexual  behaviors  or  concomitant  ulcerative  STDs,
routine  HCV  testing  of  HIV-infected  MSM  should  be  considered.  Because  a  small
percentage  of  coinfected  persons  fail  to  acquire  HCV  antibodies,  HCV  RNA  should  be
tested  in  HIV-positive  persons  with  unexplained  liver  disease  who  are  anti-HCV
negative. The course of liver disease is more rapid in HIV/HCV coinfected persons, and
the risk for cirrhosis is nearly twice that of persons with HCV infection alone. Coinfected
persons  receiving  HIV  antiviral  regimens  are  now  being  treated  for  HCV  after  their
CD4+  cell  counts  increase,  optimizing  their  immune  response.   Sexually  transmitted
gastrointestinal syndromes include proctitis, proctocolitis, and enteritis. Evaluation for
these syndromes should include appropriate diagnostic procedures (e.g., anoscopy or
sigmoidoscopy, stool examination, and culture). Proctitis is inflammation of the rectum
(i.e.,  the  distal  10--12  cm)  that  can  be  associated  with  anorectal  pain,  tenesmus,  or
rectal discharge. N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis (including LGV serovars), T. pallidum,
and  HSV  are  the  most  common  sexually  transmitted  pathogens  involved.  In  patients
coinfected  with  HIV,  herpes  proctitis  can  be  especially  severe.  Proctitis  occurs
predominantly  among  persons  who  participate  in  receptive  anal  intercourse.
Proctocolitis  is  associated  with  symptoms  of  proctitis,  diarrhea  or  abdominal  cramps,
and  inflammation  of  the  colonic  mucosa  extending  to  12  cm  above  the  anus.  Fecal
leukocytes  might  be  detected  on  stool  examination,  depending  on  the  pathogen.
Pathogenic organisms include Campylobacter sp., Shigella sp., Entamoeba histolytica,
and LGV serovars of C. trachomatis. CMV or other opportunistic agents can be involved
in  immunosuppressed  HIV-infected  patients.  Proctocolitis  can  be  acquired  by  the  oral
route  or  by  oral-anal  contact,  depending  on  the  pathogen.  Enteritis  usually  results  in
diarrhea  and  abdominal  cramping  without  signs  of  proctitis  or  proctocolitis;  it  occurs
among persons whose sexual practices include oral-anal contact. In otherwise healthy
persons,  Giardia  lamblia  is  most  frequently  implicated.  When  outbreaks  of
gastrointestinal illness occur among social or sexual networks of MSM, clinicians should
consider sexual transmission as a mode of spread and provide counseling accordingly.
Among HIV-infected patients, gastrointestinal illness can be caused by other infections
that
 usually
 are
 not
 sexually
 transmitted,
 including
 CMV,
 Mycobacterium
avium--intracellulare, Salmonella sp., Campylobacter sp., Shigella sp., Cryptosporidium,
Microsporidium, and Isospora. Multiple stool examinations might be necessary to detect
Giardia, and special stool preparations are required to diagnose cryptosporidiosis and
microsporidiosis.  In  addition,  enteritis  can  be  directly  caused  by  HIV  infection.  When
laboratory diagnostic capabilities are available, treatment decisions should be based on
the  specific  diagnosis.  Diagnostic  and  treatment  recommendations  for  all  enteric
infections  are  beyond  the  scope  of  these  guidelines.  Acute  proctitis  of  recent  onset
among  persons  who  have  recently  practiced  receptive  anal  intercourse  is  usually
sexually  acquired  (469,470).  Such  patients  should  be  examined  by  anoscopy  and
should  be  evaluated  for  infection  with  HSV,  N.  gonorrhoeae,  C.  trachomatis,  and  T.
pallidum. If an anorectal exudate is detected on examination or if polymorphonuclear
leukocytes are detected on a Gram-stained smear of anorectal secretions, the following
therapy should be prescribed while awaiting additional laboratory tests. Recommended
Regimen Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM  PLUS Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days
Patients  with  suspected  or  documented  herpes  proctitis  should  be  managed  in  the
same  manner  as  those  with  genital  herpes  (see  Genital  HSV  Infections).  If  painful
perianal ulcers are present or mucosal ulcers are detected on anoscopy, presumptive
therapy  should  include  a  regimen  for  genital  herpes  and  LGV.  Appropriate  diagnostic
testing for LGV should be conducted in accordance with state or federal guidelines, and
doxycycline therapy should be administered 100 mg orally twice daily for 3 weeks. For
MSM, treatment for LGV proctitis/proctocolitis with 3 weeks of doxycycline in those with
anorectal  chlamydia  and  either  1)  proctitis  (as  detected  by  proctoscopic  examination
and  the  presence  of  >10  white-blood  cells  upon  high-power  field  examination  of  an
anorectal smear specimen) or 2) HIV infection can be considered. Follow-up should be
based  on  specific  etiology  and  severity  of  clinical  symptoms.  Reinfection  might  be
difficult  to  distinguish  from  treatment  failure.  Partners  of  persons  with  sexually
transmitted  enteric  infections  should  be  evaluated  for  any  diseases  diagnosed  in  the
index patient. Persons who have pediculosis pubis (i.e., pubic lice) usually seek medical
attention  because  of  pruritus  or  because  they  notice  lice  or  nits  on  their  pubic  hair.
Pediculosis  pubis  is  usually  transmitted  by  sexual  contact.  Recommended  Regimens
Permethrin 1% cream rinse applied to affected areas and washed off after 10 minutes
OR Pyrethrins with piperonyl butoxide applied to the affected area and washed off after
10  minutes  Alternative  Regimens  Malathion  0.5%  lotion  applied  for  8--12  hours  and
washed off OR Ivermectin 250 µg/kg orally, repeated in 2 weeks Reported resistance to
pediculicides has been increasing and is widespread (471--473). Malathion can be used
when treatment failure is believed to have resulted from drug resistance. The odor and
long duration of application for malathion make it a less attractive alternative than the
recommended pediculcides. Ivermectin has been successfully used to treat lice, but it
has  only  been  evaluated  in  studies  involving  a  limited  number  of  participants.  The
recommended regimens should not be applied to the eyes. Pediculosis of the eyelashes
should  be  treated  by  applying  occlusive  ophthalmic  ointment  to  the  eyelid  margins
twice a day for 10 days. Bedding and clothing should be decontaminated (i.e., either
dry cleaned or machine-washed and dried using the heat cycle) or removed from body
contact for at least 72 hours. Fumigation of living areas is not necessary. Patients with
pediculosis  pubis  should  be  evaluated  for  other  STDs.  Patients  should  be  evaluated
after 1 week if symptoms persist. Retreatment might be necessary if lice are found or if
eggs are observed at the hair-skin junction. Patients who do not respond to one of the
recommended regimens should be retreated with an alternative regimen. Sex partners
that  have  had  sexual  contact  with  the  patient  within  the  previous  month  should  be
treated.  Patients  should  abstain  from  sexual  contact  with  their  sex  partner(s)  until
patients and partners have been treated and reevaluated to rule out persistent disease.
Pregnancy Pregnant and lactating women should be treated with either permethrin or
pyrethrins  with  piperonyl  butoxide;  lindane  and  ivermectin  are  contraindicated  in
pregnancy and lactating women. HIV Infection Patients who have pediculosis pubis and
also are infected with HIV should receive the same treatment regimen as those who are
HIV  negative.  The  predominant  symptom  of  scabies  is  pruritus,  but  sensitization  to
Sarcoptes scabiei occurs before pruritus begins. The first time a person is infested with
S.  scabiei,  sensitization  can  take  several  weeks  to  develop.  However,  pruritus  might
occur within 24 hours after a subsequent reinfestation. Scabies in adults frequently is
sexually acquired, although scabies in children usually is not. Recommended Regimens
Permethrin cream (5%) applied to all areas of the body from the neck down and washed
off  after  8--14  hours  OR  Ivermectin  200ug/kg  orally,  repeated  in  2  weeks  Alternative
Regimen Lindane (1%) 1 oz. of lotion (or 30 g of cream) applied in a thin layer to all
areas of the body from the neck down and thoroughly washed off after 8 hours Lindane
is  not  recommended  as  first-line  therapy  because  of  toxicity  (471).  It  should  only  be
used as an alternative if the patient cannot tolerate other therapies or if other therapies
have  failed.  Lindane  should  not  be  used  immediately  after  a  bath  or  shower,  and  it
should  not  be  used  by  persons  who  have  extensive  dermatitis,  women  who  are
pregnant or lactating, or children aged <2 years. Lindane resistance has been reported
in some areas of the world, including parts of the United States (474). Seizures have
occurred when lindane was applied after a bath or used by patients who had extensive
dermatitis.  Aplastic  anemia  after  lindane  use  also  has  been  reported  (471,  474).
Permethrin  is  effective  and  safe  and  less  expensive  than  ivermectin  (471,  474).  One
study  demonstrated  increased  mortality  among  elderly,  debilitated  persons  who
received ivermectin, but this observation has not been confirmed in subsequent studies
(475).  Bedding  and  clothing  should  be  decontaminated  (i.e.,  either  dry  cleaned  or
machine-washed and dried using the hot cycle) or removed from body contact for at
least  72  hours.  Fumigation  of  living  areas  is  unnecessary.  Crusted  scabies  (i.e.,
Norwegian scabies) is an aggressive infestation that usually occurs in immunodeficient,
debilitated,  or  malnourished  persons  (476).  Patients  who  are  receiving  systemic  or
potent  topical  glucocorticoids,  organ  transplant  recipients,  mentally  retarded  or
physically
 incapacitated
 persons,
 HIV-infected
 or
 human
 T-lymphotrophic
virus-1-infected persons, and persons with various hematologic malignancies are at risk
for
 developing
 crusted
 scabies.
 Crusted
 scabies
 is
 associated
 with
 greater
transmissibility than scabies. No controlled therapeutic studies for crusted scabies have
been  conducted,  and  the  appropriate  treatment  remains  unclear.  Substantial  risk  for
treatment  failure  might  exist  with  a  single  topical  scabicide  or  with  oral  ivermectin
treatment. Combined treatment with a topical scabicide and repeated treatment with
oral  ivermectin  200  µg/kg  on  days  1,  2,  8,  9,  and  15  are  suggested.  Additional
treatment on days 22 and 29 might be required for severe cases. Ivermectin should be
combined  with  the  application  of  either  5%  topical  benzyl  benzoate  or  5%  topical
permethrin (full body application to be repeated daily for 7 days then 2 times weekly
until  release  from  care  or  cure).  Lindane  should  be  avoided  because  of  the  risks  for
neurotoxicity  associated  with  both  heavy  applications  and  denuded  skin.  Fingernails
should be closely trimmed to reduce injury from excessive scratching. Patients should
be informed that the rash and pruritus of scabies might persist for up to 2 weeks after
treatment. Symptoms or signs that persist for >2 weeks can be attributed to several
factors. Treatment failure can be caused by resistance to medication, although faulty
application  of  topical  scabicides  also  can  contribute  to  persistence  ---  patients  with
crusted scabies might have poor penetration into thick scaly skin and harbor mites in
these difficult-to-penetrate layers. Particular attention must be given to the fingernails
of these patients. Reinfection from family members or fomites can occur in the absence
of  appropriate  contact  treatment  and  washing  of  bedding  and  clothing.  Even  when
treatment is successful and reinfection is avoided, symptoms can persist or worsen as a
result  of  allergic  dermatitis.  Finally,  the  presence  of  household  mites  can  cause
symptoms to persist as a result of cross reactivity between antigens. Retreatment can
be considered after 1--2 weeks for patients who are still symptomatic or if live mites are
present.  Treatment  with  an  alternative  regimen  is  recommended  for  persons  who  do
not respond to the recommended treatment. Sexual contacts and those that have had
close personal or household contact with the patient within the preceding month should
be  examined  and  treated.  Scabies  outbreaks  frequently  occur  in  nursing  homes,
hospitals, residential facilities, and other communities. Control of an epidemic can only
be achieved by treatment of the entire population at risk. Ivermectin can be considered
in this setting, especially if treatment with topical scabicides fails. Epidemics should be
managed in consultation with an infectious disease specialist. Infants, Young Children,
and  Pregnant  or  Lactating  Women  Infants,  young  children,  and  pregnant  or  lactating
women  should  not  be  treated  with  lindane;  however,  they  can  be  treated  with
permethrin. Ivermectin is not recommended for pregnant or lactating patients, and the
safety  of  ivermectin  in  children  who  weigh  <15  kg  has  not  been  determined.  HIV
Infection  Patients  who  have  uncomplicated  scabies  and  also  are  infected  with  HIV
should  receive  the  same  treatment  regimens  as  those  who  are  HIV  negative.
HIV-infected patients and others who are immunosuppressed are at increased risk for
crusted scabies, for which ivermectin has been reported to be effective in noncontrolled
studies  involving  only  a  limited  number  of  participants.  HIV-infected  patients  with
crusted scabies should be managed in consultation with an infectious disease specialist.
The recommendations in this report are limited to the identification, prophylaxis, and
treatment  of  STDs  and  conditions  commonly  identified  in  the  management  of  such
infections. The documentation of findings, collection of nonmicrobiologic specimens for
forensic  purposes,  and  management  of  potential  pregnancy  or  physical  and
psychological trauma are beyond the scope of this report. Examinations of survivors of
sexual assault should be conducted by an experienced clinician in a way that minimizes
further  trauma  to  the  survivor.  The  decision  to  obtain  genital  or  other  specimens  for
STD diagnosis should be made on an individual basis. Care systems for survivors should
be  designed  to  ensure  continuity  (including  timely  review  of  test  results),  support
adherence,  and  monitor  for  adverse  reactions  to  any  therapeutic  or  prophylactic
regimens  prescribed  at  initial  examination.  Laws  in  all  50  states  strictly  limit  the
evidentiary use of a survivor's previous sexual history, including evidence of previously
acquired  STDs,  as  part  of  an  effort  to  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  survivor's
testimony.  Evidentiary  privilege  against  revealing  any  aspect  of  the  examination  or
treatment  also  is  enforced  in  most  states.  Although  it  rarely  occurs,  STD  diagnoses
might later be accessed, and the survivor and clinician might opt to defer testing for
this  reason.  While  collection  of  specimens  at  initial  examination  for  laboratory  STD
diagnosis  gives  the  survivor  and  clinician  the  option  to  defer  empiric  prophylactic
antimicrobial treatment, compliance with follow up visits is traditionally poor (477,478).
Among sexually active adults, the identification of an STD might represent an infection
acquired  prior  to  the  assault,  and  therefore  might  be  more  important  for  the
psychological  and  medical  management  of  the  patient  than  for  legal  purposes.
Trichomoniasis,  BV,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydial  infection  are  the  most  frequently
diagnosed infections among women who have been sexually assaulted. Such conditions
are relatively prevalent, and the presence after an assault does not necessarily imply
acquisition  during  the  assault.  However,  a  postassault  examination  presents  an
important  opportunity  to  identify  or  prevent  STDs.  Chlamydial  and  gonococcal
infections  in  women  are  of  particular  concern  because  of  the  possibility  of  ascending
infection. In addition, HBV infection can be prevented by postexposure administration of
hepatitis  B  vaccine.  Reproductive-aged  female  survivors  should  be  evaluated  for
pregnancy, if appropriate. Initial Examination An initial examination might include the
following  procedures:  NAATs  for  C.  trachomatis  and  N.  gonorrhoeae.  These  tests  are
preferred for the diagnostic evaluation of sexual assault victims, regardless of the sites
of penetration or attempted penetration (197). Wet mount and culture or point-of-care
testing of a vaginal-swab specimen for
T. vaginalis infection. The wet mount also should be examined for evidence of BV
and candidiasis, especially if vaginal discharge, malodor, or itching is evident. A serum
sample for immediate evaluation for HIV infection, hepatitis B, and syphilis. Decisions to
perform these tests should be made on an individual basis.
 Follow-Up  Examinations  After  the  initial  postassault  examination,  follow-up
examinations  provide  an  opportunity  to  1)  detect  new  infections  acquired  during  or
after  the  assault;  2)  complete  hepatitis  B  vaccination,  if  indicated;  3)  complete
counseling and treatment for other STDs; and 4) monitor side effects and adherence to
postexposure  prophylactic  medication,  if  prescribed.  Examination  for  STDs  can  be
repeated within 1--2 weeks of the assault. Because infectious agents acquired through
assault  might  not  have  produced  sufficient  concentrations  of  organisms  to  result  in
positive  test  results  at  the  initial  examination,  testing  can  be  repeated  during  the
follow-up visit, unless prophylactic treatment was provided. If treatment was provided,
testing should be conducted only if the survivor reports having symptoms. If treatment
was not provided, follow-up examination should be conducted within 1 week to ensure
that  results  of  positive  tests  can  be  discussed  promptly  with  the  survivor  and  that
treatment is provided. Serologic tests for syphilis and HIV infection can be repeated 6
weeks, 3 months, and 6 months after the assault if initial test results were negative and
infection in the assailant could not be ruled out (see Sexual Assault and STDs, Risk for
Acquiring  HIV  Infection).  Compliance  with  follow-up  visits  is  poor  among  survivors  of
sexual assault (477,478). As a result, routine preventive therapy after a sexual assault
should be encouraged. The following prophylactic regimen is suggested as preventive
therapy:  Postexposure  hepatitis  B  vaccination,  without  HBIG.  This  vaccine  should  be
administered to sexual assault survivors at the time of the initial examination if they
have  not  been  previously  vaccinated.  Follow-up  doses  of  vaccine  should  be
administered  1--2  and  4--6  months  after  the  first  dose.  An  empiric  antimicrobial
regimen  for  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  and  trichomonas.  Emergency  contraception.  (This
measure is necessary only when the assault could result in pregnancy in the survivor.)
Recommended Regimens Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM in a single dose OR Cefixime 400 mg
orally in a single dose PLUS Metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose PLUS Azithromycin
1  g  orally  in  a  single  dose  OR  Doxycycline  100  mg  orally  twice  a  day  for  7  days  For
those  requiring  alternative  treatments,  refer  to  the  specific  sections  in  this  report
relevant to the specific agent. The efficacy of these regimens in preventing infections
after  sexual  assault  has  not  been  evaluated.  Clinicians  should  counsel  patients
regarding  the  possible  benefits  and  toxicities  associated  with  these  treatment
regimens;  gastrointestinal  side  effects  can  occur  with  this  combination.   At  the  initial
examination and, if indicated, at follow-up examinations, patients should be counseled
regarding 1) symptoms of STDs and the need for immediate examination if symptoms
occur  and  2)  abstinence  from  sexual  intercourse  until  STD  prophylactic  treatment  is
completed. Risk for Acquiring HIV Infection HIV seroconversion has occurred in persons
whose only known risk factor was sexual assault or sexual abuse, but the frequency of
this occurrence is probably low. In consensual sex, the risk for HIV transmission from
vaginal intercourse is 0.1%--0.2% and for receptive rectal intercourse, 0.5%--3% (479).
The risk for HIV transmission from oral sex is substantially lower. Specific circumstances
of an assault (e.g., bleeding, which often accompanies trauma) might increase risk for
HIV transmission in cases involving vaginal, anal, or oral penetration. Site of exposure
to ejaculate, viral load in ejaculate, and the presence of an STD or genital lesions in the
assailant or survivor also might increase the risk for HIV. Children might be at higher
risk for transmission, because the sexual abuse of children is frequently associated with
multiple episodes of assault and might result in mucosal trauma (see Sexual Assault or
Abuse  of  Children).  Postexposure  therapy  with  zidovudine  was  associated  with  a
reduced risk for acquiring HIV in a study of health-care workers who had percutaneous
exposures to HIV-infected blood (480). On the basis of these results and the results of
animal  studies,  PEP  has  been  recommended  for  health-care  workers  who  have
occupational exposures to HIV (446). These findings have been extrapolated to other
types  of  HIV  exposure,  including  sexual  assault  (78).  If  HIV  exposure  has  occurred,
initiation  of  PEP  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  exposure  likely  increases  benefit.
Although a definitive statement of benefit cannot be made regarding PEP after sexual
assault, the possibility of HIV exposure from the assault should be assessed at the time
of the postassault examination. The possible benefit of PEP in preventing HIV infection
also  should  be  discussed  with  the  assault  survivor  if  the  assault  poses  a  risk  for  HIV
exposure. Several factors impact the medical recommendation for PEP and affect the
assault survivor's acceptance of that recommendation, including 1) the likelihood of the
assailant  having  HIV,  2)  any  exposure  characteristics  that  might  increase  the  risk  for
HIV transmission, 3) the time elapsed after the event, and 4) the potential benefits and
risks  associated  with  the  PEP  (78).  Determination  of  the  assailant's  HIV  status  at  the
time  of  the  assault  examination  usually  in  not  possible.  Therefore,  the  health-care
provider should assess any available information concerning 1) characteristics and HIV
risk behaviors of the assailant(s) (e.g., a man who has sex with other men and persons
who  use  injection  drugs  or  crack  cocaine),  2)  local  epidemiology  of  HIV/AIDS,  and  3)
exposure  characteristics  of  the  assault.  When  an  assailant's  HIV  status  is  unknown,
factors  that  should  be  considered  in  determining  whether  an  increased  risk  for  HIV
transmission exists include 1) whether vaginal or anal penetration occurred; 2) whether
ejaculation  occurred  on  mucous  membranes;  3)  whether  multiple  assailants  were
involved;  4)  whether  mucosal  lesions  are  present  in  the  assailant  or  survivor;  and  5)
any other characteristics of the assault, survivor, or assailant that might increase risk
for  HIV  transmission.  If  PEP  is  offered,  the  following  information  should  be  discussed
with the patient: 1) the unproven benefit and known toxicities of antiretrovirals; 2) the
importance of close follow-up; 3) the benefit of adherence to recommended dosing; and
4) the necessity of early initiation of PEP to optimize potential benefits (i.e., as soon as
possible after and up to 72 hours after the assault). Providers should emphasize that
PEP appears to be well-tolerated in both adults and children and that severe adverse
effects are rare (481--483). Clinical management of the survivor should be implemented
according  to  the  following  guidelines  (78).  Specialist  consultation  on  PEP  regimens  is
recommended  if  HIV  exposure  during  the  assault  was  possible  and  if  PEP  is  being
considered. The sooner PEP is initiated after the exposure, the higher the likelihood that
it  will  prevent  HIV  transmission  if  HIV  exposure  occurred;  however,  distress  after  an
assault  also  might  prevent  the  survivor  from  accurately  weighing  exposure  risks  and
benefits of PEP and from making an informed decision to start such therapy. If use of
PEP is judged to be warranted, the survivor should be offered a 3--5-day supply of PEP,
and  a  follow-up  visit  should  be  scheduled  several  days  later  to  allow  for  additional
counseling.  Recommendations  for  Postexposure  Assessment  of  Adolescent  and  Adult
Survivors  Within  72  Hours  of  Sexual  Assault§§  Assess  risk  for  HIV  infection  in  the
assailant. Evaluate characteristics of the assault event that might increase risk for HIV
transmission. Consult with a specialist in HIV treatment, if PEP is being considered. If
the  survivor  appears  to  be  at  risk  for  HIV  transmission  from  the  assault,  discuss
antiretroviral prophylaxis, including toxicity and lack of proven benefit. If the survivor
chooses to start antiretroviral PEP (78), provide enough medication to last until the next
return  visit;  reevaluate  the  survivor  3--7  days  after  initial  assessment  and  assess
tolerance  of  medications.  If  PEP  is  started,  perform  CBC  and  serum  chemistry  at
baseline (initiation of PEP should not be delayed, pending results). Perform HIV antibody
test  at  original  assessment;  repeat  at  6  weeks,  3  months,  and  6  months.
Recommendations in this report are limited to the identification and treatment of STDs.
Management of the psychosocial aspects of the sexual assault or abuse of children is
beyond  the  scope  of  these  recommendations.  The  identification  of  sexually
transmissible agents in children beyond the neonatal period suggests sexual abuse. The
significance  of  the  identification  of  a  sexually  transmitted  agent  in  such  children  as
evidence  of  possible  child  sexual  abuse  varies  by  pathogen.  Postnatally  acquired
gonorrhea;  syphilis;  and  nontransfusion,  nonperinatally  acquired  HIV  are  usually
diagnostic of sexual abuse. Sexual abuse should be suspected when genital herpes is
diagnosed.  The  investigation  of  sexual  abuse  among  children  who  have  an  infection
that  could  have  been  transmitted  sexually  should  be  conducted  in  compliance  with
recommendations by clinicians who have experience and training in all elements of the
evaluation of child abuse, neglect, and assault. The social significance of an infection
that  might  have  been  acquired  sexually  and  the  recommended  action  regarding
reporting  of  suspected  child  sexual  abuse  varies  by  the  specific  organism,  as  do  the
recommendations regarding reporting of suspected child sexual abuse (Table 6). In all
cases in which an STD has been diagnosed in a child, efforts should be made to detect
evidence of sexual abuse, including conducting diagnostic testing for other commonly
occurring  STDs  (484--486).  The  general  rule  that  sexually  transmissible  infections
beyond the neonatal period are evidence of sexual abuse has exceptions. For example,
rectal or genital infection with C. trachomatis among young children might be the result
of perinatally acquired infection and has, in some cases, persisted for as long as 2--3
years. Genital warts have been diagnosed in children who have been sexually abused,
but  also  in  children  who  have  no  other  evidence  of  sexual  abuse  (487,488).  BV  has
been  diagnosed  in  children  who  have  been  abused,  but  its  presence  alone  does  not
prove sexual abuse. In addition, most HBV infections in children result from household
exposure  to  persons  who  have  chronic  HBV  infection.  The  possibility  of  sexual  abuse
should be strongly considered if no conclusive explanation for nonsexual transmission
of an STD can be identified.  All U.S. states and territories have laws that require the
reporting  of  child  abuse.  Although  the  exact  requirements  differ  by  state,  if  a
health-care  provider  has  reasonable  cause  to  suspect  child  abuse,  a  report  must  be
made. Health-care providers should contact their state or local child-protection service
agency  regarding  child-abuse  reporting  requirements  in  their  states.  Examinations  of
children  for  sexual  assault  or  abuse  should  be  conducted  in  a  manner  designed  to
minimize pain and trauma to the child. Collection of vaginal specimens in prepubertal
children  can  be  very  uncomfortable  and  should  be  performed  by  an  experienced
clinician to avoid psychological and physical trauma to the child. The decision to obtain
genital or other specimens from a child to conduct an STD evaluation must be made on
an  individual  basis.  The  following  situations  place  children  at  high-risk  for  STDs  and
constitute a strong indication for testing. The child has or has had symptoms or signs of
an  STD  or  of  an  infection  that  can  be  sexually  transmitted,  even  in  the  absence  of
suspicion of sexual abuse. Among the signs that are associated with a confirmed STD
diagnosis are vaginal discharge or pain, genital itching or odor, urinary symptoms, and
genital ulcers or lesions. A suspected assailant is known to have an STD or to be at high
risk for STDs (e.g., has multiple sex partners or a history of STDs). A sibling or another
child  or  adult  in  the  household  or  child's  immediate  environment  has  an  STD.  The
patient  or  parent  requests  testing.  Evidence  of  genital,  oral,  or  anal  penetration  or
ejaculation is present. If a child has symptoms, signs, or evidence of an infection that
might  be  sexually  transmitted,  the  child  should  be  tested  for  other  common  STDs
before the initiation of any treatment that could interfere with the diagnosis of those
other  STDs.  Because  of  the  legal  and  psychosocial  consequences  of  a  false-positive
diagnosis, only tests with high specificities should be used. The potential benefit to the
child  of  a  reliable  diagnosis  of  an  STD  justifies  deferring  presumptive  treatment  until
specimens  for  highly  specific  tests  are  obtained  by  providers  with  experience  in  the
evaluation of sexually abused and assaulted children. The scheduling of an examination
should depend on the history of assault or abuse. If the initial exposure was recent, the
infectious  agents  acquired  through  the  exposure  might  not  have  produced  sufficient
concentrations  of  organisms  to  result  in  positive  test  results.  A  follow-up  visit
approximately  2  weeks  after  the  most  recent  sexual  exposure  can  include  a  repeat
physical examination and collection of additional specimens. To allow sufficient time for
antibodies  to  develop,  another  follow-up  visit  approximately  12  weeks  after  the  most
recent sexual exposure might be necessary to collect sera. A single examination might
be sufficient if the child was abused for an extended period and if a substantial amount
of  time  elapsed  between  the  last  suspected  episode  of  abuse  and  the  medical
evaluation.  The  following  recommendations  for  scheduling  examinations  serve  as  a
general  guide.  The  exact  timing  and  nature  of  follow-up  examinations  should  be
determined on an individual basis and should be performed to minimize the possibility
for  psychological  trauma  and  social  stigma.  Compliance  with  follow-up  appointments
might  be  improved  when  law  enforcement  personnel  or  child  protective  services  are
involved. Initial and 2-Week Follow-Up Examinations During the initial examination and
2-week follow-up examination (if indicated), the following should be performed. Visual
inspection of the genital, perianal, and oral areas for genital discharge, odor, bleeding,
irritation,  warts,  and  ulcerative  lesions.  The  clinical  manifestations  of  some  STDs  are
different in children than in adults. For example, typical vesicular lesions might not be
present  in  the  presence  of  HSV  infection.  Because  this  infection  can  be  indicative  of
sexual abuse, specimens should be obtained from all vesicular or ulcerative genital or
perianal  lesions  compatible  with  genital  herpes  and  then  sent  for  viral  culture.
Specimen collection for N. gonorrhoeae
culture from the pharynx and anus in boys and girls, the vagina in girls, and the
urethra  in  boys.  Cervical  specimens  are  not  recommended  for  prepubertal  girls.  For
boys with a urethral discharge, a meatal specimen discharge is an adequate substitute
for an intraurethral swab specimen. Because of the legal implications of a diagnosis of
N. gonorrhoeae infection in a child, if culture for the isolation of N. gonorrhoeae is done,
only standard culture procedures should be performed. Gram stains are inadequate to
evaluate  prepubertal  children  for  gonorrhea  and  should  not  be  used  to  diagnose  or
exclude gonorrhea. Specimens from the vagina, urethra, pharynx, or rectum should be
streaked  onto  selective  media  for  isolation  of  N.  gonorrhoeae,  and  all  presumptive
isolates  of  N.  gonorrhoeae  should  be  identified  definitively  by  at  least  two  tests  that
involve different principles (e.g., biochemical, enzyme substrate, or serologic). Isolates
should be preserved to enable additional or repeated testing. 
 Cultures for C. trachomatis from specimens collected from the anus in both boys
and girls and from the vagina in girls. The likelihood of recovering 
C.  trachomatis  from  the  urethra  of  prepubertal  boys  is  too  low  to  justify  the
trauma involved in obtaining an intraurethral specimen. However, a meatal specimen
should be obtained if urethral discharge is present. Pharyngeal specimens for
C. trachomatis are not recommended for children of either sex because the yield
is low, perinatally acquired infection might persist beyond infancy, and culture systems
in some laboratories do not distinguish between
C.  trachomatis  and  C.  pneumoniae.  Only  standard  culture  systems  for  the
isolation of 
C.  trachomatis  should  be  used.  The  isolation  of  C.  trachomatis  should  be
confirmed
 by
 microscopic
 identification
 of
 inclusions
 by
 staining
 with
fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal antibody specific for
C. trachomatis; EIAs are not acceptable confirmatory methods. Isolates should be
preserved.  Nonculture  tests  for  chlamydia  (e.g.,  nonamplified  probes,  EIAs,  and  DFA)
are not sufficiently specific for use in circumstances involving possible child abuse or
assault. NAATs can be used for detection of
C. trachomatis in vaginal specimens or urine from girls. All specimens should be
retained for additional testing if necessary. No data are available regarding the use of
NAATs in boys or for extragenital specimens (e.g., those obtained from the rectum) in
boys and girls. Culture remains the preferred method for extragenital sites. Culture and
wet mount of a vaginal swab specimen for
T.  vaginalis  infection  and  BV.  Collection  of  serum  samples  to  be  evaluated
immediately, preserved for subsequent analysis, and used as a baseline for comparison
with  follow-up  serologic  tests.  Sera  should  be  tested  immediately  for  antibodies  to
sexually transmitted agents. Agents for which suitable tests are available include
T. pallidum, HIV, and HBV. Decisions regarding the agents for which to perform
serologic  tests  should  be  made  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Data  on  use  of  NAATs  for
detection of N. gonorrhoeae in children are limited, and performance is test dependent
(197,486). Consultation with an expert is necessary before using NAATs in this context
to minimize the possibility of cross-reaction with nongonococcal Neisseria species and
other  commensals  (e.g.,  N.  meningitidis,  N.  sicca,  N.  lactamica,  N.  cinerea,  and
Moraxella  catarrhalis).  NAATs  can  be  used  as  an  alternative  to  culture  with  vaginal
specimens  or  urine  from  girls,  whereas  culture  remains  the  preferred  method  for
urethral  specimens  or  urine  from  boys  and  for  extragenital  specimens  (pharynx  and
rectum)  from  all  children.  All  positive  specimens  should  be  retained  for  additional
testing. HIV infection has been reported in children whose only known risk factor was
sexual  abuse.  Serologic  testing  for  HIV  infection  should  be  considered  for  abused
children. The decision to test for HIV infection should be made on a case-by-case basis,
depending  on  the  likelihood  of  infection  among  assailant(s).  Although  data  are
insufficient concerning the efficacy and safety of PEP among both children and adults,
treatment is well tolerated by infants and children (with and without HIV infection), and
children have a minimal risk for serious adverse reactions because of the short period
recommended  for  prohylaxis.  (78,138).  In  considering  whether  to  offer  antiretroviral
PEP, health-care providers should consider whether the child can be treated soon after
the sexual exposure (i.e., within 72 hours), the likelihood that the assailant is infected
with  HIV,  and  the  likelihood  of  high  compliance  with  the  prophylactic  regimen.  The
potential benefit of treating a sexually abused child should be weighed against the risk
for adverse reactions. If antiretroviral PEP is being considered, a provider specializing in
evaluating or treating HIV-infected children should be consulted. Recommendations for
HIV-Related  Postexposure  Assessment  of  Children  within  72  Hours  of  Sexual  Assault
Review HIV/AIDS local epidemiology and assess risk for HIV infection in the assailant.
Evaluate circumstances of assault that might affect risk for HIV transmission. Consult
with  a  specialist  in  treating  HIV-infected  children  if  PEP  is  considered.  If  the  child
appears  to  be  at  risk  for  HIV  transmission  from  the  assault,  discuss  PEP  with  the
caregiver(s),  including  its  toxicity  and  unknown  efficacy.  If  caregivers  choose  for  the
child to receive antiretroviral PEP (78,142,489), provide enough medication to last until
the return visit at 3--7 days after the initial assessment, at which time the child should
be reevaluated and tolerance of medication assessed; dosages should not exceed those
for adults. Perform HIV antibody test at original assessment, 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6
months.  In  circumstances  in  which  transmission  of  syphilis,  HIV,  or  hepatitis  B  is  a
concern  but  baseline  tests  are  negative,  an  examination  approximately  6  weeks,  3
months,  and  6  months  after  the  last  suspected  sexual  exposure  is  recommended  to
allow time for antibodies to infectious agents to develop. In addition, results of HBsAg
testing  must  be  interpreted  carefully,  because  HBV  can  be  transmitted  nonsexually.
Decisions  regarding  which  tests  should  be  performed  must  be  made  on  an  individual
basis. The risk of a child acquiring an STD as a result of sexual abuse or assault has not
been  well  studied.  Presumptive  treatment  for  children  who  have  been  sexually
assaulted  or  abused  is  not  recommended  because  1)  the  incidence  of  most  STDs  in
children is low after abuse/assault, 2) prepubertal girls appear to be at lower risk for
ascending  infection  than  adolescent  or  adult  women,  and  3)  regular  follow-up  of
children  usually  can  be  ensured.  However,  some  children  or  their  parent(s)  or
guardian(s) might be concerned about the possibility of infection with an STD, even if
the risk is perceived to be low by the health-care provider. Such concerns might be an
appropriate  indication  for  presumptive  treatment  in  some  settings  and  might  be
considered  after  all  specimens  for  diagnostic  tests  relevant  to  the  investigation  have
been collected. * STI is the term used by USPSTF to describe the syndromes caused by
various  pathogens  that  can  be  acquired  and  transmitted  through  sexual  activity.  †
Regardless of history of condom use during exposure. § Commercially available NAATS
are  not  FDA  cleared  for  these  indications,  but  they  can  be  used  by  laboratories  that
have met all regulatory requirements for an off-label procedure.  ¶ The absence of a
fourfold or greater titer for an infant does not exclude congenital syphilis. ** CSF test
results obtained during the neonatal period can be difficult to interpret; normal values
differ by gestational age and are higher in preterm infants. Values as high as 25 white
blood  cells  (WBCs)/mm3  and/or  protein  of  150  mg/dL  might  occur  among  normal
neonates; some specialists, however, recommend that lower values (i.e., 5 WBCs/mm3
and  protein  of  40  mg/dL)  be  considered  the  upper  limits  of  normal.  Other  causes  of
elevated values should be considered when an infant is being evaluated for congenital
syphilis.  †† A woman treated with a regimen other than those recommended in these
guidelines  for  treatment  should  be  considered  untreated.   §§  If  the  infant's
nontreponemal test is nonreactive and the provider determines that the mother's risk
for  untreated  syphilis  is  low,  treatment  of  the  infant  (single  IM  dose  of  benzathine
penicillin G 50,000 units/kg for possible incubating syphilis) without an evaluation can
be considered.   §§ Assistance with PEP-related decisions can be obtained by calling the
National
 Clinician's
 Post-Exposure
 Prophylaxis
 Hotline
 (PEP
 Line)
 (telephone:
888-448-4911).
 AIDS
 Acquired
 immunodeficiency
 syndrome
 ALT
 Alanine
aminotransferase  anti-HBc  Antibody  to  hepatitis  B  core  antigen  anti-HCV  Hepatitis  C
antibodies  ASC-US  Atypical  squamous  cells  of  undetermined  significance  BCA
Bichloroacetic  acid  BV  Bacterial  vaginosis  CBC  Complete  blood  count  CI  Confidence
interval  CIN  Cervical  intraepithelial  neoplasia  CLD  Chronic  liver  disease  CLIA  Clinical
Laboratory Improvement  Amendments CNS Central nervous system CSF Cerebrospinal
fluid  DFA  Direct  fluorescent  antibody  DGI  Disseminated  gonococcal  infection  dL
Deciliter  DNA  Deoxyribonucleic  acid  EC  Emergency  contraception  EIA  Enzyme
immunoassay  ELISA  Enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay  EPT  Expedited  partner
therapy FDA Food and Drug Administration FTA-ABS Fluorescent treponemal antibody
absorbed gG Glycoprotein G GNID Gram-negative intracellular diplococci HAART Highly
active  antiretroviral  therapy  HAV  Hepatitis  A  virus  HBIG  Hepatitis  B  immune  globulin
HBsAg Hepatitis B surface antigen HBV Hepatitis B virus HCC hepatocellular carcinoma
HCV  Hepatitis  C  virus  HIV  Human  immunodeficiency  virus  HPV  Human  papillomavirus
HSV  Herpes  simplex  virus  IFA  Immunofluorescence  assay  IgE  Immunoglobulin  E  Ig
Immune globulin IgG Immunoglobulin G IgM Immunoglobulin M IM Intramuscularly IUD
Intrauterine  device  IV  Intravenous  or  intravenously  KOH  Potassium  hydroxide  LGV
Lymphogranuloma  venereum  MAC  Mycobacterium  avium  complex  MIC  Minimum
inhibitory  concentration  MSM  Men  who  have  sex  with  men  N-9  Nonoxynol-9  NAAT
Nucleic  acid  amplification  test  NGU  Nongonococcal  urethritis  Pap  Papanicolaou  PCR
Polymerase  chain  reaction  PEP  Postexposure  prophylaxis  PID  Pelvic  inflammatory
disease PO By mouth PPV Positive predictive value QRNG Quinolone-resistant Neisseria
gonorrhoeae  RNA  Ribonucleic  acid  RPR  Rapid  plasma  reagin  RT-PCR  Reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain  reaction RVVC Recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis SIL
Squamous  intraepithelial  lesion  STD  Sexually  transmitted  disease  TCA  Trichloroacetic
acid TE Toxoplasmic encephalitis TP-PA Treponema pallidum particle agglutation VDRL
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory VVC Vulvovaginal candidiasis WB Western blot
WBC White blood count WSW Women who have sex with women Box 1. The Five P's:
Partners, Prevention of Pregnancy, Protection from STDs, Practices, and Past History of
STDs 1. Partners "Do you have sex with men, women, or both?" "In the past 2 months,
how  many  partners  have  you  had  sex  with?"  "In  the  past  12  months,  how  many
partners  have  you  had  sex  with?"  "Is  it  possible  that  any  of  your  sex  partners  in  the
past 12 months had sex with someone else while they were still in a sexual relationship
with you?" 2. Prevention of pregnancy "What are you doing to prevent pregnancy?" 3.
Protection  from  STDs  "What  do  you  do  to  protect  yourself  from  STDs  and  HIV?"  4.
Practices "To understand your risks for STDs, I need to understand the kind of sex you
have had recently." "Have you had vaginal sex, meaning 'penis in vagina sex'?" If yes,
"Do you use condoms: never, sometimes, or always?" "Have you had anal sex, meaning
'penis  in  rectum/anus  sex'?"  If  yes,  "Do  you  use  condoms:  never,  sometimes,  or
always?"  Have  you  had  oral  sex,  meaning  'mouth  on  penis/vagina'?"  For  condom
answers: If "never:" "Why don't you use condoms?" If "sometimes:" "In what situations
(or with whom) do you not use condoms?" 5. Past history of STDs "Have you ever had
an STD?" "Have any of your partners had an STD?" Additional questions to identify HIV
and viral hepatitis risk include: "Have you or any of your partners ever injected drugs?"
"Have any of your partners exchanged money or drugs for sex?" "Is there anything else
about your sexual practices that I need to know about?" Box 2. Skin-test reagents for
identifying  persons  at  risk  for  adverse  reactions  to  penicillin*  Major  Determinant
Benzylpenicilloyl poly-L-lysine (PrePen) (AllerQuest, Plainville Connecticut) (6 x 10-5M).
Minor Determinant Precursors† Benzylpenicillin G (10-2M, 3.3 mg/mL, 10,000 units/mL)
Benzylpenicilloate  (10-2M,  3.3  mg/mL)  Benzylpenicilloate  (or  penicilloyl  propylamine)
(10-2M, 3.3 mg/mL) Positive Control Commercial histamine for intradermal skin testing
(1.0 mg/mL) Negative Control Diluent (usually saline) or allergen diluent
 * Adapted from Saxon A, Beall GN, Rohr AS, Adelman DC. Immediate hypersensitivity
reactions to beta-lactam antibiotics. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:204--15. Reprinted with
permission from G.N. Beall and Annals of Internal Medicine. † Aged penicillin is not an
adequate  source  of  minor  determinants.  Penicillin  G  should  be  freshly  prepared  or
should  come  from  a  fresh-frozen  source.  TABLE  1.  Oral  desensitization  protocol  for
patients with a positive skin test* Penicillin V suspension dose† Amount§ (units/mL) mL
Units Cumulative dose (units) 1 1,000 0.1 100 100 2 1,000 0.2 200 300 3 1,000 0.4 400
700 4 1,000 0.8 800 1,500 5 1,000 1.6 1,600 3,100 6 1,000 3.2 3,200 6,300 7 1,000 6.4
6,400 12,700 8 10,000 1.2 12,000 24,700 9 10,000 2.4 24,000 48,700 10 10,000 4.8
48,000  96,700  11  80,000  1.0  80,000  176,700  12  80,000  2.0  160,000  336,700  13
80,000  4.0  320,000  656,700  14  80,000  8.0  640,000  1,296,700  Note:  Observation
period was 30 minutes before parenteral administration of penicillin. * Reprinted with
permission from the New England Journal of Medicine (Wendel GO, Jr, Stark BJ, Jamison
RB,  Melina  RD,  Sullivan  TJ.  Penicillin  allergy  and  desensitization  in  serious  infections
during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1985;312:1229--32.). † Interval between doses, 15--30
minutes;  elapsed  time,  4--8  hours;  cumulative  dose,  1.3  million  units.  §  The  specific
amount  of  drug  was  diluted  in  approximately  30  mL  of  water  and  then  administered
orally.   Box  3.  Classification  of  vulvovaginal  candidiasis  (VVC)  Uncomplicated  VVC  
Sporadic  or  infrequent  vulvovaginal  candidiasis  OR  Mild-to-moderate  vulvovaginal
candidiasis  OR  Likely  to  be  C.  albicans  OR  Non-immunocompromised  women
Complicated  VVC   Recurrent  vulvovaginal  candidiasis  OR  Severe  vulvovaginal
candidiasis  OR  Non-albicans  candidiasis  OR  Women  with  uncontrolled  diabetes,
debilitation,  or  immunosuppression  TABLE  2.  Recommended  regimens:  dose  and
schedule  for  hepatitis  A  vaccines  Vaccine   Age  (yrs)   Dose  Volume  (mL)  Two-dose
schedule (months)* HAVRIX†  1--18   720 (EL.U.) 0.5  0 (6--12) >18   1,440 (EL.U.) 1.0  0
(6--12) VAQTA§  1--18   25 (U)  0.5  0 (6--18) >18   50 (U)  1.0  0 (6--18) Source: CDC.
Prevention of hepatitis A through active or passive immunization: recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-7).
Abbreviations: EL.U = Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) units; U = units. * 0
months  represents  timing  of  the  initial  dose;  subsequent  numbers  represent  months
after  the  initial  dose.  †  Hepatitis  A  vaccine,  inactivated,  GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals;
this vaccine is also licensed for a 3-dose series in children aged 2--18 years, with 360
EL.U, 0.5 mL doses at 0, 1, and 6--12 months. § Hepatitis A vaccine, inactivated, Merck
&  Co.,  Inc.  TABLE  3.  Recommended  doses  of  currently  licensed  formulations  of
adolescent and adult hepatitis B vaccines Group Single-antigen vaccine  Combination
vaccine Recombivax HB Engerix-B Twinrix*  Dose (µg)† Volume (mL) Dose (µg)† Volume
(mL)  Dose  (µg)†  Volume  (mL)  Adolescents  aged  11--19  years§  5  0.5  10  0.5  NA  NA
Adolescents aged 11--15 years¶ 10 1.0 NA NA NA NA Adults (aged ≥20 years)  10 1.0
20 1.0 20 1.0 Hemodialysis patients and other immunocompromised persons aged < 20
years§  5  0.5  10  0.5  NA  NA  Hemodialysis  patients  and  other  immunocompromised
persons  aged  ≥20  years  40**  1.0  40††  2.0  NA  NA  Sources:  CDC.  A  comprehensive
immunization  strategy  to  eliminate  transmission  of  hepatitis  B  virus  infection  in  the
United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP) Part 1: immunization of infants, children, and adolescents. MMWR 2005;54(No.
RR-16).  CDC.  A  comprehensive  immunization  strategy  to  eliminate  transmission  of
hepatitis  B  virus  infection  in  the  United  States:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  Part  II:  immunization  of  adults.  MMWR
2006;55(No. RR-16).   * Combined hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccine. This vaccine is
recommended for persons aged ≥18 years who are at increased risk for both hepatitis
B and hepatitis A virus infections.  † Recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen protein
dose, in micrograms. § Pediatric formulation administered on a 3-dose schedule; higher
doses might be more immunogenic, but no specific recommendations have been made.
¶  Adult  formulation  administered  on  a  2-dose  schedule.    **  Dialysis  formulation
administered on a 3-dose schedule at 0, 1, and 6 months. †† Two 1.0-mL doses of the
adult  formulation  administered  at  one  site  on  a  4-dose  schedule  at  0,  1,  2,  and  6
months. TABLE 4. Interpretation of serologic test results* for HBV infection  Serologic
marker Interpretation HBsAg† Total anti-HBc§ IgM¶ anti-HBc Anti-HBs** -- -- -- -- Never
infected +†† -- -- -- Early acute infection; transient (up to 18 days) after vaccination + +
+ -- Acute infection -- + + -- Acute resolving infection -- + -- + Recovered from past
infection  and  immune  +  +  --  --  Chronic  infection  --  +  --  --  False  positive  (i.e.,
susceptible);  past  infection;  "low-level"  chronic  infection§§;  passive  transfer  to  infant
born  to  HBsAg-positive  mother  --  --  --  +  Immune  if  concentration  is  >10  mIU/mL,¶¶
passive  transfer  after  HBIG  administration   *  Symbol  for  negative  test  result,  "--";
symbol for positive test result, "+". † Hepatitis B surface antigen. § Antibody to hepatitis
B  core  antigen.  ¶  Immunoglobulin  M.    **  Antibody  to  HBsAg.   ††  To  ensure  that  an
HBsAg-positive  test  result  is  not  a  false  positive,  samples  with  repeatedly  reactive
HBsAg  results  should  be  tested  with  an  FDA-cleared  (and,  if  appropriate,  neutralizing
confirmatory) test.   §§ Persons positive for only anti-HBc are unlikely to be infectious
except  under  unusual  circumstances  involving  direct  percutaneous  exposure  to  large
quantities
 of
 blood
 (e.g.,
 blood
 transfusion
 and
 organ
 transplantation).
 ¶¶
Milli-International
 Units
 per
 milliliter.
 TABLE
 5.
 Guidelines
 for
 postexposure
immunoprophylaxis  of  unvaccinated  persons  who  have  an  identifiable  exposure  to
blood  or  body  fluids  that  contain  blood  Cause  Action  Exposure  to  an  HBsAg*-positive
source Percutaneous (e.g., bite or needlestick) or mucosal exposure to HBsAg-positive
blood or body fluids that contain blood Administer hepatitis B vaccine & HBIG† Sexual
or needle-sharing contact of an HBsAg-positive person Administer hepatitis B vaccine &
HBIG† Victim of sexual assault/abuse by a perpetrator who is HBsAg positive Administer
hepatitis B vaccine & HBIG† Exposure to a source with unknown HBsAg status Victim of
sexual assault/abuse by a perpetrator with unknown HBsAg status Administer hepatitis
B  vaccine†  Percutaneous  (e.g.,  bite  or  needlestick)  or  mucosal  exposure  to  blood  or
body  fluids  that  contain  blood  from  a  source  with  unknown  HBsAg  status  Administer
hepatitis  B  vaccine†  *  Hepatitis  B  surface  antigen.  †  Immunoprophylaxis  should  be
administered  as  soon  as  possible,  preferably  ≤24  hours.  Studies  are  limited  on  the
maximum  interval  after  exposure  during  which  postexposure  prophylaxis  is  effective,
but the interval is unlikely to exceed 7 days for percutaneous exposures and 14 days
for  sexual  exposures.  The  complete,  3-dose  hepatitis  B  vaccine  series  should  be
administered.  TABLE  6.  Implications  of  commonly  encountered  sexually  transmitted
(ST) or sexually associated (SA) infections for diagnosis and reporting of sexual abuse
among infants and pre-pubertal children  ST/SA confirmed  Evidence for sexual abuse 
Suggested action Gonorrhea*  Diagnostic  Report† Syphilis*  Diagnostic  Report† Human
immunodeficiency  virus§  Diagnostic   Report†  Chlamydia  trachomatis*   Diagnostic  
Report†  Trichomonas  vaginalis   Highly  suspicious   Report†  Condylomata  acuminata
(anogenital warts)* Suspicious  Report† Genital herpes*  Suspicious  Report†¶ Bacterial
vaginosis   Inconclusive   Medical  follow-up  Source:  Adapted  from  Kellogg  N,  American
Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect. The evaluation of child
abuse  in  children.  Pediatrics  2005;116(2):506--12.   *  If  not  likely  to  be  perinatally
acquired  and  rare  nonsexual,  vertical  transmission  is  excluded.  †  Reports  should  be
made to the agency in the community mandated to receive reports of suspected child
abuse  or  neglect.  §  If  not  likely  to  be  acquired  perinatally  or  through  transfusion.  ¶
Unless there is a clear history of autoinoculation. Chairperson: Kimberly A. Workowski,
MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (NCHHSTP),
CDC  and  Emory  University,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Presenters:  Heidi  Bauer,  MD,  California
Sexually Transmitted Disease Control Branch, Oakland, California; Laura Bachman, MD,
Wake  Forest  University;  Gale  Burstein,  MD,  MPH,  Erie  County  Department  of  Health;
Linda  Eckert,  MD,  University  of  Washington;  William  M.  Geisler,  MD,  University  of
Alabama,  Birmingham,  Alabama;  Khalil  Ghanem,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  University;  Matt
Golden,  MD,  MPH,  University  of  Washington;  Linda  Gorgos,  MD,  New  Mexico
Department  of  Health;  Margaret  Hammerschlag,  MD,  State  University  of  New  York,
Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York; Lisa Hollier, MD, University of Texas at
Houston; Peter Leone, MD, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill,
North  Carolina;  Jeanne  Marrazzo,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;
Kenneth Hugh Mayer, MD, Brown University Medical School, Providence, Rhode Island;
Paul  Nyirjesy,  MD,  Drexel  University  College  of  Medicine,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;
Anne  Rompalo,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  School  of  Medicine,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Pablo
Sanchez, MD, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas; Bradley
Stoner, MD, PhD, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri; Anna Wald, MD, University
of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  George  Wendel,  MD,  University  of  Texas
Southwestern  Medical  School,  Dallas,  Texas;  Harold  C.  Wiesenfeld,  MD,  University  of
Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania.   Moderators:  Willard  Cates,  Jr.,  MD,  MPH,  Family
Health  International,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  King  K.  Holmes,  MD,  PhD,  University  of
Washington, Seattle, Washington; David Martin, MD, Louisiana State University Medical
Center,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.   Rapporteurs:  Hunter  Handsfield,  MD,  University  of
Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;  William  McCormack,  MD,  State  University  of  New
York Health Science Center, Brooklyn, New York; William M. Geisler, MD, University of
Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama. Consultants: N. Franklin Adkinson, MD, Johns Hopkins
University;  William  Andrews,  MD,  PhD,  University  of  Alabama,  Birmingham;  Michael
Augenbraun,  MD,  State  University  of  New  York  Health  Science  Center,  Brooklyn,  New
York; Bryon Batteiger, MD, University of Indiana; Gail Bolan, MD, California Department
of  Health,  Oakland,  California;  Bruce  Coles,  DO,  New  York  Department  of  Health;
Carolyn  Deal,  PhD,  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases,  National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; J. Dennis Fortenberry, MD, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; Edward Hook, III, MD, University of Alabama,
Birmingham,  Alabama;  Jane  R.  Schwebke,  MD,  University  of  Alabama,  Birmingham,
Alabama; Joann Schulte, DO, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; David
Soper, MD, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina; Lawrence
Stanberry, MD, PhD, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas; Bruce Trigg,
MD,  New  Mexico  Department  of  Health;  Yolanda  Wimberly,  MD,  Morehouse  School  of
Medicine; Jonathan M. Zenilman, MD, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore,
Maryland.  Liaison  Participants:  Kaytura  Aaron  MD,  HRSA;  Laura  Bachman,  MD,  HIV
Association of America; Lynn Barclay, MD, American Social Health Association; Margaret
J. Blythe, MD, American Academy of Pediatrics; Carolyn D. Deal, PhD, National Institutes
of  Health;  Jordon  Dimitrakov,  MD,  PhD,  American  Urological  Association;  Mark
FitzGerald,  MD,  British  Association  for  Sexual  Health  and  HIV,  Southampton,  United
Kingdom; Dennis Fortenberry, MD, Society of Adolescent Medicine; Edward W. Hook, III,
MD,  Infectious  Disease  Society  of  America;  Noreen  Jack,  MD,  Pan  American  Health
Association;  Peter  Kerndt,  MD,  National  Coalition  of  STD  Directors;  Jeanne  Marrazzo,
MD, American Sexually Transmitted Diseases Association; Francis J. Ndowa, MD, World
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland; Michael Parkinson, MD, American College of
Preventative  Medicine;  Jeffrey  Piepert,  MD,  American  College  of  Obstetrics  and
Gynecology;  Patricia  Reams,  MD,  National  Commission  on  Correctional  Health  Care;
Bisan Salhi, MD, American College of Emergency Physicians; Karen Shea, MSN, Planned
Parenthood  Federation  of  America;  David  Soper,  MD,  Infectious  Diseases  Society  for
Obstetrics  and  Gynecology;  Bradley  Stoner,  MD,  PhD,  CDC  STD  Prevention  Training
Centers; Amy Swann, Assoication of Reproductive Health Professionals; Litjen Tan, PhD,
American  Medical  Association;  Tom  Wong,  MD,  Public  Health  Agency  of  Canada,
Ottawa,  Ontario,  Canada.  CDC,  Division  of  Sexually  Transmitted  Disease  Prevention
Treatment Guidelines 2010 Project Coordinator: Kimberly A. Workowski, MD, NCHHSTP,
CDC and Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia. Project Manager: Richard Voigt, NCHHSTP,
CDC, Atlanta, Georgia. NCHHSTP/CDC Presenters: Deblina Datta, MD; Eileen Dunne, MD;
Matthew  Hogben,  PhD;  Scott  Holmberg,  MD;  Emily  Koumans,  MD;  Lori  Newman,  MD.
CDC Consultants: Sevgi O. Aral, PhD; Ronald Ballard, PhD; Bernard Branson, MD; John
Brooks, MD, MPH; John Douglas, MD; Alison Friedman; Dale Hu, MD; Peter Kilmarx, MD;
John Papp, PhD; Phil Spradling, MD.  Support Staff: Brenda Kelley, Valerie Barner, and
Deborah  McElroy,  NCHHSTP,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Use  of  trade  names  and
commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply  endorsement  by  the
U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  References  to  non-CDC  sites  on  the
Internet  are  provided  as  a  service  to  MMWR  readers  and  do  not  constitute  or  imply
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of pages found at
these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from typeset documents.
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version.  Users  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF  version  (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr)
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. An original paper copy of this issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone:  (202)  512-1800.  Contact  GPO  for  current  prices.  **Questions  or  messages
regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view
different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5912a1.htm
