Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  What  are  Smart  Snacks  in  School?  Smart  Snacks  in  School
refers to the national nutrition standards for foods and beverages sold outside of the
federal  reimbursable  school  meal  programs  during  the  school  day.  These  items  are
called “competitive foods” because they can compete with participation in school meal
programs. As of the 2014–2015 school year, all competitive foods and beverages sold
during the school day must meet or exceed Smart Snacks in School nutrition standards,
which include limits on fat, sugar, sodium, and calorie content. These standards are the
minimum requirement for schools, but states and local education agencies can continue
to implement stronger nutrition standards for all competitive foods in schools. School
vending  machines  are  one  venue  where  schools  may  sell  competitive  food  and
beverages  during  the  school  day.  As  part  of  the  School  Health  Policies  and  Practices
Study, 2014, CDC analyzed photographs of a nationally representative sample of school
vending machines available to students prior to the Smart Snacks implementation. The
report,  Characteristics  of  Vending  Machines  Available  to  Students  in  U.S.  Schools:
Results  from  the  School  Health  Policies  and  Practices  Study,  2014   [PDF  –  10  MB],
highlights  key  findings  including  Although  school  vending  machines  can  be  a
convenient source of food and beverages throughout the day, the items sold should be
healthy  options.  Local  education  agencies  should  ensure  that  local  school  wellness
policies  include  Smart  Snacks  standards  for  vending  machines,  and  schools  should
make  sure  that  foods  and  beverages  in  vending  machines  meet  the  standards.   
Healthy Youth To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthyschools/nutrition/smartsnacks.htm
