A  startling  outbreak  has  been  reported  in  Chicago  and  Milwaukee.  Within  the  past  2
days,  15  people  have  visited  emergency  rooms  complaining  of  high  fever,  fatigue,
coughing, chest pain, and difficulty breathing. Several people have died, and others are
near death! Your help is needed to put an end to this outbreak! The first reported case
is a 37-year-old musician from Chicago named Zeke. You start by talking to Zeke to find
out  what  he  was  doing  before  he  got  sick.   Zeke  said  that  he  started  coughing  and
feeling very tired shortly after he led a music workshop for 50 students at a Chicago
concert hall.  He thought he might have picked something up from one of the students
in  the  class,  or  perhaps  he  caught  it  2  days  ago  on  a  flight  home  from  vacation  in
Africa.   You decide to ask Zeke more about his trip to Africa.   You learn that Zeke and
several of his friends took a trip to Mali last week.  While they were there, Zeke took a
side trip to meet a drum maker who taught him how to make djembes (African drums
made of animal skins and wood). Zeke brought home 4 of the djembes he helped make.
  Zeke  and  his  friends  returned  home  on  the  same  20-hour  flight.   After  talking  with
Zeke's friends, you learn that he is the only one with a high fever, fatigue, cough, chest
pain, and difficulty breathing. While sitting near other people for many hours on a flight
can lead to sharing each other's germs, it's still too early to know exactly what's caused
the outbreak. Keep investigating to find out! It's too early to know for sure, but Zeke
remembered coughing and feeling very tired immediately after the class. Most colds,
flus, and other viral infections take at least 1 day before symptoms are easily noticed.
Keep investigating to find out! You're right, it's too soon to tell when or how he caught
his illness. We don't even know what disease we're dealing with yet.   You'll need to find
out what Zeke has before you can determine what made him sick.  Keep investigating
to  find  out!  More  cases  of  the  mysterious  illness  are  being  reported  in  Chicago  and
Milwaukee hospitals. Patients' loved ones are in a panic and are hoping you can help
find out what's made everyone so sick.  Lab results show patients are infected with a
bacterium that doctors suspect might be anthrax. You immediately send the samples to
public  health  laboratories  for  testing,  but  that  will  take  a  couple  of  days.    In  the
meantime, you need to talk with everyone who is sick - and their families - to find out
which  activities  they  participated  in  before  becoming  sick.   When  you  look  at  the
responses to your questions, it seems that many of the sick people participated in the
same activities recently - like working in a government building or attending a music
event.   You  already  have  gotten  information  directly  from  sick  patients  or  family
members of those who died.  You interview 85 people who are not sick, but participated
in  similar  activities  as  those  who  are  sick  or  died.  In  outbreak  investigations  we  call
these people the "population at risk of getting sick." Each person was asked what they
did  in  the  2  weeks  before  getting  sick.  The  "attack  rate"  was  calculated  for  each
activity.  Hint: To find a possible source of the outbreak, look for both a high attack rate
for those who participated in an activity and a low attack rate among those who did not
participate. Anthrax Anthrax is a serious disease caused by a type of bacteria known as
Bacillus anthracis. Anthrax is not contagious. You cannot catch it from another person,
like you can catch the cold or flu.  Anthrax can be found naturally in the soil and can
infect domestic and wild animals like cattle, sheep, and goats. The animals become sick
when  they  eat  spores  (germs)  in  contaminated  soil  or  vegetation.    People  can  get
anthrax by: Anthrax can get into the body through the skin, lungs, or digestive system. 
You are correct. Knowing what activity or exposure these people have in common can
help  you  find  out  where  this  outbreak  may  have  started.   It  looks  like  all  of  the  sick
people  attended  a  music  event  in  Chicago.  You  may  be  on  to  something!  But  what
about the high number of sick people who work in or near a government building? Is
that  something  to  worry  about  too?    No.  You've  already  interviewed  well  and  sick
people  in  the  Chicago  building  where  people  got  sick.  Interviewing  workers  in  every
government building in these 2 cities would not be as helpful as knowing what activity
or exposure these people have in common.  Knowing this can help you find out where
this outbreak may have started.  It looks like all of the sick people attended a music
event in Chicago. You may be on to something! But what about the high number of sick
people who work in or near a government building? Is that something to worry about
too?  No. Canceling all music events in Chicago is not necessary at this point and may
cause a panic. That won't help solve the outbreak.  Instead, take this time to re-check
your data and see what the sick people have in common.  It looks like all of the sick
people  attended  a  music  event  in  Chicago.  You  may  be  on  to  something!  But  what
about the high number of sick people who work in or near a government building? Is
that something to worry about too? With the large number of government workers who
are  sick,  you  decide  to  look  into  it  more.   Police  reports  show  that  there  was  a
bioterrorism threat 3 days before Zeke and the others got sick - a former government
employee  threatened  to  mail  anthrax  to  his  old  office  building  in  downtown  Chicago.
You interview the 2 sick people from Milwaukee to find that neither of them had been in
or  around  any  government  building  in  Chicago  in  the  2  weeks  before  getting  sick.
Bioterrorism A bioterrorism attack is a deliberate release of viruses, bacteria, or other
germs (agents) used to cause sickness or death in people, animals, or plants. Anthrax
can be released quietly and without anyone knowing. Bioterrorists may send packages
or envelopes that contain harmful germs, like in 2001, when anthrax was added to a
powder  and  deliberately  spread  through  the  mail.   Anthrax  is  one  of  the  most  likely
agents  to  be  used  in  a  biological  attack.  It  only  takes  a  small  amount  of  anthrax  to
infect  a  large  number  of  people.  You're  jumping  to  conclusions.  You  haven't  even
determined  that  any  anthrax  was  ever  actually  mailed  to  the  building.  All  clues  are
pointing to something else. Keep searching! No. You interviewed the 2 sick people from
Milwaukee  and  found  out  they  had  not  been  in  or  near  any  government  buildings  in
Chicago  for  the  2  weeks  before  getting  sick.  Besides,  you  haven't  determined  that
anthrax  was  ever  actually  mailed  to  the  building  in  the  first  place.  Other  clues  are
pointing  to  something  else.  But,  what  could  it  be?  That's  correct.  We  need  more
evidence and lab tests before we can determine if this bioterrorism threat is real or a
hoax. There are sick people 100 miles away near Milwaukee, Wisconsin. And remember,
these sick people told you they had not been in or near the government buildings in
Chicago.   Other  clues  are  pointing  to  something  else.  But,  what  could  it  be?  After
intense questioning, testing at government buildings, and lab tests, authorities find no
evidence  of  anthrax.  The  bioterror  threat  was  a  hoax.   Meanwhile,  the  results  of  the
blood tests you sent to the public health labs indicate a need for further testing, so you
send  them  away  to  special  labs  at  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention
(CDC).  The  results  from  CDC  labs  show  Bacillus  anthracis,  the  bacteria  that  causes
anthrax! Based on this finding and the patients' symptoms, the doctors diagnose each
patient with inhalation anthrax. You tell all the patients to begin treatment immediately.
But if it's anthrax after all, does that mean the police missed something? Since you've
ruled  out  the  government  building  as  the  place  where  all  of  the  sick  people  came  in
contact with anthrax, you review the attack rates and interviews again. You find that
everyone  who's  tested  positive  for  anthrax  also  attended  a  music  event  at  the  same
Chicago  concert  hall  where  Zeke  held  his  music  workshop.   Treatment  of
anthraxSomeone with symptoms of anthrax should get medical treatment as quickly as
possible to have the best chances for a full recovery. Doctors will use several antibiotics
that work best for treating anthrax. They will also consider which antibiotics are best for
a patient based on his or her medical history. Prevention of anthraxAntibiotics can also
be  used  to  prevent  anthrax  from  developing  in  people  who  have  been  exposed  but
have not yet developed symptoms.  Anthrax spores in a person's body typically take 1
to 6 days to be "activated" - to start releasing their toxins - but some spores can take
more than a month before they do so. That's why people who have been exposed to
anthrax  must  take  antibiotics  for  60  days  -  to  ensure  anthrax  is  no  longer  in  their
bodies.   Inhalation  anthraxIf  a  person  breathes  in  anthrax,  they  can  get  inhalation
anthrax.  When  anthrax  germs  are  inside  your  body,  they  start  to  grow  and  multiply.
This could happen quickly or it could take a long time. After the anthrax starts to grow,
it  releases  toxins  -  or  poisons  -  that  will  attack  your  body  and  make  you  sicker  and
sicker.   Early  symptoms  of  inhalation  anthrax  are  much  like  symptoms  of  the  flu  -
fever/chills, cough, nausea or vomiting.  Other symptoms may include: Yes, it is very
likely  that  the  release  of  anthrax  occurred  at  the  music  event.   Maybe  something  or
someone at the music event had been contaminated with anthrax.  Keep looking to find
out exactly what happened. No. Remember, anthrax can't be passed from one person
to another the way cold or flu can be.  It's more likely that something or someone at the
music event had been contaminated with anthrax. Keep looking to find out exactly what
happened!  Remember,  the  authorities  had  already  ruled  bioterrorism  out.  There's  no
evidence that the suspected terrorist ever had access to anthrax. Keep looking to find
out exactly what happened! All of the people who became sick in this outbreak were
together on the day of the workshop. You're now convinced that the workshop is where
anthrax was released, though you still aren't sure how. While you try to figure that out,
there's something else you need to do. The 35 workshop participants who are healthy
must  be  given  antibiotics  to  prevent  them  from  becoming  sick  (this  is  called
post-exposure prophylaxis), since they may have been exposed to anthrax. You're one
step  away  from  finding  out  what  caused  the  outbreak!  You  talk  to  Zeke  again.  He
remembers  the  drum  maker  in  Mali  was  coughing  and  having  trouble  taking  deep
breaths, similar to the symptoms of all the sick people from the music workshop. You
investigate  further,  contacting  health  authorities  in  Mali.  They  tell  you  that  the  drum
maker  passed  away  shortly  after  Zeke  returned  to  Chicago.   Zeke  also  tells  you  that
during  the  workshop  in  Chicago,  he  demonstrated  how  to  make  a  drum,  using  goat
skins he brought back from Africa.  You decide to go back to the other participants at
the workshop to ask about it.  Interestingly, most of the sick people report that while
Zeke was showing them how to make the drum, they noticed a large amount of dust
and particles floating in the air.  People can get anthrax through contact with infected
animals or their products, such as hides or hair. In fact, anthrax used to be called "wool
sorters'  disease"  and  was  considered  a  common  risk  for  workers  in  wool  mills,
slaughterhouses, and factories that processed animal hides, hair, and bone.  Anthrax is
rare in the United States, but outbreaks do occur in wild and domestic animals. Yearly
vaccination of animals is recommended in areas that have had anthrax in the past. The
disease  is  most  common  in  parts  of  Central  and  South  America,  sub-Saharan  Africa,
central and southwestern Asia, southern and Eastern Europe, and the Caribbean. Sorry,
no. Remember, anthrax can't be passed from one person to another the way cold or flu
can  be.   You  conduct  tests  of  the  drums  Zeke  played  and  the  goat  skins  he  used  to
make  drums  at  the  workshop.  They're  contaminated  with  anthrax  spores!  When  the
drums  and  skins  were  shown  to  Zeke's  workshop,  spores  were  released  into  the  air.
People  who  came  closest  to  the  drums  and  skins  breathed  the  spores,  making  them
sick.  The  drums  and  the  goat  hides  he  brought  back  from  Mali  were  not  treated
effectively with chemicals to kill anthrax spores. Zeke also did not report the goat skins
he brought back from Africa to Customs and Border Protection.  Because of this, when
he  returned  to  the  US,  it  wasn't  verified  that  they  had  been  properly  treated  to  kill
anthrax spores. No.  If there were spores on Zeke's clothes, it is unlikely that enough
would  have  come  off  his  clothes  to  get  14  other  people  sick.  But  you're  close.    You
conduct tests of the drums Zeke played and the goat skins he used to make drums at
the workshop. They're contaminated with anthrax spores! When the drums and skins
were shown to Zeke's workshop, spores were released into the air. People who came
closest to the drums and skins breathed the spores, making them sick. The drums and
the goat hides he brought back from Mali were not treated effectively with chemicals to
kill anthrax spores. Zeke also did not report the goat skins he brought back from Africa
to  Customs  and  Border  Protection.   Because  of  this,  when  he  returned  to  the  US,  it
wasn't  verified  that  they  had  been  properly  treated  to  kill  anthrax  spores.  Yes!  You
conduct tests of the drums Zeke played and the goat skins he used to make drums at
the workshop. They're contaminated with anthrax spores! When the drums and skins
were shown to Zeke's workshop, spores were released into the air. People who came
closest to the drums and skins breathed the spores, making them sick. The drums and
the goat hides he brought back from Mali were not treated effectively with chemicals to
kill anthrax spores. Zeke also did not report the goat skins he brought back from Africa
to  Customs  and  Border  Protection.   Because  of  this,  when  he  returned  to  the  US,  it
wasn't  verified  that  they  had  been  properly  treated  to  kill  anthrax  spores.  Your  hard
work  helped  to  solve  this  outbreak!  Although  this  scenario  was  not  real,  there  have
been  several  real-life  investigations  of  anthrax  illness  involving  drums  made  of
contaminated  animal  hides.  Disease  Detectives  worked  in  2006  to  determine  that  a
drum maker in Pennsylvania caught inhalation anthrax by working with dried goat hides
that had traces of anthrax spores. In 2009, a New Hampshire woman became sick with
gastrointestinal anthrax (a very rare form of the disease that causes flu-like symptoms,
sore  throat,  nausea,  and  diarrhea)  after  participating  in  a  drumming  event.  Disease
Detectives  worked  in  each  of  these  cases  to  determine  the  cause  of  the  outbreak.
Anthrax  also  has  been  used  as  a  bioterrorist  threat  in  the  United  States.  In  2001,
Disease Detectives helped solve an anthrax terrorist attack which affected many people
across  the  United  States.  Note:   Several  aspects  of  the  original  outbreaks  and
investigations have been altered to fit the format and length of this application. Your
help  is  needed  in  a  terrible  outbreak  that's  affecting  children!  An  international  group
that  aids  the  sick  has  discovered  a  horrifying  health  emergency:  more  than  100
children in a remote corner of Nigeria have died, and many more are extremely sick.
The  sick  aren't  responding  to  anti-malaria  medicine  or  antibiotics.  They  desperately
need your help to solve the outbreak! Doctors Without Borders has been doing some
routine  health  work  in  northwestern  Nigeria.  This  is  a  remote  area,  with  dusty  and
mountainous terrain. People here are very poor. Most are farmers or miners who dig for
precious minerals like gold.  The doctors discovered that 3 villages are in the midst of a
horrible outbreak: 118 children (many of them younger than 5) are dead. Many more
are sick, with symptoms including vomiting, abdominal pain, headache, and convulsions
(sudden, violent, uncontrollable shaking).  This is a major health crisis. With so many
kids dead and more dying every day, there's no time for delay.  Grab your passport and
suitcase, get your vaccinations, and line up your visas and security clearances from the
American  and  Nigerian  embassies.  It's  time  to  fly  to  Nigeria!   Sorry,  but  doing  this
slowly and deliberately won't fly this time. It's you who needs to fly, to Nigeria, right
now!  This is a major health crisis. With so many kids dead and more dying every day,
there's no time for delay.  Grab your passport and suitcase, get your vaccinations, and
line up your visas and security clearances from the American and Nigerian embassies.
It's time to solve the outbreak!  This is a major health crisis. With so many kids dead
and  more  dying  every  day,  there's  no  time  for  delay.   So  grab  your  passport  and
suitcase, get your vaccinations, and line up your visas and security clearances from the
American and Nigerian embassies. It's time to fly to Nigeria!  It's a major undertaking,
but you and your team make it to the villages. There you find a terrible scene. Outside
the  villages  is  a  graveyard  with  more  than  100  newly  dug,  small  graves.   Parents  of
children who died tell you that their kids had seizures, and you see that many of the
sick kids are still having seizures. Others are listless, and some have gone blind.  Most
of the sick are children. There are some sick adults, too, but they aren't as bad off, and
no adults have died.  Just reaching the villages was a huge challenge: after a long flight,
you then had to drive for 2 days across hundreds of miles of dirt roads, over mountains,
while  hauling  a  huge  amount  of  gear.  You  had  medical  equipment,  environmental
testing equipment, computers, large batteries for power, and more.  GPS doesn't work
out here, so simply finding the villages was an adventure. Sometimes you had to follow
puzzling  directions  that  people  offered,  like  "turn  left  at  the  river."   You  also  need  a
team of security guards, and you work closely with the local emir (religious leader) so
that people know you're here to help.  There are 3 villages in this area. Each village
consists  of  open-air  dwellings  with  dirt  floors,  separated  by  low  walls.  People  from
extended families live in compounds (a number of dwellings close together, enclosed by
a common wall).  Some of the compounds have their own well for drinking water, but
people in other compounds use a common village well.  A few of the villagers begin to
wonder if the drinking water is contaminated.  Because this is such an emergency, yes,
it seems like a good idea to rush in and take those samples right away. But that could
backfire on you.  This is a traditional Muslim community, and you're an outsider here,
coming from another country. You need to earn people's trust and can't assume they'll
just go along with whatever you say. The first step is to meet with the village elders,
explain what you want to do, and win them over so the villagers will cooperate.  OK,
now it's time to get those samples!  That's right! Because this is an emergency, it may
have seemed like a good idea to rush in and take those samples right away. But that
could  have  backfired  on  you.   This  is  a  traditional  Muslim  community,  and  you're  an
outsider here, coming from another country. You need to earn people's trust and can't
assume they'll just go along with whatever you say. So the first step is to meet with the
village  elders,  explain  what  you  want  to  do,  and  win  them  over  so  the  villagers  will
cooperate.  OK, now it's time to get those samples!  You still aren't sure how people are
getting  sick,  so  moving  them  to  a  different  area  might  not  help.  Plus,  relocating  3
villages  isn't  exactly  an  easy  thing  to  do,  and  it  certainly  isn't  a  good  way  for  an
outsider like you to win the villagers' trust!  It's important to get blood samples, but the
thing  to  do  first  is  to  get  the  permission  of  the  village  elders.  Because  this  is  a  very
traditional community, earning that approval first will make the rest of your job a bit
easier.  More kids are dying, you need to hurry!  Now that you have the village elders'
permission, you take blood tests of all the sick people in the village, including children
under 5.  While doing your research in the villages, you notice that in many cases entire
families are involved in mining. Many children work in the mines and even very young
children  help  their  mothers  break  down  rocks  or  dry  the  ore  in  their  own  family
compound.  The blood tests show that the sick children have extremely high levels of
lead  in  their  blood,  which  means  they  have  lead  poisoning,  a  serious  and  often  fatal
condition.  The  sick  children  need  immediate  treatment,  but  you  only  have  a  limited
amount of medicine.  As part of the investigation, you discover that 1 of the 3 villages is
not  involved  in  gold  mining  and  has  a  much  lower  rate  of  sickness  than  the  other  2
villages. This leads you to suspect that the mining is to blame for the lead poisoning,
since it releases so much toxic lead dust into the air.  The people who mine gold don't
have  sophisticated  machinery  or  protective  equipment.  They  collect  large  rocks  and
then crush them (with simple tools or their hands) without wearing facemasks, goggles,
or gloves. And they don't do this work solely in a mine, either. Much of the work is done
in the village, and some is even done in family compounds, by mothers and children. 
You try to talk to the head of each household to find out whether the family members
have been mining.  What is lead poisoning?Lead poisoning is a serious condition that
occurs when lead builds up in the body. Even small amounts of lead can cause severe
health problems. At very high levels, lead poisoning can be fatal.  Children under the
age  of  5  are  especially  vulnerable  to  lead  poisoning  because  it  can  severely  affect
mental  and  physical  development.  Young  children  are  also  more  likely  to  get  lead
poisoning because they're often on the ground and exposed to lead-contaminated soil
and  dust.  They  tend  to  put  their  hands  in  their  mouth  and  nose,  increasing  their
chances of infection.  Lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust in older buildings
are the most common sources of lead poisoning in children in the United States. Other
sources include contaminated air, water, and soil.  It's an awful choice to face, but in
cases like this where there are so many sick and there is so little medicine, the best
thing to do is focus on those who are having seizures or are in a coma. You simply don't
have the ability to give medicine to every person who's been infected with lead at this
point.  That's right. It's an awful choice to face, but in cases like this where there are so
many sick and such little medicine, the best thing to do is focus on those children who
are the most sick.  It's an awful choice to face, but in cases like this where there are so
many sick and a limited amount of medicine, the best thing to do is focus on those who
are the most sick. You're right in realizing that all the children under the age of 5 are at
risk, but for now you need to treat those who are having seizures or are in a coma.  You
start  treating  the  sickest  kids  with  chelation  therapy  to  help  them  recover.   You've
learned  that  two-thirds  of  the  families  in  the  2  sicker  villages  are  mining  gold.  The
mining could be responsible for the deaths, but because the villagers are so poor and
this is the only way they can make money, they don't want to stop mining.  You need to
determine what parts of mining put the villagers at highest risk.  When interviewing the
families, you ask about the types of mining activities they do. You need to figure out
which  of  these  activities  are  most  dangerous.   What  is  chelation  therapy?Chelation
therapy is a treatment used to address lead poisoning. In Nigeria, doctors used an oral
medicine (Succimer), a chemical that binds, or attaches, to heavy metals such as iron,
lead,  mercury,  cadmium,  and  zinc.  The  body  then  removes  the  chemicals  through
urination.  Children treated with chelation therapy receive it over the course of many
weeks.  Children  often  need  more  than  one  dose  of  chelation  especially  if  their  blood
lead  levels  are  very  high.   Chelation  therapy  saves  lives.  The  deaths  from  lead
poisoning  stop  almost  immediately  as  soon  as  the  medicine  becomes  available.
However,  it  doesn't  reverse  any  damage  that  has  already  been  done  to  the  child's
brain. Some children are blind, have paralysis or major seizure disorders that could be
permanent.  There are several steps to mining the gold. Some people break the rocks
into smaller gravel, some grind the rocks into a fine powder, some wash and dry the ore
powder to separate the gold out, and some use heat to vaporize the mercury out.  To
figure  out  which  steps  are  most  dangerous,  you  have  a  talk  with  mothers  who  have
healthy  children  as  well  as  mothers  who  have  sick  children.  In  all,  you  gather  data
about 52 healthy kids and 50 sick kids. Then, you ask the parents about each mining
activity they do so you can calculate the "attack rate" for each activity.  You're right
that parents who grind rocks into powder are very likely to have sick kids. The attack
rate for that is 73%, the highest of any activity.  But it's even worse if parents do 3 or 4
different mining activities. Their kids have an attack rate of 85%! Keep going to solve
the outbreak!  You actually chose the activity with one of the lowest attack rates. It's
still pretty bad at 59%, but some of the other activities are even worse.  If parents do 3
or  4  different  mining  activities,  their  kids  have  an  attack  rate  of  85%!  Keep  going  to
solve the outbreak!  You're right: kids whose parents perform 3 or 4 different mining
activities have the highest attack rate (85%). The data shows you that all of the mining
activities are unhealthy, and that each additional activity makes it even worse for the
kids.   Keep  going  to  solve  the  outbreak!   Four  weeks  after  arriving  in  the  villages,
you've given chelation therapy to the sickest kids younger than 5. Most of them have
improved,  though  many  may  still  have  permanent  disabilities.  Teams  of  Nigerian
workers and environmental specialists thought it was best to remove the top layer of
contaminated earth from the villages to reduce the number of people who get sick, so it
was removed and buried far outside the village. They had to hurry, because the rainy
season is coming, and such work will be impossible then.  You've been working hard to
educate  the  miners  about  the  risks  of  this  kind  of  mining.  You  tell  them  not  to  mine
from  inside  their  own  compounds.  They  should  always  keep  their  living  areas  free  of
mining  activities.   Still,  they  don't  have  good  protective  equipment.  And  even  when
they follow your advice, most of the miners come home covered in dust, tracking the
dust when they walk to and from the village.  You've kept careful track of the number of
cases  since  the  epidemic  started  by  using  an  epi  curve.  An  epi  curve  shows  how  an
outbreak changes over time. It includes:  Epi curves are updated as new data come in,
so  they  are  always  changing.  The  shape  of  the  curve  can  provide  clues  about  the
possible source of an outbreak.  Learn how to read an epi curve. In this outbreak, lead
dust from the mines was to blame. However, in the US, when children have high blood
lead  levels,  it's  usually  because  of  lead-based  paint  (which  was  banned  from  use  in
housing in 1978) and lead-contaminated dust. To avoid lead poisoning in the US, follow
these tips:  Not quite. The epi curve shows you that the number of sick has dropped
quite  a  bit  since  you  started  chelation  therapy  and  environmental  repairs.   It's  good
that most families have stopped mining from inside their compounds. But the rate of
illness is still way too high. What's likely happening is that miners are returning home
covered  in  dust,  which  then  infects  their  children.  And  even  though  the  deaths  have
slowed down, the children are still being exposed to dangerous levels of lead, which can
leave them with major handicaps such as blindness, spastic paralysis, seizure disorders,
and mental retardation.  You did great work and helped solve the outbreak. But this is
one case that, unfortunately, still hasn't been resolved. New cases are still appearing
and  will  continue  to  appear  until  miners  change  their  behaviors  and  environmental
repairs can be completed.  That's right. The epi curve shows you that the number of
sick  has  dropped  quite  a  bit  since  you  started  chelation  therapy  and  environmental
repairs, but the villages are still facing a lead poisoning outbreak.  It's good that most
families have stopped mining from inside their compounds. But the rate of illness is still
way  too  high.  What's  likely  happening  is  that  miners  are  returning  home  covered  in
dust, which then infects their children. And even though the deaths have slowed down,
the children are still being exposed to dangerous levels of lead, which can leave them
with major handicaps.  You did great work and helped solve the outbreak. But this is
one case that, unfortunately, still hasn't been resolved. New cases are still appearing
and  will  continue  to  appear  until  miners  change  their  behaviors  and  environmental
repairs can be completed.  Sorry, but no. The epi curve shows you that the number of
sick has dropped, but the villages are still facing a lead poisoning outbreak.  It's good
that most families have stopped mining from inside their compounds. But the rate of
illness is still way too high. What's likely happening is that miners are returning home
covered  in  dust,  which  then  infects  their  children.  And  even  though  the  deaths  have
slowed down, the children are still being exposed to dangerous levels of lead, which can
leave them with major handicaps.  You did great work and helped solve the outbreak.
But this is one case that, unfortunately, still hasn't been resolved. New cases are still
appearing  and  will  continue  to  appear  until  miners  change  their  behaviors  and
environmental  repairs  can  be  completed.   The  true  story  behind  the  outbreak  This
fictional scenario is based on a real-life outbreak that is still claiming lives in Nigeria.  In
May  2010,  Doctors  Without  Borders  contacted  the  CDC  and  other  groups  after  it
discovered that a staggering number of children were dying in villages in a remote part
of  Zamfara  Province.  CDC  scientists  raced  to  the  scene,  where  tests  quickly  showed
that  the  children  (and  some  adults)  had  severe  lead  poisoning.  The  cause  of  the
outbreak  was  traced  to  what  is  called  "artisanal  gold  mining,"  or  small-scale  mining
using primitive tools and little, if any, protective equipment.  Scientists have called this
the worst case of mass lead poisoning in modern times.  Conditions were especially bad
because  much  of  the  mining  was  done  in  family  compounds,  where  children  were
exposed  to  huge  amounts  of  lead  through  dust  and  other  means.  CDC,  Nigerian
authorities,  Doctors  Without  Borders,  and  other  organizations  have  worked  hard  to
provide  chelation  therapy  and  to  repair  the  environment  by  removing  contaminated
soil. But because much of the mining activities continue, the outbreak has not ended. 
Note: Aspects of the original outbreaks and investigations have been altered to fit the
format and length of this application.  We're sending you back in time a bit for this one.
It's  1999,  and  the  New  York  City  Department  of  Health  calls  you  when  11  people  in
Queens  come  down  with  a  mysterious  illness.  They  all  had  been  healthy  until  very
recently,  when  they  suddenly  got   bad  fever  with  headaches,  neck  stiffness,  and
disorientation (confusion). Some of them are partially paralyzed. Six are in the hospital,
and 2 are in critical condition! Doctors suspect a virus, but what is it? It's late August,
and New York City is baking in a heat wave. Fred is a retired US veteran in his 70s and
quite active for his age. He's an avid gardener and likes going for long walks every day.
Fred started feeling sick 5 days ago, and now he's in the hospital with a high fever, bad
headache, and extreme muscle weakness. He's having so much trouble breathing that
he's been put on a ventilator. His doctor conducts tests that suggest Fred has a virus,
although it's not yet clear what kind of virus. The next day, 2 people in their 60s with
similar symptoms are admitted to the hospital. New York City's Department of Health
has reached out to all local hospitals to see if anyone else has been admitted with high
fevers and headaches. As it turns out, a total of 11 people are hospitalized with similar
symptoms,  and  they  all  live  in  northern  Queens.  Of  the  11  cases,  9  live  in  the  same
general neighborhood, and the other 2 live only a short distance away. Overall, 8 of the
11  are  55  years  or  older.  Most  of  them  had  been  relatively  healthy  until  getting  this
sickness,  although  2  had  recently  returned  from  hospital  stays  (one  after  having  hip
replacement  surgery  and  the  other  after  having  a  skin  lesion  removed).  On  the  one
hand, it's true that older people have weaker immune systems, so sometimes they're
more likely to catch certain illnesses. But you don't have any reason to suspect that age
has anything to do with this outbreak. In fact, you don't have much information at all.
That's the problem! You need to talk to the sick people and find out more about what
symptoms they have, what they've been doing lately, whether they know each other,
and what they might have in common. Keep going before it spreads! On the one hand,
it's certainly suspicious that all of the sick people live in the same part of town. But you
still don't have any reason to suspect that this is a contagious illness. In fact, you don't
have much information at all. That's the problem! You need to talk to the sick people
and  find  out  more  about  what  symptoms  they  have,  what  they've  been  doing  lately,
whether  they  know  each  other,  and  what  they  might  have  in  common.  Keep  going
before  it  spreads!  On  the  one  hand,  it's  true  that  older  people  have  weaker  immune
systems, and it's certainly suspicious that all of the sick people live in the same part of
town.  But  you  don't  have  any  evidence  to  support  the  idea  that  this  is  a  contagious
illness  or  that  older  people  are  more  likely  to  catch  it.  In  fact,  you  don't  have  much
information at all. That's the problem! You need to talk to the sick people and find out
more about what symptoms they have, what they've been doing lately, whether they
know each other, and what they might have in common. Keep going before it spreads!
Sadly, Fred dies in the hospital, as does another sick person. Three others are in critical
condition, with very high fever, headache, disorientation (confusion), muscle weakness,
and  convulsions  (sudden,  violent,  uncontrollable  shaking).  The  outbreak  is  getting
worse. There are now 17 sick people, all of whom live in northern Queens. You talk to
the  sick  people  and  their  relatives  to  find  out  what  they  had  been  doing  in  the  days
before  they  got  sick.  You  visit  their  homes  and  investigate  their  environments,
searching  for  clues.  Blood  samples  from  the  patients  are  sent  to  the  New  York  State
Health Department laboratory  where they will run tests to see if they can identify what
may  be  making  these  people  sick.  You  visit  with  the  sick  people  and  their  families,
asking  questions  like:  You've  been  hearing  reports  that  an  unusual  number  of  dead
crows  are  being  found  in  the  city.  You  don't  have  any  reason  to  believe  that  this  is
connected to your investigation, because none of the sick people mention having been
near birds lately. Still, you make a point of staying in touch with local veterinarians who
are trying to find out why the birds died. Sorry, but there's no reason to suspect birds at
this point. None of the people have mentioned being around birds.  Of the sick people,
7 own pets, and only 3 reported that they have been around other animals lately. What
should make you suspicious is the fact that 15 of the sick people have spent some time
outdoors  in  the  evening  recently.  That  means  they  may  have  been  bitten  by
mosquitoes,  which  can  spread  a  variety  of  diseases.  And  if  it  is  being  spread  by
mosquitoes,  that  means  more  people  could  get  it  very  quickly.  You  need  to  hurry!
Sorry, but there's no reason to suspect that people are catching the illness from other
sick people. Only 5 of the sick people know anyone else who is sick. 
 What should make you suspicious is the fact that 15 of the sick people have recently
spent some time outdoors in the evening. That means they may have been bitten by
mosquitoes, which can spread a variety of diseases. 
 And  if  it  is  being  spread  by  mosquitoes,  that  means  more  people  could  get  it  very
quickly.  You  need  to  hurry!  That's  right!  The  fact  that  15  of  the  sick  people  have
recently  spent  some  time  outdoors  in  the  evening  means  that  they  could  have  been
bitten by mosquitoes, which can spread a variety of diseases. And if it is being spread
by  mosquitoes,  more  people  could  get  it  soon.  You  need  to  hurry!  Many  of  the  sick
people said they'd recently spent time outdoors in the evening (walking or gardening).
In talking with the sick people, many confirm that they were bitten by a mosquito in the
last week, although others can't quite remember. This evidence, along with test results
from the laboratory that suggest infection with a mosquito-transmitted virus, leads you
to believe that the sick people have St. Louis encephalitis, a rare disease that caused
another outbreak in New York back in the 1950s. Bad news: the outbreak is spreading
to other areas! You learn that 2 people in the Bronx have what appears to be the same
illness, as does someone in Manhattan and someone in Westchester County, north of
the Bronx. Two of these people say they've been to Queens recently. And you also get
an  update  about  all  those  dead  birds.  What  is  St.  Louis  encephalitis  virus?St.  Louis
encephalitis  virus  is  transmitted  to  people  by  the  bite  of  an  infected  mosquito.  Most
people  infected  with  St.  Louis  encephalitis  virus  have  no  apparent  illness,  but  some
people do get quite sick. Initial symptoms include: In rare cases, St. Louis encephalitis
virus  can  kill  or  cause  long-term  disability.  Severe  illness  occurs  more  commonly  in
older adults. There is no specific treatment for St. Louis encephalitis virus infection. You
can reduce your risk by using insect repellent, wearing protective clothing, and staying
indoors in the evening when mosquitoes are most active. The reports about dead crows
keep coming. The Bronx Zoo calls to say that several of their birds have also died in the
last 3 days, including exotic species like Chilean flamingos. But St. Louis encephalitis
virus doesn't kill birds, so you assume that this is an unrelated disease. To be safe, you
talk to the team of veterinarians who took lab samples from the dead birds. The cause
of death still hasn't been determined, so they're still investigating and will update you
with any news.  You can help reduce the number of mosquitoes in outdoor areas where
you  work  and  play  by  draining  sources  of  standing  water.  These  are  places  where
mosquitoes  lay  their  eggs  and  breed.  Local  mosquito  control  organizations  may  also
spray  insecticides  to  help  further  reduce  the  number  of  mosquitoes  in  your
neighborhood. Note: Vitamin B and "ultrasonic" devices are not effective in preventing
mosquito  bites.  This  is  important  because  mosquitoes  -  the  primary  carriers  of  these
diseases - like to breed in stagnant water in ditches, sewage treatment ponds, old tires,
clogged  gutters,  and  other  sources  of  standing  water  but  because  of  the  scale  and
scope  of  the  outbreak,  we  need  to  think  bigger.  The  best  step  now  is  to  consider
spraying insecticides in New York City to control the mosquito population. Keep going to
solve the outbreak!  That's right! The best step now is to weigh the risks and benefits of
spraying insecticides in New York City and surrounding areas. You need to kill off the
mosquitoes so they can't infect more people, and the fastest way to do it is by spraying
insecticides  from  trucks  or  aircrafts  to  kill  adult  mosquitoes.  Local  town/county
mosquito  control  helps  reduce  the  number  of  mosquitoes.  This  is  a  crucial  part  of
reducing  the  risk  of  infection  spreading  to  people.  Mosquito  control  won't  get  rid  of
every  last  mosquito,  but  combined  with  repellent  use,  it  can  markedly  reduce  the
chances  of  getting  bitten.  Keep  going  to  solve  the  outbreak!  Yes,  a  St.  Louis
encephalitis  virus  vaccine  would  be  great,  if  only  one  existed.  But  it  doesn't.  That
means that the best step now is to spray insecticides in New York City and surrounding
areas. You need to kill off the mosquitoes before they infect more people. Keep going to
solve the outbreak! Lab tests on the dead crows show that they have West Nile virus,
which  has  never  been  found  in  the  Western  Hemisphere  before!  Knowing  this
information, you decide to run a different test on the sick people. You learn they don't
have St. Louis encephalitis virus after all; they have West Nile virus. West Nile virus is
closely related to St. Louis encephalitis virus and causes a similar illness.  Since West
Nile virus has never been seen in the United States before, the clinical findings and lab
tests could be confusing. Mosquitoes spread West Nile virus to people, but mosquitoes
can also spread it to birds. This is why the birds started dying at about the same time
that  so  many  people  got  sick.  Now  that  you  know  West  Nile  virus  has  come  to  the
United States, you need to take some steps to prevent it from spreading even more!
What is West Nile virus?West Nile virus disease is a potentially serious illness spread by
mosquitoes.  Before  1999,  West  Nile  virus  had  never  been  found  in  the  Western
Hemisphere.  Although it's not clear how the virus came to our area, experts believe
West Nile virus disease is now a seasonal epidemic in North America that flares up in
the  summer  and  continues  into  the  fall.  People  typically  get  symptoms  4  to  10  days
after  they  are  bitten  by  an  infected  mosquito.   West  Nile  virus  affects  everyone
differently: You work with city, county, and state authorities to set traps that will collect
mosquitoes from across the area. You test the mosquitoes for various viruses, including
West  Nile  virus.  You  have  already  begun  a  carefully  targeted  program  of  spraying
insecticides in northern Queens and the neighboring south Bronx to cut down on the
mosquito population, decreasing the possibility that West Nile virus will spread. The city
sprays insecticides on September 10 (about 3 weeks after you were first called in). The
surrounding areas are sprayed on September 14. During the next few days, a few more
people get sick. You need to figure out if the insecticides are working or if the illness is
still  spreading.  If  it  is,  you'll  need  to  try  something  else  to  stop  the  spread.  To  keep
track of the outbreak, you've created an epidemiologic (epi) curve. This shows Disease
Detectives how an outbreak changes over time. It includes: Epi curves are updated as
new data come in, so they are always changing. The shape of the curve can provide
clues about the possible source of an outbreak.
                                                                                            
                                                                                             Learn how to read an epi
curve. You weren't fooled by the fact that a few people got sick after the spraying of
insecticides.  That's  because  West  Nile  virus  has  an  incubation  period  of  4-10  days,
meaning  that  those  people  were  probably  bitten  before  the  spraying  but  didn't  get
symptoms until afterwards. The bottom line is that the various public health measures
you've  taken  (encouraging  people  to  avoid  mosquito  bites   and  spraying  insecticides
throughout the city and surrounding areas) have been a big help! Things are looking
better in New York City, but how about the rest of the country? There's one step to go
to solve the outbreak! On the one hand, you're right that some people did get sick after
the  spraying  of  insecticides.  But  that's  not  because  the  spraying  didn't  work,  it's
because  West  Nile  virus  has  an  incubation  period  of  4-10  days.  Those  people  were
probably  bitten  before  the  spraying  but  didn't  get  symptoms  until  afterwards.  The
bottom  line  is  that  the  various  public  health  measures  you've  taken  (encouraging
people  to  avoid  mosquito  bites  and  spraying  insecticides  throughout  the  city  and
surrounding  areas)  have  been  a  big  help!  The  outbreak  appears  to  be  fading  in  New
York.  But  how  about  the  rest  of  the  country?  There's  one  step  to  go  to  solve  the
outbreak! The epi curve shows us that the outbreak appears to be tapering off. A small
number of people got sick after the spraying of insecticides, but that's because West
Nile  virus  has  an  incubation  period  of  4-10  days.  Those  people  were  probably  bitten
before the spraying but didn't get symptoms until afterwards. The bottom line is that
the  various  public  health  measures  you've  taken  (encouraging  people  to  avoid
mosquito  bites  and  spraying  insecticides  throughout  the  city  and  surrounding  areas)
have been a big help! Things are looking better in New York City, but how about the
rest of the country? There's one step to go to solve the outbreak! As October begins, a
total of 62 people have gotten sick, and 7 have died. All of the people who died were in
their 60s or older.  Blood tests you've taken of other New Yorkers show that many other
people have been infected with the virus, too, but they never showed any symptoms.
As has been the case in other countries, only a small percentage of the people infected
with  West  Nile  virus  actually  became  sick.  Now  that  the  weather  has  gotten  cooler,
mosquitoes have stopped biting people in New York and other northeastern states. We
may never know how West Nile virus first came to the United States, but odds are good
that it will reappear next spring when mosquitoes return. There are a few theories to
explain how West Nile virus came to the United States: Mosquito bites are more than an
itchy pain. They can also spread serious illnesses. Follow these steps to avoid bites: You
would need a whole lot of insecticide to spray the entire United States. There's no need
to go crazy! The best thing to do at this point is to start educating people across the
country about the importance of using insect repellents and taking other steps to avoid
mosquito bites. You'll also want to warn other local and state health departments that
West Nile virus will likely spread into new areas. They'll need to start taking steps now
for monitoring virus activity in the future, and they should start figuring out how they'll
control their mosquito population when the virus reaches them. Congratulations, your
hard work helped solve the outbreak! That's right! The best thing to do at this point is
to  start  educating  people  across  the  country  about  the  importance  of  using  insect
repellents and taking other steps to avoid mosquito bites. You'll also want to warn other
local  and  state  health  departments  that  West  Nile  virus  will  likely  spread  into  new
areas. They'll need to start taking steps now for monitoring virus activity in the future,
and they should start figuring out how they'll control their mosquito population when
the  virus  reaches  them.  Congratulations,  you  solved  the  outbreak!  Hey,  what  kind  of
attitude is that? On the one hand, you're right that once West Nile virus made it to the
United States, it was here to stay. But there's plenty you can do to make sure we don't
have  big  outbreaks!  The  best  thing  to  do  at  this  point  is  to  start  educating  people
across  the  country  about  the  importance  of  using  insect  repellents  and  taking  other
steps  to  avoid  mosquito  bites.  You'll  also  want  to  warn  other  local  and  state  health
departments that West Nile virus will likely spread into new areas. They'll need to start
taking  steps  now  for  monitoring  virus  activity  in  the  future,  and  they  should  start
figuring out how they'll control their mosquito population when the virus reaches them.
Congratulations,  your  hard  work  helped  solve  the  outbreak!  Your  hard  work  helped
solve the outbreak! Although the characters in this story were not real, this scenario is
based on a real outbreak that CDC helped solve. In the summer of 1999, an unusually
high  number  of  New  Yorkers  were  hospitalized  with  encephalitis  (inflammation  of  the
brain).  They  were  originally  diagnosed  with  St.  Louis  encephalitis,  but  when  a  large
number of birds started dying in the city, scientists learned that the birds actually had
West Nile virus. This was the first time West Nile virus had ever been reported in the
United States. West Nile virus was first discovered in the West Nile District of Uganda in
1937. The virus became recognized as a cause of encephalitis in older patients during
an outbreak in Israel in 1957. West Nile virus had been reported in Africa, Europe, and
the Middle East, but it wasn't until 1999 that it was found in the Western Hemisphere.
Since then, West Nile virus activity has been reported  in people, birds, other animals,
or mosquitoes  in every state except Alaska and Hawaii. That means that every spring
and summer, there is a possibility that a new outbreak could occur almost anywhere in
the  continental  United  States.  The  best  way  to  prevent  West  Nile  virus  and  other
mosquito-borne  diseases  like  St.  Louis  encephalitis  virus  is  to  avoid  getting  mosquito
bites  by  using  insect  repellents,  reducing  mosquito  breeding  sites  on  your  property,
supporting  local  mosquito  control  programs,  and  limiting  your  time  outdoors  when
mosquitoes  are  present.  Note:  Several  aspects  of  the  original  outbreak  and
investigation  have  been  altered  to  fit  the  format  and  length  of  this  application.  The
Georgia  state  veterinary  conference  just  ended.  Dozens  of  people  got  sick  at  the
conference,  complaining  of  severe  stomach  cramps,  diarrhea,  and  fever.  The
conference  coordinator  called  the  state  health  department  to  report  that  several
participants are sick and 2 have been hospitalized. As an officer in the CDC Epidemic
Intelligence  Service  (EIS)  stationed  at  the  Georgia  Department  of  Public  Health,  you
have been called in to help. You are on a mission to stop this outbreak!  First, you call
the  event  coordinator  and  ask  for  a  schedule  of  events  and  a  list  of  the  conference
attendees.  The  coordinator  also  gives  you  contact  information  for  the  15  people  she
knows who are sick so far. You begin by attempting to call each sick person to interview
them and ask about their symptoms, when they first became sick, which events they
attended  at  the  conference,  what  they  ate  and  drank  while  at  the  conference,  and  if
they know of others who are sick.  Since you don't have any lab results yet, you need
other  information  to  come  up  with  a  hypothesis  (an  idea  or  theory)  about  what  is
making people sick and what these people have in common. Later, you'll need to find
out: You succeed in reaching 10 of the 15 sick people. To better understand how the
attendees got sick, you ask about the activities in which they participated since arriving
at the conference.  You also ask about the foods they ate, drinks consumed, as well as
other activities that might have put them at risk. You then study the data to see what
the sick people have in common. Sorry, while several people who stayed at the hotel
are sick, there are a number of sick people who did not stay at the conference hotel.
You're  trying  to  come  up  with  a  hypothesis,  and  since  all  10  of  the  sick  people  you
interviewed attended the Welcome Party, you suspect the Welcome Party is to blame. 
You'll need to investigate more to confirm or refute your suspicion. You're off to a great
start! You suspect the Welcome Party is to blame since all 10 of the people who are sick
attended  that  event,  but  you  need  to  investigate  more  to  confirm  or  refute  your
suspicion.  Sorry.   While  several  people  who  attended  the  opening  session  are  sick,
there are a number of sick people who did not attend the opening session. You're trying
to come up with a hypothesis since the lab results aren't back yet.  You suspect the
Welcome  Party  is  to  blame  since  all  10  of  the  people  who  are  sick  attended  that
function,  but  you  need  to  investigate  more  to  confirm  or  refute  your  suspicion.  The
good news is most of the people who are sick are starting to get better.  In talking with
a  few  of  the  attendees,  you  learn  that  most  of  them  met  a  lot  of  new  people  at  the
Welcome Party, shook hands, and ate some food. Based on what they've told you about
the party, you suspect something the participants ate at the Welcome Party is causing
everyone to be sick. However, in order to be certain you'll need to interview as many of
the  conference  attendees  as  possible.  The  conference  organizer  tells  you  the  food  at
the Welcome Party was prepared by a local caterer. You request a copy of the menu
served at the Welcome Party in order to develop a list of items to which participants
might have been exposed. During your initial 10 interviews you asked about attendee
participation  in  various  conference  events,  as  well  as  the  food  items  they  ate  during
conference events. Using the information gathered from the interviews, along with the
Welcome Party menu, you create a standard questionnaire that you use to interview as
many of the 75 conference attendees as possible. You make sure to ask clear, detailed
questions  about  any  items  you  suspect.  By  interviewing  most  of  the  75  conference
attendees,  you  learn  that  at  least  25  people  are  sick,  including  your  10  initial
interviewees.  A few individuals began feeling ill on Monday, with many more reporting
symptoms on Tuesday and Wednesday. You don't have laboratory test results yet, so
you define a sick person as someone who attended the conference and began having
diarrhea anytime between Jan. 29 through Feb. 5. To analyze the data, you create an
epidemic  curve  or  "epi  curve"  which  shows  how  an  outbreak  changes  over  time.  It
includes: Learn more about an epi curve. After conducting these additional interviews,
you calculate the attack rate and relative risk of each conference event and each menu
item  from  the  Welcome  Party.  Based  on  the  interviews,  you  confirm  your  initial
hypothesis that the illness was associated with the Welcome Party and not any of the
other  conference  events.  You  therefore  focus  on  determining  the  attack  rates  of  the
food  items  at  the  party.  Relative  risk  is  a  measure  of  association  that  helps  you  to
determine  which  items  are  most  likely  responsible  for  an  outbreak.   It  allows
investigators to compare risk factors or exposures among those who are sick, compared
with those who are not. Since you have identified the Welcome Party as the source of
illness, you now focus on the relative risk of the food items served at the party. No need
to  be  "chicken"  to  eat  the  chicken  tenders!  However,  you  should  watch  out  for  the
spinach  dip  and  veggie  lasagna!  These  foods  have  the  highest  attack  rates  and
elevated relative risks. Maybe there's a common ingredient in these 2 dishes that is to
blame? Keep working to solve the outbreak. It does look like the spinach dip had a high
attack rate and an elevated relative risk, but so did the veggie lasagna. Maybe there's a
common  ingredient  in  these  2  dishes  that  is  to  blame?  Keep  working  to  solve  the
outbreak. The attack rates and relative risks for the spinach dip and veggie lasagna are
very  suspicious.  Perhaps  there's  a  common  ingredient  in  these  2  dishes  that  is  to
blame? Keep working to solve the outbreak. Initial laboratory results are back and show
that  the  outbreak  is  likely  due  to  E.  coli  O157.  The  state  health  department  has  to
confirm the results in their lab, but that could take several days.  In the meantime, you
ask  the  caterer  for  a  list  of  the  recipes  from  the  Welcome  Party  and  review  the
ingredients. You notice that the 2 dishes with the highest relative risks (the spinach dip
and veggie lasagna) both had raw spinach leaves added as a garnish after the dishes
were  cooked;  no  other  dishes  used  raw  spinach  and  there  were  no  other  common
ingredients  between  these  2  dishes.  You  immediately  contact  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration (FDA) and tell them about your suspicions that raw spinach could be the
source of this outbreak. You don't have any time to waste, so you go visit the caterer.
Luckily,  you  find  some  unopened  bags  of  fresh  spinach  that  were  purchased  at  the
same time as those used to prepare the food for the Welcome Party.  Since the spinach
is still in the bag, FDA is able to trace the lot numbers for this product to find out where
it was grown and bagged. What is E. coli?  Escherichia coli (abbreviated as E. coli) are
bacteria found in the environment, foods, and intestines of people and animals. Most E.
coli are harmless and actually are an important part of a healthy human intestinal tract.
However,  some  are  pathogenic,  meaning  they  can  cause  illness,  either  diarrhea  or
illness outside of the intestinal tract. The types of E. coli that can cause diarrhea can be
transmitted through contaminated water or food, through contact with animals or their
environments,  or  when  infected  people  do  not  wash  hands  well  after  going  to  the
bathroom,  and  the  bacteria  get  from  their  hands  into  someone  else's  mouth.  Some
kinds of E. coli cause disease by making a toxin called Shiga toxin. The bacteria that
make  these  toxins  are  called  "Shiga  toxin-producing"  E.  coli,  or  STEC.   The  most
commonly identified STEC in North America is E. coli O157:H7.   Get tips on how to stay
safe.   The best way to protect yourself from an E. coli infection is to:  What is a Lot
Number? A lot number is an identification (ID) number given to each batch of a product
(or subset of a batch). When manufacturers produce a product, they give each batch a
unique lot number so that it is possible to track the product, including the ingredients
used,  the  manufacturing  plant,  and  the  equipment  used  to  process  an  item.   Lot
numbers help with tracing and may even help you find the specific farm or field where
the produce was grown and processed. You're exactly right!  As you wait for the results,
it's a good idea for you to jointly work with FDA to contact the spinach producer and
inform  them  about  the  investigation.     Before  you  can  determine  if  the  spinach  is
contaminated,  you'll  need  to  rule  out  things  like  cross-contamination  in  the  kitchen
while the food was being prepared, as well as the possibility that someone who was sick
prepared the food.   If the spinach is to blame, the state health department and FDA will
work to find out where the spinach was produced, how it was packaged, and where it
was  distributed.   FDA  and  the  state  work  to  collect  and  analyze  records,  looking  for
common producers or suppliers, as well as other companies who received the spinach
of  concern.    A  recall  is  a  bit  premature  at  this  point.   Before  you  determine  if  the
spinach is contaminated, you'll need to rule out things like cross-contamination in the
kitchen while the food was being prepared, as well as the possibility that someone who
was sick prepared the food.  You should work with the state health department and FDA
to have the spinach tested for E. coli O157.  As you wait for the results, it's a good idea
for you to jointly work with FDA to contact the spinach producer and inform them about
the investigation.    If the spinach is to blame, the state health department and FDA will
work to find out where the spinach was produced, how it was packaged, and where it
was  distributed.  FDA  and  the  state  work  to  collect  and  analyze  records,  looking  for
common producers or suppliers, as well as other companies who received the spinach
of concern.   Before you determine if the spinach is contaminated, you'll need to rule
out things like cross-contamination in the kitchen while the food was being prepared, as
well as the possibility that someone who was sick prepared the food.   You should work
with the state health department and FDA to have the spinach tested for E. coli O157. 
As you wait for the results, it's a good idea for you to jointly work with FDA to contact
the spinach producer and inform them about the investigation.    If the spinach is to
blame,  the  state  health  department  and  FDA  will  work  to  find  out  where  the  spinach
was produced, how it was packaged, and where it was distributed. FDA and the state
work to collect and analyze records, looking for common producers or suppliers, as well
as other companies who received the spinach of concern.   The results from the state
health  department  are  in!   The  bacterial  testing  shows  the  sick  people  are,  in  fact,
infected  with  E.  coli  O157:H7.    The  State  Public  Health  Laboratory  sends  the  DNA
"fingerprints"  to  PulseNet  (a  national  network  of  state  and  local  public  health
laboratories  and  federal  food  regulatory  laboratories).   PulseNet  scientists  at  CDC
headquarters  in  Atlanta  compare  "fingerprints"  of  this  strain  of  E.  coli  O157  with  the
DNA  "fingerprints"  in  the  database  and  find  that  this  particular  strain  is
indistinguishable  from  that  of  12  other  cases  that  have  been  reported  across  the
country  in  the  last  few  weeks.   You  also  discover  that  this  strain  has  never  been
reported  to  PulseNet  before  now.    In  fact,  there  is  already  another  ongoing
investigation  of  these  12  sick  people.   You  learn  from  the  EIS  officer  at  CDC
headquarters that they are already investigating this outbreak.  They also tell you that
3 additional people have been hospitalized and 1 person has died. In total, 37 people
are infected with the outbreak strain from 5 different states.  Twenty-five people were
infected during the conference in Georgia, and another 12 people are spread across the
country:     We  first  need  to  find  out  if  the  other  12  people  who  are  sick  even  ate
spinach.  If so, then we'll need to track down the point of contamination and that could
be anywhere from the field, to the packaging plant, to the distribution center.   You still
have  more  work  to  do!  We  first  need  to  find  out  if  the  other  12  people  who  are  sick
even ate spinach.  If so, then we'll need to track down the point of contamination and
that could be anywhere from the field, to the packaging plant, to the distribution center.
  You still have more work to do! You're absolutely right.  The next thing you need to do
is talk to the 12 additional people who are sick in other states and find out if they ate
spinach.  If so, then we'll need to track down the point of contamination and that could
be anywhere from the field, to the packaging plant, to the distribution center.   You still
have more work to do! Your hunch is right!  The initial interviews from the state and
local investigators reveal 11 of the 12 other sick people ate spinach, too.  To find out if
these people ate the same brand of spinach as those at the conference, you need to
review the data collected during all of the interviews.   In the meantime, FDA visits the
production  facility  where  the  spinach  used  at  the  conference  event  is  cleaned  and
bagged.  During  their  visit,  FDA  officials  look  at  the  possible  points  of  contamination
(such  as  dirty  wash  water,  sick  employees  handling  the  spinach,  or  other  problems).
However, no likely points of contamination are found.   FDA decides to visit the spinach
farm.  Now this is a "field" investigation!  You review data collected from interviews with
each of the 11 additional sick people to find out if they ate the same brand of spinach
that made conference attendees sick.  You want to learn more about when and where
they might have eaten it, including if they ate the spinach at home or in a restaurant.  If
the spinach was eaten at home, you'll also want to know what brand it was and from
where it was purchased.    Based on your data review, you discover all of the people
who  are  sick  ate  the  same  brand  of  spinach  as  the  attendees  from  the  conference.
Fortunately,  2  of  the  individuals  still  have  some  of  the  spinach,  so  you  collect  the
spinach to check the lot number and test it for E. coli O157:H7.   Not only do the lot
numbers  match  the  bags  of  spinach  from  the  conference  caterer,  but  lab  testing  of
these  new  bags  of  spinach  finds  they  were  also  contaminated  with  E.  coli  O157:H7.
During the visit to the spinach farm, the farm manager is interviewed so data can be
collected  about  the  farm  and  its  operations.    The  spinach  farm  is  next  to  a  creek.  
Across  the  creek,  about  a  quarter  a  mile  away,  there  is  a  farm  with  300  cows  The
pastures the cows graze in is a very hilly area that is on higher ground.   There is a well
maintained  fence  to  keep  the  cows  out  of  the  fields  and  away  from  the  creek.  The
spinach farmer reports that he uses treated well water for his crops, but there has been
some flooding in parts of his fields due to recent heavy rains. Did you know that cattle
are  natural  carriers  of  E.  coli  O157:H7?   Cows  do  not  always  carry  E.  coli  O157,  but
sometimes they do.   Although cows are usually not affected by the bacteria, they can
carry it and shed it in their waste, even while appearing healthy. If the bacteria got into
the spinach fields, it could contaminate the spinach. Because of heavy rains, the cows
have been grazing in the pasture across the stream, uphill from the spinach farm. Also,
there's a fence that prevents the cows from getting into the creek or the fields. There's
no way they could have eaten the spinach.   Cow manure is collected and tests positive
for  the  outbreak  strain  of  E.  coli  O157.   Floods  from  the  rain  most  likely  washed  the
cows' waste onto the plants closest to the stream (which explains why only 1 lot was
infected). The cows are therefore the likely source of the spinach contamination.  You
recommend that the spinach farmer improve drainage to avoid flooding from the creek
when there is a heavy rain.    Because of the proximity to the cattle farm, the farmer
doesn't use the water from the stream to irrigate the fields and instead uses treated
water from a well. Cow manure is collected and tests positive for the outbreak strain of
E. coli O157.  Floods from the rain most likely washed the cows' waste onto the plants
closest  to  the  stream  (which  explains  why  only  1  lot  was  infected).  The  cows  are
therefore  the  likely  source  of  the  spinach  contamination.   You  recommend  that  the
spinach farmer improve drainage to avoid flooding when there is a heavy rain.   The
cattle have been grazing in the pasture across the stream, uphill from the spinach farm.
Cow  manure  is  collected  and  tests  positive  for  the  outbreak  strain  of  E.  coli  O157.  
Floods from the rain most likely washed the cows' waste onto the plants closest to the
stream (which explains why only 1 lot was infected). The cows are therefore the likely
source of the spinach contamination.  Thanks to the hard work conducted by your team,
the state health department, and the FDA, the affected lots were located and recalled,
potentially  preventing  many  more  people  from  getting  sick.  Additionally,  the  spinach
farmer will make changes to improve drainage and help keep the spinach safe in the
future.      Your  quick  thinking  and  keen  detective  skills  were  key  to  solving  this
outbreak!  This  fictional  outbreak  was  based  partly  on  a  real-life  outbreak  of  fresh
spinach in the US in August and September 2006.  Over the course of this outbreak,
183 people became sick from E. coli O157:H7 in 26 states, 95 people were hospitalized,
and  1  person  died.  CDC's  Disease  Detectives  partnered  with  state  and  local  health
departments to work diligently to solve this outbreak by interviewing the people who
were sick.  By doing so, they found that 95% of the people had eaten uncooked, fresh
spinach during the 10 days before getting sick. Based on CDC's investigation, the FDA
issued an advisory to warn people about eating fresh, bagged spinach.    CDC's National
Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases  (NCEZID)  aims  to  prevent
disease,  disability,  and  death  caused  by  a  wide  range  of  infectious  diseases.    Note:
Several  aspects  of  the  original  outbreak  and  investigation  and  findings  have  been
altered to fit the format and length of this application. It's midsummer in Louisiana: hot,
humid, and time to harvest sugarcane. Several workers at a sugar plantation are sick
with a mysterious illness that's left one man in the hospital. Harvesting sugarcane is a
physically  demanding  job,  and  the  men  work  in  very  tough  conditions.  Do  they  just
have  a  bad  virus,  or  is  it  something  they  got  from  working  close  together  in  the
scorching  heat?  Local  doctors  need  your  help  to  solve  the  outbreak!  The  workers
reported to the sugar plantation for their first day on July 9. After 2 days on the job, 7
workers went to the doctor complaining of headache, fatigue, and muscle aches. Six of
them have fevers. The doctor told them to take some painkillers and get some rest. A
couple of days later, one of those sick workers, a 20-year-old named Jorge, had to be
taken to the nearest hospital. His left shoulder and arm were in a lot of pain, and his
hand was numb. The manager just thinks his new workers are faking to get out of work,
but one doctor thinks it could be a meningitis outbreak. The temperature has been over
100  degrees  since  the  beginning  of  July,  and  the  humidity  makes  it  even  worse.
Mosquitoes are thick in the air, and venomous snakes slither in the grass. Some of the
workers  have  had  to  watch  out  for  stray  dogs  that  wander  onto  the  plantation.  The
workers share water bottles in the field, and many of them take dips in a nearby lake to
cool off after work. What is Meningitis? Meningitis is a disease caused by swelling of the
meninges, which are membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord. The swelling is
usually a result of an infection of the fluid around the brain and spinal cord. Meningitis
is most often caused by bacteria or viruses. Meningitis also can be caused by physical
injury, cancer, certain drugs, or even parasites. Swimming in warm water (lakes, ponds,
and pools) can put you at risk of recreational water illnesses (RWIs). These are caused
by germs spread when people swallow or come into contact with contaminated (dirty)
water.  RWIs  include  many  different  kinds  of  infections,  affecting  skin,  ears,  eyes,
digestive systems, and the brain. Diarrhea is the most common symptom of RWIs. You
don't have any reason to suspect that mosquitoes are spreading the illness. You need
to  find  out  what  the  patients  have  in  common  first.  Keep  investigating  before  it
spreads! You're right! The first thing to do is get a better idea of what the sick people
have in common. Keep investigating before it spreads! Most recreational water illnesses
lead  to  diarrhea,  and  none  of  the  sick  patients  have  that.  Since  one  of  the  doctors
suspects  meningitis,  there  may  come  a  time  to  test  the  water.  But  that  shouldn't  be
first  on  your  list.  You  need  to  find  out  what  the  patients  have  in  common  first.  Keep
investigating before it spreads! Four more workers are sick on July 13, bringing the total
to 11. You interview the sick workers and their manager to get more information. The
workers were split into 3 groups on 3 different fields. Some shared water bottles while
they worked, and some swam in the lake afterwards. Some of the workers live in the
town  year-round,  but  many  came  from  other  parts  of  the  state  and  even  other
countries.  Most  live  in  cramped  apartments,  sharing  bedrooms.  A  few  sleep  in  small
trailers  on  the  plantation  property.  Of  the  11  who  are  sick,  6  recently  traveled  from
another  country  (4  are  from  Mexico  and  2  are  from  Guatemala).  Jorge,  who's  from
Guatemala, is the only one in the hospital. Eight of the sick workers have worked on
this  plantation  in  past  summers,  and  they  don't  think  the  hard  work  or  the  heat  has
anything to do with why they've gotten sick. Sorry, no. It's true that a lot of the sick
workers are living with a sick person (7 out of 11). But an even bigger number have
worked on the North Field (9 out of 11).  Both of those things lead you to believe that
this is a contagious illness. You need to hurry! That's right! The data shows you that
people  who  worked  on  the  North  Field  were  much  more  likely  to  get  sick.  But  why?
That's what you need to find out next! Six of the sick workers shared their water bottle,
which  is  a  good  way  to  spread  germs.  But  what  most  (9)  of  the  workers  have  in
common is that they worked at the North Field. You need to hurry and figure this out!
Doctors confirm that the other workers just had a bad virus, but Jorge seems to have
something worse. Ten of the workers are feeling better on July 20, and have returned to
work. Jorge, however, has gotten worse: one of his eyelids is drooping, he hasn't been
able to move his right arm for days, and he's had so much trouble breathing that he's
been put on a breathing tube. On July 21, which is 10 days after he first felt sick, he
slips into a coma. His symptoms suggest it's something affecting his nerves and brain.
Based on his symptoms, Jorge's doctors now think that he could have rabies, which is
almost always caused by the bite of a rabid animal. There's a small scar on one of his
shoulders  that  could  be  a  bite  mark.  The  doctors  run  some  tests  to  confirm  their
suspicion, and you send the lab work to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC)  headquarters  in  Atlanta  to  analyze.  You  also  talk  to  a  worker  named  Eduardo,
who is from the same town in Guatemala as Jorge. He tells you that they left their town
together on July 2, riding buses and trains through Guatemala and Mexico for 4 days.
They spent the night in a small town in Texas and made it to the plantation on July 8.
He doesn't remember Jorge saying he'd been bitten by any animals, but he does tell
you that there were a lot of stray dogs near the field where they were working. What is
Rabies?  Rabies  is  a  virus  most  often  spread  by  the  bite  of  a  rabid  animal.  The  vast
majority of rabies cases in the US happen in wild animals like raccoons, skunks, bats,
and foxes. The rabies virus infects the brain and nerves. People who get rabies usually
have  the  virus  in  their  bodies  for  many  weeks  before  they  show  any  symptoms.  The
early symptoms are like those of many other illnesses: fever, headache, and weakness
or  discomfort.  Over  time,  more  symptoms  show  up:  confusion,  hyperactivity,  trouble
sleeping, slight or partial paralysis, hallucinations, hypersalivation (increase in saliva),
difficulty  swallowing,  and  fear  of  water.  Within  days  of  these  symptoms,  the  person
dies. Because there's no cure for rabies, people who have been bitten by a potentially
rabid  animal,  need  to  seek  medical  care  immediately,  before  the  virus  can  travel  to
their brain. The incubation period for rabies is usually many weeks. Jorge was feeling
sick by his second day in Louisiana, so he couldn't have caught it from anything at the
plantation. He likely was bitten by something back home in Guatemala, long before he
traveled  to  the US.  But how  do  you  make sure no  one else gets rabies?  Keep  going!
Sorry, but the incubation period for rabies is usually many weeks. Jorge was feeling sick
by his second day in Louisiana, so he couldn't have caught it from anything during his
travels  that  week.  He  likely  was  bitten  by  something  back  home  in  Guatemala,  long
before  he  traveled  north.  But  how  do  you  make  sure  no  one  else  gets  rabies?  Keep
going! That's right. We still don't know exactly how Jorge got rabies, but we do know
that the virus is usually inside an infected person for many weeks before he or she has
any symptoms. That means Jorge couldn't have gotten it from something in the US. He
likely was bitten by something back home in Guatemala, long before he traveled north.
But  how  do  you  make  sure  no  one  else  gets  rabies?  Keep  going!  The  test  results
confirm that Jorge has rabies. When you call Jorge's mother in Guatemala, she tells you
that he had been bitten by a vampire bat in May. A growing number of people in her
town have been getting rabies, she says. Because Jorge's symptoms are so far along,
unfortunately,  there's  little  doctors  can  do  to  save  him.  On  July  26,  he  dies  in  the
hospital. The key to preventing rabies after someone has been bitten is to give a series
of shots called post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) before the person has any symptoms.
That  means  you  have  another  big  decision  to  make.  There  could  be  more  infected
people who aren't showing any symptoms yet. Because rabies is a fatal illness, anyone
who might be at risk should get the PEP shots as soon as possible. You know that Jorge
traveled for days with Eduardo, lived in an apartment with 3 other people, and worked
in the fields with other workers. He even shared his water bottle with some of them.
You need to make sure none of these people get sick. How to prevent rabies: There's no
need to go overboard. Scientists have proven that rabies can be transmitted through a
sick  person's  saliva,  for  that  reason  you  investigate  further  and  find  out  the  risk  of
exposure.  As rabies is such a dangerous disease, you should give the PEP shots to the
workers who shared Jorge's water bottle. You should also give it to health care workers
who may have been exposed to some of Jorge's bodily fluids such as tears. Your work's
not done yet. You need to head south! That's right. Scientists have proven that rabies
can be spread through a sick person's saliva. You investigate further and find out the
risk of exposure.  As rabies is such a dangerous disease, you should give the PEP shots
to the workers who shared Jorge's water bottle. You should also give it to health care
workers  who  may  have  been  exposed  to  some  of  Jorge's  bodily  fluids  such  as  tears.
Your work's not done yet. You need to head south! Not quite. It's true that there have
been no documented cases of one person spreading rabies to another person, except
for  some  instances  involving  transplanted  organs  and  tissues.  But  scientists  have
proven that rabies can be spread through a sick person's saliva. You investigate further
and find out the risk of exposure.  As rabies is such a dangerous disease, you should
give the PEP shots to the workers who shared Jorge's water bottle. You should also give
it to health care workers who may have been exposed to some of Jorge's bodily fluids
such  as  tears.  Your  work's  not  done  yet.  You  need  to  head  south!  As  you  work  with
health authorities in Guatemala, you learn that Jorge's mother was right: 11 people in
his town have come down with rabies in the last 2 years. That's odd, because there had
never been any cases in this town before. The Guatemalan health department invites
you to come down and investigate. This is a small village in the mountains, and it's only
had electricity for about 2 years. Many of the cows and donkeys on local farms have bat
bites,  and  so  do  some  dogs.  You  study  where  the  vampire  bats  live  and  which  farm
animals  have  been  bitten.  You  also  notice  that  though  the  village  recently  added
electric  lights  down  its  small  roads,  people  still  don't  have  electricity  in  their  homes.
Vampire bats prefer to feed in darkness. It's possible that the new lights have disturbed
the bats' usual patterns, which is why they've started coming to this town. Since the
houses are still dark, the bats are flying in and biting people while they sleep. That's
right! The best way to prevent rabies is to avoid contact with rabid animals. Since bats
have been getting into people's homes at night, you should help them find ways to seal
openings into the house. You were right not to try to kill the local bats, as there's no
scientific reason to do this. In fact, because of rabies' long incubation period, most of
the bats that were infected have probably already died by now. This means the ones
that are still alive have some immunity to rabies. If you killed them off, they'd only be
replaced by a new population of bats that would be more likely to get rabies. That's the
last thing you want. And giving PEP shots to every single person in the entire village is a
bit  too  much.  Congratulations,  you  solved  the  outbreak!  Nope.  Giving  PEP  shots  to
every single person in the entire village is a bit too much. Certainly anyone who's been
bitten by a vampire bat should get one, and so should anyone who's come into contact
with saliva or other body fluids from a rabid animal or a vampire bat. But that's it. What
you should really do is encourage people to fill any holes in the roofs or walls of their
homes  to  prevent  bats  from  getting  in.  Your  hard  work  helped  solve  the  outbreak!
There's no scientific reason to try to kill the local bats. In fact, because of rabies' long
incubation period, most of the bats that were infected have probably already died by
now. This means the ones that are still alive have some immunity to rabies. If you killed
them off, they'd only be replaced by a new population of bats that would be more likely
to get rabies. That's the last thing you want. What you should do is encourage people to
fill any holes in the roofs or walls of their homes to prevent bats from getting in. Your
hard  work  helped  solve  the  outbreak!  Your  hard  work  helped  to  solve  the  outbreak!
Although this scenario was not real, it's based on some recent incidents. A young man
in  Louisiana  died  from  rabies  after  being  bitten  weeks  earlier  by  a  vampire  bat  in
Mexico. It was the first time someone in the US died from rabies after a vampire bat
bite. And it's unlikely to be the last, as vampire bats have been moving north. In the
real outbreak, CDC workers traveled to the worker's home town in Mexico. Because cats
and dogs in the town were frequently bitten by vampire bats, health workers from the
US  and  Mexico  vaccinated  dogs  and  cats  to  protect  them.  Local  health  workers  also
took steps to control the vampire bat population. In another recent case, CDC workers
traveled  to  a  village  in  Peru,  deep  in  the  Amazon  jungle.  The  town  had  never  had  a
rabies case before, but suddenly many people were getting rabies. CDC investigators
believe  that  new  electric  lights  had  altered  the  bats'  behavior,  and  CDC  worked  with
local authorities and the villagers to stop the outbreak. Rabies is a killer. If you're ever
bitten  by  an  animal,  see  a  doctor  immediately.  Note:  Several  aspects  of  the  original
outbreaks  and  investigations  have  been  altered  to  fit  the  format  and  length  of  this
application.  You  might  not  be  able  to  trust  your  own  eyes  on  this  next  outbreak.  It
begins with a surprising increase in a rare eye condition. At least, it's supposed to be
rare, but it seems to be becoming a lot more common! A number of people are being
infected by a tiny ameba (single-celled living organism) that's causing permanent eye
damage.  Dozens  of  people  in  these  states  need  transplants  of  their  cornea  (the
transparent, outermost layer of the eye), and many are going blind! We need your help
to solve the outbreak! Dr. Lee is an ophthalmologist (eye doctor) in Athens, Georgia. He
recently  noticed  that  more  of  his  patients  were  getting  a  rare  disease  called
Acanthamoeba keratitis (known as "AK"). There wasn't a sudden rise in the number of
cases; in fact, the increase was so gradual that he only realized it after several years.
He  calls  the  Georgia  Department  of  Public  Health,  and  it  turns  out  he  isn't  the  only
doctor suspecting an increase. Three other doctors have recently called about the same
thing. The Department then calls the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
and asks you to figure out what's going on, and fast! Soon after the call from Georgia,
New  York's  Department  of  Public  Health  calls  you  about  the  same  thing.  It's  strange
that two states nearly 1,000 miles from each other could have the same problem. You
wonder if AK is increasing around the country, or if this is a false alarm. It's possible
that a few doctors just happen to have sicker patients than other doctors. You decide to
gather 6 years of medical records from a sample of eye doctors in Georgia, New York,
and 3 other states across the country to see if AK really is becoming more common.
What is Acanthamoeba keratitis? Acanthamoeba is a microscopic ameba ("amoeba" is
the  British  spelling)  that  can  cause  rare  but  severe  infections  of  the  eye,  skin,  brain,
and  spinal  cord.  One  of  the  diseases  it  causes  is  Acanthamoeba  keratitis  (AK),  an
infection of the eye that causes eye pain, redness, sensitivity to light, and the feeling
that something is stuck in your eye. AK can permanently damage your vision or cause
blindness. The ameba is found around the world in soil and dust, as well as in water.  It
lives in the ocean and freshwater lakes and rivers. It can also be found in swimming
pools,  hot  tubs,  and  drinking  water.  Most  people  will  be  exposed  to  it  during  their
lifetime, but very few will become sick from it. The problem seems to be getting worse.
Although some states have seen more cases than others, the data shows you that there
have been more cases each year in each state for at least 6 straight years. You'll need
to  act  fast.  A  new  person  is  coming  down  with  it  nearly  every  day!  The  problem  is
actually  getting  worse.  Although  some  states  have  reported  more  cases  than  others,
the  data  shows  you  that  there  have  been  more  cases  each  year  in  each  state  for  at
least  6  straight  years.  You'll  need  to  act  fast.  A  new  person  is  coming  down  with  it
nearly  every  day!  The  problem  is  actually  getting  worse.  Although  some  states  have
seen more cases than others, the data showed you that there have been more cases
each  year  in  each  state  for  at  least  6  straight  years.  You'll  need  to  act  fast.  A  new
person  is  coming  down  with  it  nearly  every  day!  In  order  to  figure  out  why  so  many
people are getting AK, you need to learn more. You and a team of Epidemic Intelligence
Service  (EIS)  officers  take  a  closer  look  at  the  medical  records  for  all  the  AK  case
patients, this time expanding to 10 states. This additional work takes some time, but
once  you've  got  all  the  information  you  have  a  better  sense  of  what's  happening.  It
turns  out  that  97%  of  the  infected  people  wear  contact  lenses.  For  comparison,  only
13% of all Americans wear contacts. You take a look at the medical records for all 1,128
people with AK in 10 states. A typical example is Justin, a 19-year-old college student in
Syracuse,  NY,  who  has  been  wearing  contacts  for  2  years.  He  stays  up  late  and
sometimes  falls  asleep  in  his  contacts.  Four  months  ago  his  right  eye  started  to  feel
sore, and it looked red. He started using rewetting drops, but they didn't help. So he
stopped wearing contacts for a few days. He didn't want to spend money on the doctor
and  was  hoping  the  problem  would  just  go  away.  Instead,  it  got  worse:  his  vision
became  blurry.  He  finally  saw  his  doctor  a  month  after  the  problem  started,  and  the
doctor told Justin he had AK. Unfortunately, the infection had gotten so bad that Justin
will  never  have  normal  vision  again  unless  he  has  corneal  transplant  surgery.  Of  the
1,128 people with AK: You know that most of the infected people wear contact lenses,
but  that  doesn't  necessarily  mean  that  the  lenses  themselves  are  to  blame.  And
because you know so little about why this outbreak is happening, you wouldn't know
what to warn people about yet. You need to find out what else the infected people have
in common, and fast, before the outbreak gets worse! We don't have any evidence yet
that  the  use  of  rewetting  drops  is  related  to  the  outbreak.  Remember,  Justin  started
using them after he developed his first symptoms of AK. You need to find out what else
the infected people have in common, and fast, before the outbreak gets worse! That's
right. You know that 97% of the people with AK wear contact lenses, so that's a good
start.  Now  you  need  to  see  what  else  they  have  in  common.  Keep  going,  before  the
outbreak  gets  worse!  You  decide  to  find  out  what  contact  lens  products  the  people
infected with AK use. There are different brands of lenses, different types of lenses (like
soft  lenses  or  hard  lenses,  extended  wear,  and  disposable),  and  different  types  of
solutions  (like  disinfecting  solutions  and  rewetting  drops).  You  also  ask  the  infected
people  how  they  use  their  lenses.   Do  they  ever  forget  to  take  their  contacts  out  at
night? Do they wear them for too long before replacing them? Do they ever use expired
solution? You and your EIS team review the data to see what's causing the outbreak. Of
the  1,128  people  with  AK  infection,  you  interview  a  sample  of  194  people  who  wear
contacts. You also talk to 410 people who wear contacts but don't have infections. In
outbreak investigations, we call this second group the "control group." Each person was
asked  what  they  did  in  the  month  before  becoming  infected.  The  "attack  rate"  was
calculated for each activity. A lot of the sick people (96) are using that kind of lens, but
so are a lot of healthy people. In fact, the attack rates for people who use them (32%) is
the exact same as the attack rate for people who don't. That means it's unlikely to be
the problem - it's just a popular kind of lens. Maybe you should take a closer look at
Solution D. Its attack rate of 41% is much greater than the attack rate among people
who didn't use that solution (27%). Let's work harder to solve the outbreak! The data
tells you that people who use Solution D have an attack rate of 41%, much higher than
the 27% attack rate for people who didn't use it. That makes you suspicious that the
solution could actually be part of the problem. Great work, your investigative skills are
solid! Only 38 of the infected people said they've used rewetting drops, so that can't be
the  reason  so  many  people  are  getting  AK.  Maybe  you  should  take  a  closer  look  at
Solution D. Its attack rate of 41% is much greater than the attack rate among people
who didn't use that solution (27%). Let's work harder to solve the outbreak! Hundreds
of people around the country are becoming blind because of AK, and most of them will
need surgery to be able to see again. Doctors are alarmed and need to know what's
going wrong. The good news is, you finally have a solid lead! Since you know that many
of  the  people  with  AK  used  Solution  D,  you  immediately  test  the  solution  for
Acanthamoeba. But it's a dead end. Surprisingly, you don't find the ameba in any of the
new bottles you test. Maybe the contact solution isn't to blame. Something else must
be causing the increase in AK. Keep investigating! When you first looked at the medical
records, you noticed that many of the people with AK were either elderly or teenagers,
but you weren't sure what that meant. Then, when talking again to Dr. Lee and some of
the other doctors, they mention that Solution D is marketed toward new contact users.
In fact, these doctors even give out a free sample of Solution D as part of their "How to
Wear and Care For Your Contact Lenses" packets to patients who are first-time contact
lens wearers. You decide to take another look at your data. Interestingly enough, you
find that two thirds (66%) of infected people have been wearing contacts for less than 3
years. Acanthamoeba is usually present in the water and soil. There are a number of
ways  people  can  be  exposed  to  Acanthamoeba,  but  it's  usually  through  water.  You
wonder if Acanthamoeba has become more common in the country's tap water over the
years.  While  you're  interviewing  people,  you  find  out  that  a  separate  team  from  the
environmental health department has been testing, for years, the tap water in some of
the  states  you're  studying.  Their  lab  results  show  that  the  tap  water  in  those  states
doesn't  have  any  more  Acanthamoeba  now  than  it  had  in  the  past  15  years.  So,
exposure to tap water alone isn't causing these infections. Because many of the people
with  AK  are  new  contact  users,  you're  right  to  be  suspicious.  But  when  you  read  the
information packet, you don't see anything wrong. What's most likely happening is that
the new contact wearers are not handling their lenses properly. They may be putting in,
taking out, disinfecting, or storing their lenses incorrectly. You've almost figured it out,
only one step to go! That's right. What's most likely happening is that the new contact
wearers  are  not  handling  their  lenses  properly.  They  may  be  putting  in,  taking  out,
disinfecting,  or  storing  their  lenses  incorrectly.  You've  almost  figured  it  out,  only  one
step to go! The test results didn't find any amebas in Solution D bottles, so this is not
likely to be the reason for the outbreak. Since you've ruled so many other things out,
what's  most  likely  happening  is  that  the  new  contact  wearers  are  not  handling  their
lenses properly. They may be putting in, taking out, disinfecting, or storing their lenses
incorrectly. You've almost figured it out, only one step to go! Now it's starting to make
sense!  You know that 66% of the infected people are new to wearing contact lenses,
and sometimes people who are new at something don't quite know how to do it well.
Since you also know that Acanthamoeba is usually spread through water, you suspect
that perhaps the new contact lens wearers are letting their lenses touch water or aren't
taking proper care of them. You ask the infected people and your control group another
series of questions, this time about their daily routine and habits with their contacts.
You ask questions about whether people are doing something that might put them at
greater risk of infection, such as: Contact lens users should follow these guidelines to
avoid infections: Washing your face with your lenses in is a bad idea, but the results
don't  suggest  that  it's  responsible  for  this  outbreak.  It  appears  that  "topping  off"  the
disinfecting  solution  and  storing  lenses  in  water  are  the  two  most  likely  behaviors  to
lead  to  AK:  they  both  have  attack  rates  of  50%  or  greater.  This  is  because
Acanthamoeba can grow quickly in the right environment, including your lens case! If
water  gets  into  your  case,  the  amebas  will  grow  and  multiply  so  much  that  they  will
contaminate  the  lens,  which  then  infects  the  eye.  Your  hard  work  helped  solve  the
outbreak!  It  appears  that  "topping  off"  the  disinfecting  solution  and  storing  lenses  in
water instead of solution are the two likeliest behaviors to lead to AK: they both have
attack rates of 50% or greater. This is because Acanthamoeba can grow quickly in the
right environment, including your lens case! If water gets into your case, the amebas
will grow and multiply so much that they will contaminate the lens, which then infects
the  eye.  Your  hard  work  helped  solve  the  outbreak!  That's  right!  Topping  off  the
disinfecting  solution  appears  to  be  closely  linked  to  cases  of  AK.  The  other  behavior
that's  closely  linked  is  storing  lenses  in  water  instead  of  solution  -  both  have  attack
rates greater than 50%. This is because Acanthamoeba can grow quickly in the right
environment, including your lens case! If you top off your solution, the disinfectant in
the solution is not as good at preventing the amebas from growing and multiplying. The
ameba  will  contaminate  the  lens,  which  then  infects  the  eye.  Congratulations,  you
solved the outbreak! Your hard work helped solve this outbreak! Though the characters
in  this  scenario  are  not  real,  this  was  based  on  the  fact  that  more  and  more  people
have been diagnosed with Acanthamoeba keratitis over the last decade. Investigators
from  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  have  worked  with  several  other
federal,  state,  and  local  agencies  to  identify  why  this  is  happening.  Because
Acanthamoeba is present in the water and soil, it is a normal part of our environment.
But certain people are at greatest risk for infection, including people who wear contact
lenses but do not follow important steps to keep their lenses clean or safely put them in
their eyes. It's extremely important to make sure that water never touches your lenses
and that you never top off your disinfecting solutions. Remember that contact lenses
are medical devices - treat them that way! This might not be what you typically think of
as an outbreak, since there wasn't one particular source, like a bad piece of food. But it
reminds us how our own actions can lead to disease, and if enough people start doing
the  same  action,  an  outbreak  can  start.  Note:  Aspects  of  the  original  outbreaks  and
investigations have been altered to fit the format and length of this application. You've
been called to investigate a deadly illness that's causing a nationwide panic. More than
100 military veterans are sick, some have died, and more people are dying every day.
No one can tell how they got sick or how the illness is spreading. And it's an election
year, with the President scheduled to visit the city soon. Local police, and the media,
have been on high alert. Is it a new flu outbreak? A terrorist attack? News reports are
creating a scare throughout the country. We need your help fast! On July 27, a retired
Air Force Captain returned home tired and sick after a trip to Philadelphia. Three days
later, he was rushed to the hospital with chest pains, fever, and trouble breathing.  He
soon  died.  Within  a  week,  10  more  Pennsylvania  veterans  have  died,  and  the  state
Department  of  Health  calls  to  ask  for  your  help.  You  and  a  large  team  of  Epidemic
Intelligence Service (EIS) officers race to Philadelphia, where the city is in a panic and
all types of theories are being debated. You start gathering data about when people got
sick. Some of your coworkers are worried this is the start of a new flu epidemic! Older
people often get pneumonia from a bad flu, and a few months ago a deadly kind of flu
was  discovered  at  a  military  base  only  40  miles  from  Philadelphia.  Another  theory  is
that it's a terrorist attack, since it's mostly military veterans who are sick. Some people
think it could be a rare disease spread by city pigeons, others think it's poisoning from
nickel.  Reporters  are  anxious  to  know  what's  happening,  and  they're  following  your
every  move.  Well,  almost:  they're  so  scared  about  getting  sick  themselves  that  they
don't  follow  you  into  any  hospital  rooms.  Currently  151  are  sick  and  11  have  died,
though doctors are warning that many others are near death. Many of the sick are older
and most are men. Though they live all over Pennsylvania, they were all in Philadelphia
during July 21-24. Many of them were at a military veterans' conference. To keep track
of  the  data,  you  make  an  epidemic  curve  (epi  curve).  What's  an  epidemic  curve  (epi
curve)? An epi curve shows how an outbreak changes over time. It includes: Epi curves
are updated as new data come in, so they are always changing. The shape of the curve
can provide clues about the possible source of an outbreak. Learn how to read an epi
curve. It's important that EIS officers be honest and up-front about what's happening
when  talking  to  the  media  and  the  public.  But  it's  too  soon  to  warn  people  about
avoiding public places. You don't even know if this outbreak is contagious. There's a lot
of pressure on you this time. You need to hurry! During outbreaks, EIS officers need to
be  honest  about  what's  happening  when  talking  to  the  media  and  the  public.  If  you
don't  tell  them  what's  going  on,  your  silence  will  frighten  them  even  more  than  the
sickness. You should be honest that you don't have any information about whether it's
contagious. But you also need to be calm and reassuring. There's a lot of pressure on
you this time. You need to hurry! Sorry, but no. During outbreaks, EIS officers need to
be  honest  about  what's  happening  when  talking  to  the  media  and  the  public.  If  you
don't  tell  them  what's  going  on,  your  silence  will  frighten  them  even  more  than  the
sickness. That's why you need to be calm and reassuring. There's a lot of pressure on
you this time. You need to hurry! The pressure on you is building. There are now 200
sick people (147 of them are in the hospital), and 23 more people have died! To stay on
top of things, you ask a team of nurses to check in with every hospital in the state daily.
You also set up a hotline for people to call with tips and information. You and a team of
EIS officers spread out across the city, and place calls all over the state, to talk to 200
sick people and their families. You ask about their symptoms to make sure they all have
the same illness. You also need to find out what they did while in Philadelphia in order
to figure out what links them together. Since you don't even know what the illness is or
how it's spread, you make a list of questions to ask the sick people and their families,
asking things like: Close, but not quite. Your data does show that the majority of the
sick (56%) stayed at the Deluxe Hotel. But an even greater number (84%) attended the
conference, so that's the one thing most of them have in common. You've still got a lot
of work to do, and more people are dying! That's right! It's true that most of the sick are
older men, and that more of them stayed at the Deluxe Hotel than anywhere else. But
the one thing the vast majority of the sick (84%) have in common is that they attended
the conference. You've still got a lot of work to do, and more people are dying! Your
data does show that many of the sick are older men. But the thing that's even more
common  among  the  sick  is  that  most  of  them  (84%)  went  to  the  military  veterans'
conference.  You've  still  got  a  lot  of  work  to  do,  and  more  people  are  dying!  Panic  is
spreading  across  the  country.  Major  magazines  are  putting  the  outbreak  on  their
covers!  You've  learned  that  many  of  the  sick  had  stayed  at  the  Deluxe  Hotel,  but,
strangely, only one of the hotel's 400 workers got sick. Your best lead is the military
conference, which was actually held at that same hotel. You need to figure out exactly
what the sick people did at the conference, which is going to take some detective work.
The conference was 4 days long, and people went to different events on different days.
You  also  need  to  talk  to  people  who  went  to  the  conference  but  aren't  sick.  This  is
harder than it sounds, since no one at the conference kept an attendance list. You and
a team of EIS officers have to call veterans' groups all over the state, trying to track
people  down.  After  a  few  days  of  work,  you  finally  get  information  on  400  healthy
people  and  200  sick  people.  You  need  to  ask  each  sick  person  which  events  they
attended at the conference and calculate the "attack rate" for each event. All that data
didn't get us any closer to the source. None of the events seem any likelier than the
others to have gotten people sick. We still don't know what started the outbreak. The
public is getting more frightened. We need to hurry! Sorry, but no. All that data didn't
get us any closer to the source. None of the events seem any likelier than the others to
have gotten people sick. We still don't know what that started the outbreak. The public
is  getting  more  frightened.  We  need  to  hurry!  You're  right!  None  of  the  conference
events seem any likelier than the others to have gotten people sick. We still don't know
what it was that started the outbreak. The public is getting more frightened. We need to
hurry! One bit of good news: you haven't turned up any evidence that sick people have
spread the illness to anyone else. So at least it doesn't seem to be contagious. But you
still have a lot of unanswered questions. One hotel guest, an airline pilot, got sick even
though he was only there for a few hours, taking a nap between flights. A local taxi cab
driver who never even entered the building is also sick. In fact, there are a surprising
number of people with the same illness who did not go to the conference but were in
the city during those same days. You go back and talk again to these people, and this
time you specifically ask about the Deluxe Hotel. You find out that all of these people
had gone into or at least passed by the Deluxe Hotel on the days of the conference.
Some  of  them  say  they  went  into  the  hotel  to  get  a  drink  to  cool  off  from  the  heat.
Others  stood  near  the  entrance,  where  they  could  rest  in  the  shade  and  feel  the  air
conditioning. Some only walked on the opposite side of the street, yet they still got sick!
Whatever bacteria or virus you're facing is incredibly powerful. One man tells you that
his  wife  went  into  the  hotel  just  to  use  the  bathroom.  She  was  there  less  than  20
minutes, yet she died days later! Remember, a number of people who got sick never
even  set  foot  in  the  hotel  or  drank  the  water.  They  only  stood  near  the  entrance  or
walked past it on the street. That means it must have been something in the air, not
something  they  drank.  You're  so  close.  One  more  clue  to  solve  the  outbreak!  That's
right! Some people who got sick never even set foot in the hotel or drank the water.
They only stood near the entrance or walked past it on the street. That means it must
have been something in the air. You're so close. One more clue to solve the outbreak!
Remember, only one hotel worker got sick, and you haven't uncovered any evidence
that it's contagious. That means it's unlikely that one person spread it. The right answer
is the air in and around the hotel. That explains why nearly everyone who's sick either
went into the hotel, stood near the entrance, or walked past it on the street. You're so
close. One more clue to solve the outbreak! Weeks and then months go by, and despite
all the hard work from you and so many others, you still don't know what caused the
outbreak. You don't even know what the illness was! The unsolved mystery drives you
crazy.  Then  you  finally  get  a  break.  Working  late  one  night  in  December  (nearly  6
months  after  the  outbreak  started)  a  laboratory  scientist  on  your  team  reruns  some
new tests. He sees something he'd missed before: it looks like a new type of bacterium!
 He and others on the team look through more samples from the sick and see that the
unfamiliar  bacterium  is  present  in  many  of  these  samples,  too.  More  research  shows
that the new bacterium causes an infection of the lungs, a form of pneumonia. Early
symptoms of the illness are much like the flu. After a short time (in many cases, a day
or two), more severe pneumonia-like symptoms appear.  If it isn't treated with the right
kind  of  antibiotics  right  away,  it  can  kill.  As  a  result  of  your  discovery,  you  look  at  2
other unsolved outbreaks from recent years and learn that this bacterium was present
in those cases, too. You've actually solved 3 outbreaks with one discovery! Your team
names the new bacterium Legionella, and the disease Legionnaires' disease, after the
American  Legion  conference  where  the  outbreak  started.  Additional  research  shows
that Legionella bacteria are found naturally in the environment and grow best in warm
water, like the kind found in hot tubs, hot water tanks, cooling towers that air condition
large  buildings,  plumbing  systems,  and  fountains.  People  get  Legionnaires'  disease
when they breathe in a mist or vapor (small droplets of water in the air) that has been
contaminated with the bacteria. Antibiotics can cure most cases, but some people can
die  even  if  they  do  receive  treatment.  That's  right!  Legionella  can  grow  in  the  warm
water  of  cooling  towers,  which  are  used  in  the  air  conditioning  systems  of  large
buildings.  That  explains  why  people  who  never  even  entered  the  building  but  stood
near it got sick. Congratulations! You solved this outbreak! Nope. A number of people
who got sick never even set foot in the hotel. That means they didn't weren't swimming
in the pool, either. Because Legionella can grow in the large air conditioning towers of
big buildings, that's the most likely explanation of what happened in this outbreak. That
would  have  put  the  bacteria  in  the  air  that  everyone  in  the  hotel  (and  even  people
standing  outside  of  it)  breathed.  Your  hard  work  helped  solve  this  outbreak!  This
fictional outbreak was based on a real-life deadly outbreak that occurred during a 1976
American  Legionnaires  conference  in  Philadelphia.  The  real  outbreak  took  dozens  of
scientists, epidemiologists, and researchers across the country several months to solve.
It captured the attention of the nation, with dozens of newspaper headlines, front-page
magazine  stories,  and  TV  news  programs.  It  also  happened  during  a  Presidential
election,  just  before  the  Pope  made  a  historic  visit  to  America,  and  right  after  the
Vietnam  War  and  anti-war  protests,  so  there  were  many  theories  about  what  had
caused it. The discovery of Legionella solved not only the Philadelphia outbreak but a
few  others  as  well,  such  as  the  Pontiac  fever  outbreak  of  1968.  The  day  CDC  first
received  the  call  from  Pennsylvania  authorities  (August  2,  1976)  happened  to  be  the
first day at EIS for Stephen B. Thacker. He played a major part in solving that outbreak
and many others during his distinguished career at CDC. He served many roles over his
37-years with the agency, including Deputy Director. He passed away in 2013. Today,
an estimated 8,000 to 18,000 people are hospitalized with Legionnaires' disease each
year in the US. Reported numbers of cases are rising, but CDC is not yet sure why and
is still battling outbreaks every year. Note:  Several aspects of the original outbreak and
investigation  have  been  altered  to  fit  the  format  and  length  of  this  application.  A
serious  illness  with  a  terrifying  rash  is  popping  up  all  over  Wisconsin.  Doctors  are
puzzled  because  people  who  don't  seem  to  have  anything  to  do  with  each  other  are
coming down with it.  And no one has any idea what's causing it. Local health workers
need your help figuring out what this disease is and how it's spreading so you can stop
this outbreak! A 7-year-old girl named Cindy has been in serious condition since May 16
with  a  high  fever,  headache,  swollen  glands,  and  a  rash.  The  rash  looks  similar  to
chickenpox  with  large  swollen  spots  all  over  the  body.  Doctors  have  run  tests  for
different illnesses like MRSA (Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), herpes, or a
fungus.  The results won't be back for a day or so, but a few doctors actually think the
rash looks like smallpox, a deadly disease that was wiped out a few decades ago. Fears
are rising as doctors can't agree and calls are coming in about similar rashes across the
state.  Four  new  cases  have  been  reported.   The  most  common  symptoms  are:  Some
people also have nausea or diarrhea. The cases are spread across the state.  Most of
those who have become sick don't know each other, except for one household where 2
people  are  sick.   No  one  is  sure  how  the  illness  is  spreading.  What  is  Smallpox?
Smallpox  is  a  serious,  contagious,  and  sometimes  fatal  disease.  Infected  persons  get
high  fevers  and  raised  bumps  on  their  face  and  body.  Smallpox  has  been  around  for
thousands of years, but a successful vaccination program finally ended the disease (the
last naturally occurring case was in 1977). After the terrorist attacks on September 11,
2001,  however,  governments  are  concerned  that  terrorists  might  find  a  way  to  use
smallpox as a weapon. For this reason, the US government has stockpiled vaccine and
an antiviral for smallpox treatment. Looks like it fooled you - The question asked what
you should NOT do. In this case, you should find out if there are similar cases in other
states. You should also find out what the sick people have in common, so you can get a
better sense of what is causing this and how people are getting sick. It's definitely too
early to warn schools about a mysterious and potentially contagious rash.  You should
wait for test results before jumping to any conclusions as you wouldn't want to scare
the local schools. This was a trick question, but we didn't fool you!  The question asked
what you should NOT do. At this point in your investigation, you should find out what
the sick people have in common. And it's a good idea to see if there are similar cases in
other  states,  too.  It's  definitely  too  early  to  warn  schools  about  a  mysterious  and
potentially  contagious  rash.   You  should  wait  for  test  results  before  jumping  to  any
conclusions as you wouldn't want to scare the local schools. Looks like it fooled you -
The question asked what you should NOT do. In an outbreak, one of the first things you
should do is get as much information as you can about the sick people. You need to find
out what they have in common, so you can get a better sense of what the illness is and
how they got it. Because this sounds like an unusual outbreak, it's also a good idea to
find out if it's also happening in other states. It's definitely too early to warn schools
about  a  mysterious  and  potentially  contagious  rash.   You  should  wait  for  test  results
before jumping to any conclusions as you wouldn't want to scare the local schools. The
good  news  is  that  the tests  that  doctors  ran  came back  negative for  chickenpox  and
other  expected  illnesses.   Doctors  are  concerned,  however,  that  the  rash  might  be  a
rare disease and are worried about how quickly it's progressing. Seven new cases have
been  reported  for  a  total  of  11  people  who  are  sick.  There's  no  time  to  waste!   You
immediately  contact  the  people  who  are  sick  and  their  families  to  find  out  what's
causing  this  outbreak.  You've  never  seen  anything  like  this  in  Wisconsin  before!   It's
your job to figure out what the mysterious, rare disease is. You ask the sick people what
they've done lately, and interestingly enough, you learn that 2 of the sick just returned
from a trip to Costa Rica.  They tell you that while on vacation they took a tour of the
rainforests and came into contact with several rare and exotic plants and animals. Most
of the people didn't have any serious health problems before this and haven't had any
contact  with  the  other  sick  people.   You're  still  struggling  to  find  the  connection
between  all  of  these  cases.  You're  correct  that  the  international  travel  is  very
suspicious, especially since these world travelers visited very remote areas and came
into  contact  with  exotic  plants  and  animals  in  the  rainforest.  However,  since  the
travelers haven't been in contact with the others who are sick, it seems unlikely that
this is the key to the puzzle. You also notice that 9 of the 11 people who are sick either
have  pets  or  live  on  farms  with  animals,  so  you  decide  check  into  this  more  as  well.
You're  correct,  there  are  an  unusual  number  of  children  that  are  sick.   But,  you  also
notice that 9 of the 11 people who are sick have pets or live on a farm near animals, so
you should probably check into this more as well. Keep trying to solve the outbreak!
Since 9 out of the 11 people who are sick had some contact with animals, you should
definitely check into this more.  Even if your suspicions are right, you'll need to figure
out why there are 2 sick people who haven't been around animals at all. Keep trying to
solve  the  outbreak!  You  need  to  act  fast!   Cindy,  the  7-year-old  girl,  has  been  in
intensive care for several days and is now on a breathing tube because her throat is so
inflamed. There are a total of 6 people in the hospital now, 4 of whom are in critical
condition. What's worse, 3 new cases have just been reported.  And the scary thing is,
there may be more cases out there.  Since the disease starts out fairly mild with fever,
headache, muscle aches, and exhaustion, there's no telling how many others may be
sick, as the rash doesn't appear until 1-3 days after the fever. In talking with the 3 new
people who are sick, you learn that one of them works at a local pet store, which only
makes  you  more  suspicious.   Now,  you  really  start   to  consider  that  the  disease  is
zoonotic  (a  disease  that  can  be  spread  from  animals  to  humans).  You  decide  to  get
more information about the types of animals the sick people have come into contact
with. During your interviews, many of the sick talk very affectionately about their pets
and how they interact with them.  This interaction includes kissing, cuddling, and often
letting  them  sleep  in  their  beds.  In  the  back  of  your  mind,  you're  still  not  sure  the
animals  are  to  blame  as  there  are  2  sick  people  who  haven't  had  any  contact  with
animals.  However, it's the best lead you've got, so you need to follow-up on it. Of the
14 who are now sick, 12 have been in contact with animals.  Many of the sick people
have several pets, and others live on farms with many different kinds of livestock. The
couple  who  vacationed  in  Costa  Rica  also  came  into  contact  with  a  vast  number  of
exotic animals (such as red-eyed tree frogs, black iguanas, and howler monkeys) during
their  trip.  However,  you  rule  out  these  exotic  creatures  since  the  couple  hasn't  had
contact with any of the others who are sick. In looking at the data, 12 of the 14 people
who are sick have been around a rather unusual pet: a prairie dog.  Based on this, you
immediately call everyone and ask them about their interactions with prairie dogs and
try  to  figure  out  how  the  other  2  patients  are  connected  to  this  case.  Keep  plugging
away.   You're  on  the  verge  of  a  breakthrough!  In  looking  at  the  data,  12  of  the  14
people who are sick have been around a rather unusual pet: a prairie dog.  Based on
this, you immediately call everyone and ask them about their interactions with prairie
dogs and try to figure out how the other 2 patients are connected to this case. Keep
plugging away.  You're on the verge of a breakthrough! In looking at the data, 12 of the
14 people who are sick have been around a rather unusual pet: a prairie dog.  Based on
this, you immediately call everyone and ask them about their interactions with prairie
dogs and try to figure out how the other 2 patients are connected to this case. Keep
plugging away.  You're on the verge of a breakthrough! You're on a mission to learn
more about these pesky prairie dogs.  You start by calling Cindy's parents who tell you
that  they  bought  the  pet  at  a  local  flea  market  on  May  1  as  a  birthday  present  for
Cindy.  She named the little guy Scooter and used to play with him every day, until he
got sick and died a few weeks later. Cindy's mom also mentions that Scooter scratched
Cindy  during  her  birthday  party  on  May  4,  as  she  distinctly  remembers  her  daughter
crying and asking for a bandage. You have a solid lead!  Immediately, you call the rest
of the people who are sick. In talking to the other families, you discover that everyone,
except 2 of the patients, had purchased a pet prairie dog in the last few weeks and that
many of the pets seemed sick, almost from the very beginning. While 2 of the patients
didn't come into contact with a prairie dog, their grandson (who is also sick) recently
had gotten one as a pet. One of the families allows you to run tests on their prairie dog.
 The results tell you that the pets are sick with a disease that's never been found before
in the US: monkeypox. You have a mystery on your hands.  You need to find out how
the prairie dogs got a disease that's usually found in Africa. You track one of the prairie
dogs with monkeypox back to a local pet store.  The owner of the pet shop tells you he
purchased several prairie dogs over the last few weeks and gives you the name of the
distributor. The distributor reports that he's made at least 3 deliveries across the entire
state in the last month.  It's your job to figure out which shipment brought disease into
Wisconsin.  What  is  Monkeypox?  Monkeypox  is  a  rare  viral  disease  found  mostly  in
Africa.  It's typically spread by infected animals that bite or scratch others and can also
be  spread  from  person  to  person  through  long  periods  of  face-to-face  contact.
Symptoms usually appear about 12 days after someone is exposed to the virus.  Initial
symptoms include fever, headache, muscle aches, and backaches.  A few days after the
fever appears (approximately 1-3 days), a rash with raised bumps with fluid appears. 
The illness can be very serious and may last up to 2-4 weeks. You're exactly right!  Your
keen detective skills helped you to put the pieces together. To recap, here's what we
know: Cindy's parents purchased the prairie dog on May 1 and Cindy was scratched on
May 4 at her birthday party.  Cindy began to get sick on May 16, which was 12 days
after  she  was  scratched,  matching  the  exposure  period  for  monkeypox.  The  hardest
part of this case is that many of the people who are ill didn't get sick until several days
after getting scratched or bitten.  By that point, most had forgotten about it, so it took a
while  to  piece  everything  together.  Actually,  it  looks  like  the  shipment  on  April  23  is
most  likely  to  blame.  To  recap,  here's  what  we  know:  Cindy's  parents  purchased  the
prairie dog on May 1 and Cindy was scratched on May 4 at her birthday party.  Cindy
began to get sick on May 16, which was 12 days after she was scratched, matching the
exposure  period  for  monkeypox.  The  hardest  part  of  this  case  is  that  many  of  the
people who are ill didn't get sick until several days after getting scratched or bitten.  By
that point, most had forgotten about it, so it took a while to piece everything together.
It looks like the shipment on April 23 is most likely to blame. To recap, here's what we
know: Cindy's parents purchased the prairie dog on May 1 and Cindy was scratched on
May 4 at her birthday party.  Cindy began to get sick on May 16, which was 12 days
after  she  was  scratched,  matching  the  exposure  period  for  monkeypox.  The  hardest
part of this case is that many of the people who are ill didn't get sick until several days
after getting scratched or bitten.  By that point, most had forgotten about it, so it took a
while  to  piece  everything  together.  In  order  to  prevent  others  from  getting  sick,  you
need to track down all of the animals that traveled with the prairie dogs to see if other
animals  are  sick  as  well.  After  much  work,  you're  able  to  find  each  of  the  animals.
Interestingly enough, you find that one of the Gambian giant rats from the shipment on
April 23 died a few days after it arrived at the pet store. Since the Gambian giant rats
were imported from Ghana, you suspect that they may have infected the prairie dogs
during the transport.  But, there's no way to know for sure until you track the Gambian
giant rats back to Africa. In tracking the Gambian giant rats, you find that there were 6
different types of animals on the flight from Africa in early April. Once again, you find
yourself  tracking  down  exotic  animals,  but  this  time  they  are  spread  all  over  the
country.   You're  able  to  find  many  still  in  pet  stores,  but  others  have  been  sold  to
families or have died. You order lab work to look for monkeypox virus in the tissues of
animals you're lucky enough to find. Did the name confuse you? In looking at the data,
you  see  that  rope  squirrels,  dormice,  and  Gambian  giant  rats  tested  positive  for
monkeypox virus. Gambian sun squirrels, however, did not. The rope squirrels, dormice,
and  Gambian  giant  rats  must  have  brought  the  disease  from  Ghana  to  the  US.  They
most  likely  infected  the  prairie  dogs,  which  then  infected  14  people.  Your  hard  work
helped to save lives! In looking at the data, you see that rope squirrels, dormice, and
Gambian giant rats tested positive for monkeypox virus. This means that these animals
probably brought the disease from Ghana to the US. One or more of these animals most
likely  infected  the  prairie  dogs,  which  then  infected  14  people.  Congratulations,  your
hard work helped to solve this outbreak and save lives! Sorry. In looking at the data,
you  see  that  rope  squirrels,  dormice,  and  Gambian  giant  rats  tested  positive  for
monkeypox  virus.  This  means  that  these  animals  probably  brought  the  disease  from
Ghana to the US. One or more of them most likely infected the prairie dogs, which then
infected 14 people. Your hard work helped to save lives! Your hard work helped solve
this  outbreak!  Although  this  scenario  was  not  real,  it's  based  on  an  outbreak  that
started  in  Wisconsin  in  the  spring  of  2003.  A  number  of  people  came  down  with  a
mysterious  illness  that  turned  out  to  be  monkeypox,  which  they'd  caught  from  their
new  pet  prairie  dogs.  Investigators  from  CDC  and  several  other  agencies  worked
together to track down the prairie dogs and the various other animals involved in the
shipments  that  brought  the  illness  to  the  US.  Regulations  were  passed  temporarily
banning the shipment of certain animals across state lines, and banning the import of
certain  animals  from  Africa.  This  was  the  first  time  monkeypox  was  found  in  the  US.
Though no one died, many were seriously ill. The transport of new animals into the US
needs to be carefully monitored to make sure that foreign illnesses don't cause harm to
people  and  native  animals.  Note:  Several  aspects  of  the  original  outbreaks  and
investigations  have  been  altered  to  fit  the  format  and  length  of  this  application.  A
strange outbreak seems to have hit a single county in the desert Southwest. A number
of  people  are  reporting  severe  flu-like  symptoms.  But  it's  early  summer,  an  unusual
time for flu season to kick in. And no other counties are reporting anything similar. Two
adults  have  died,  and  a  number  of  children  are  sick  as  well.  The  local  doctors  and
nurses  are  baffled.  They  need  your  help  to  solve  the  outbreak  before  it  spreads!  It
started when a 9-year-old boy was taken to his doctor. He'd been sick 2 days with a
fever of 103 degrees, a cough, headache, and chills. The doctor said it was a bad virus
and  sent  him  home  to  get  some  rest,  take  medicine  for  the  fever,  and  drink  lots  of
fluids. He returned to his doctor the next day with nausea and stomach pain, and was
again sent home. After another 3 days, his doctor checked him in to the hospital with a
fever of 106 degrees and trouble breathing. He died hours later. The local department
of  health  calls  you  after  learning  that  several  other  people  in  the  same  county  have
similar symptoms. According to medical records from the local department of health, of
the 25 people who are sick or who died: And the sick people are reporting the following
symptoms: No. That's a serious move, and one you shouldn't just jump into. First you
need  to  learn  more  about  the  sick  people  and  what  they  have  in  common.  Keep
investigating to find out! You're right! The best move here is to get more information.
It's  time  to  question  the  sick  people,  their  doctors,  and  family  members,  and  try  to
figure  out  what's  happening.  The  data  tells  you  that  only  3  sick  people  (12%)  have
nausea  or  diarrhea,  and  yet  these  are  often  the  first  symptoms  of  illness  caused  by
food. So while it's always possible the illness could have come through food, it's highly
unlikely. The first thing you should do is interview the sick people about what they've
been  doing  lately,  to  get  a  better  sense  of  how  they  might  have  caught  this  illness.
Keep investigating to find out! Seven days after the first person got sick, 3 more people
have checked into the hospital, and a second person has died. You arrive in the county
and  start  your  interviews  with  the  people  who  are  sick,  which  helps  you  get  detailed
information  about  them:  what  they  do  for  a  living,  where  they've  traveled  lately,
whether  they  have  pets,  and  more.  Twenty-five  sick  people  or  their  family  members
were interviewed. Of the sick people: This actually isn't right, but we'll give you a few
points  for  making  a  common  mistake.  Because  so  many  families  are  getting  sick
together, a lot of local doctors have assumed this is a virus they're giving to each other.
But only 5 out of 25 (20%) of the sick people have a sick relative. That means plenty of
the sick are the only sick member of their family. That seems to show that it isn't very
contagious, and maybe it isn't contagious at all. Keep trying to solve the outbreak! No,
the  3  sick  people  who  had  left  the  country  told  you  that  they  came  back  to  the  US
within the last week. At that point, the illness was already here in town. The first patient
went to the doctor 7 days ago. The outbreak is getting worse, so keep trying to solve it!
It was hard to figure out the data, but you nailed it: Many of the people who are sick
either  work  outdoors,  spend  a  lot  of  time  outside,  or  have  pets  that  roam  around
outdoors.  Since  the  sick  people  don't  seem  to  have  anything  else  in  common,  this  is
your best lead yet. You're getting warmer. Keep going! It turns out that all of the people
who are sick either work outdoors, spend a lot of time outside, or have pets that roam
around outdoors. Also, all of them live near woods bordering the desert. This suggests
that  the  culprit  lurks  somewhere  in  the  dry  desert  landscape  -  but  what  is  it?  More
people  are  being  hospitalized,  and  more  are  developing  a  rash,  particularly  the  sick
children. Unlike chicken pox, this rash isn't itchy. And the patients are a lot sicker than
they'd be with chicken pox. You need to hurry! Doctors run a number of tests, which the
health  department  sends  to  a  special  lab  at  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC).  While  you  wait  for  the  results,  you  take  a  closer  look  at  your
interview data to see what the sick people have been doing outdoors. The data shows
that  a  lot  of  people  have  used  the  swimming  pool.  And  when  you  visit  some  of  the
patients' houses, you notice that some of their pet dogs have ticks. You interview 100
people. Twenty-five of them are sick.  The others are not sick, but they participated in
the  same  activities  as  those  that  are  sick.   In  outbreak  investigations  we  call  these
people "controls." Each person was asked what they did before getting sick. The "attack
rate" was calculated for each activity. Hint: To find a possible source of the outbreak,
look  for  both  a  high  attack  rate  for  those  who  participated  in  an  activity  and  a  low
attack  rate  among  those  who  did  not  participate.  The  answer  was  small  and  easy  to
miss, but you found it! It turns out that one of the tiniest animals around is to blame for
the  big  problems.  You  still  aren't  out  of  the  woods  yet.  Keep  working  to  solve  the
outbreak! It was tempting to blame the pool, since 60% of the sick people had gone
swimming. But it's hot out, so a lot of people have been swimming. If the pool was to
blame, you'd have more sick people. The good news is, you're about to get a big piece
of the puzzle. Remember those tests you ran on the patients? The results are in from
the labs at CDC. Keep going to see what they say! Yes, something in "the environment"
is  to  blame,  but  testing  the  air  and  soil  won't  get  you  anywhere.  The  good  news  is,
you're  about  to  get  a  big  piece  of  the  puzzle.  Remember  those  tests  you  ran  on  the
patients?  The  results  are  in  from  the  labs  at  CDC.  Keep  going  to  see  what  they  say!
Rashes have become more common with patients who have been sick for a few days,
especially the kids. That, combined with test results that have come in from CDC, point
to a new diagnosis: Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF). Your first step is to put all of
the patients on a special antibiotic that can cure RMSF. RMSF is spread by bites from
infected ticks. One of the things that makes RMSF so dangerous is the fact that its early
symptoms  are  so  similar  to  a  bad  virus,  tricking  doctors.  This  is  particularly  bad
because  untreated  RMSF  can  be  fatal.  Still,  there  are  2  things  that  bother  you.  For
starters, only 10 out of 25 (40%) of the patients said they'd been bitten by ticks. And
second,  RMSF  has  never  been  reported  in  this  state  before.  What  is  Rocky  Mountain
spotted  fever  (RMSF)?  RMSF  is  caused  by  the  bacterium  Rickettsia  rickettsii  and  is
spread  to  people  who  are  bitten  by  infected  ticks.  Don't  be  fooled  by  its  name:  this
disease  has  struck  people  who  live  hundreds  of  miles  from  the  Rocky  Mountains.
Typical symptoms include: RMSF can be severe or even deadly if not treated in the first
few days of symptoms. The recommended first line treatment for adults and children of
all  ages  is  doxycycline,  a  special  antibiotic  that's  most  effective  if  started  before  the
fifth day of symptoms. In much of the country, ticks are more likely to bite people and
pets in warmer months (April-September). But in warmer parts of the country, they can
be a problem year-round. You can protect yourself by: Sorry, only bites from infected
ticks can spread RMSF. Doctors are often tricked by RMSF. When doctors see that more
than  one  person  in  a  family  is  sick,  they  assume  the  family  has  caught  a  contagious
virus or bacteria. Since families often play outside together, or because they may have
lots of ticks in their backyard, it's common for more than one person in a family to get
RMSF. Now that we know what we're dealing with, we need to take steps to contain the
outbreak! Correct! Data aren't always as accurate as we'd like. You had asked people if
they'd been bitten by ticks, and many had said "No." But they were wrong. They had
been bitten! Tick bites are very small and usually painless. Some people are even bitten
by tick larvae, which are as small as the head of a pin. Now that you know what you're
dealing with, you need to take steps to make sure the outbreak doesn't spread! Every
day,  we  make  discoveries  that  certain  diseases  exist  in  places  we  hadn't  expected.
What's more, changes in climate could affect the places where insects and animals live.
In this case, it looks like ticks that never carried the RMSF-causing bacteria before are
carrying it now. Or maybe there's a new kind of tick in town. Since we finally know what
disease we're dealing with, we need to take steps to make sure the outbreak doesn't
spread!  Tests  reveal  that  this  outbreak  of  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever  has  been
spread  by  the  brown  dog  tick  (Rhipicephalus  sanguineus).  This  is  the  first  time  the
brown  dog  tick  has  been  found  to  carry  RMSF.  Worse,  this  tick  is  commonly  found
across much of the US, and it feeds mostly on dogs. That means dog owners in other
parts  of  the  county  could  be  at  risk  if  the  disease  spreads  to  new  areas.  The  best
strategy for protecting residents from RMSF is by keeping brown dog ticks off of dogs
and out of people's yards. But what's the best way to do this? Dogs can easily be bitten
by  ticks  and  bring  them  into  your  home.  Dogs  can  also  get  RMSF  and  die  from  the
disease,  just  like  people.  And  there's  no  vaccine  to  prevent  RMSF.  The  best  way  to
protect your family and your pet is by giving your dog a special collar or other product
that prevents ticks. To reduce the chances that a tick will pass disease to you or your
pets: Anti-tick collars or other tick-killing treatments are the best way to keep ticks off
of dogs and out of people's homes. It may sound hard to put a collar on every dog in
the county (and it is) but that's a good way to go because officials will be able to see
which dogs have been treated. You'll have to work carefully with local Animal Control
and  town  residents  to  pull  this  off.  And  that's  not  all.  You  should  also  encourage
residents to spray anti-tick pesticides on their yards. They'll need to do that every few
months to kill off this batch of RMSF-carrying brown dog ticks. We'll give some points
for  the  first  part,  because  telling  people  how  to  protect  themselves  is  important.  But
you'll need to do more than that, and waiting until winter could be dangerous! There's
no  guarantee  the  ticks  will  die  in  the  winter,  especially  in  the  warm  Southwest.  We
shouldn't just assume things will get better next year. They may get worse! The best
bet is to make sure that all the dogs in town (even strays) are wearing tick-repelling
collars. And you should also spray pesticide on everyone's yards. On the one hand, yes,
it  is  good  advice  to  vaccinate  dogs  against  diseases  like  rabies.  But  there  are  no
vaccines against RMSF. That's why your first step really should be to make sure every
dog in town (even strays) are carrying special tick-repelling collars and that every yard
has been treated with pesticide. Your hard work helped solve this outbreak! Although
this  scenario  was  not  real,  it's  based  on  recent,  deadly  outbreaks  of  Rocky  Mountain
spotted fever in parts of the country that had never faced it before. Since 2010, cases
of RMSF have been reported in nearly every state in the US. Avoid ticks when hiking,
camping, and playing in the woods. If you own a pet, make sure they wear an anti-tick
collar,  and  check  them  regularly  when  they  come  in  from  outside.  Pets  that  are  not
protected  can  bring  ticks  into  our  yards,  homes,  and  even  our  beds.  Note:  Several
aspects of the original outbreaks and investigations have been altered to fit the format
and length of this application. It all began with a seemingly innocent birthday party at
the Community Swim Club. What is the worst thing that can happen at a 5-year old's
birthday party? Sticky fingers? Fights in the bouncy house? Headaches induced by lots
of  screaming  kids?  Usually,  but  after  this  party,  these  things  would  have  been  a
welcome side effect. Instead, the side effects included: The health department gets a
report that five children who attended the party have been admitted to a local hospital
with severe diarrhea. The next day, a parent calls the local health department to report
that her four kids (who all attended the same birthday party) also have severe diarrhea.
CDC's  team  of  Epidemic  Intelligence  Service  (EIS)  officers,  known  as  "Disease
Detectives," is called in to help investigate. The lead EIS officer asks you to interview
the parents of the children. One mother tells you that she heard that the homemade ice
cream served at the party had been made with raw eggs, and she suspects foodborne
illness.  If  you  suspect  foodborne  illness  that  is  linked  to  an  event  (for  example,  a
birthday  party)  focus  on  foods  that  the  patients  have  in  common.  But  keep  an  open
mind  about  other  possible  outbreak  sources,  such  as  drinks.  Even  though  foodborne
illness  might  be  suspected,  there  might  be  other  things  that  are  to  blame  for  the
outbreak.  When  investigating  an  outbreak,  it's  important  to  identify  everything  the
patients  have  in  common,  including  food,  drinks,  and  activities  in  which  they
participated. This will help you begin to figure out what things might have contributed
to the outbreak and if the ice cream really is to blame. You call the family who hosted
the party to learn more about the party and to get a list of names and phone numbers
of kids and parents who attended. Start interviewing! Even though the raw eggs could
be  causing  the  sickness,  you  need  to  do  a  little  more  investigating  to  be  sure.  It's
important to identify everything the patients have in common, including food, drinks,
and  activities  in  which  they  participated.  You  must  confirm  your  information  before
alerting the public. You call the family who hosted the party to learn more about the
party and to get a list of names and phone numbers of kids and parents who attended.  
By  calling  the  family  who  hosted  the  party,  you  can  go  straight  to  the  source.  You
should ask the party hosts for a list of names and phone numbers of kids and parents
who attended the party. You need to interview them to identify everything the patients
have in common, including food, drinks, and activities in which they participated. Start
interviewing! After talking to the family who hosted the birthday party, you learn that
about 30 kids and 16 adults attended the party on Sunday, August 1, at the Community
Swim Club. After the guests arrived, most of the kids played games and swam in the
activity pool. After all of the games and swimming, the guests ate cake and ice cream.
The party hosts state that the ice cream was not made with raw eggs. In fact, 2 children
who are sick left the party before the food was served. So, you decide to interview all
who attended the party. You're correct. It is important to get a complete food history
from  patients,  especially  when  foodborne  illness  is  suspected.  By  doing  so,  you  will
have a better chance of identifying items that the patients have in common. Also, keep
an open mind about all possible outbreak sources as there might be other things that
are to blame for the outbreak. Keep up the good work! Good thinking! There are many
germs that can be spread by water. So, it's a good idea to find out if the people who are
sick also swam in the pool. Keep up the good work! You are right to ask each patient
about  their  immune  system.  Many  infections  can  be  serious  in  a  person  with  a
weakened  immune  system.  Examples  of  people  with  weakened  immune  systems
include those with AIDS as well as cancer and transplant patients who are taking certain
drugs.  However,  a  weakened  immune  system  isn't  the  cause  of  the  outbreak.  It's
important to figure out what foods, drinks, and activities the patients have in common.
Keep working to solve this outbreak! Your investigation skills pay off! After talking with
the  kids  and  parents,  you  discover  that  the  patients  did  not  eat  the  same  foods  and
quickly rule out foodborne illness. Test results for 9 sick kids who attended the party
came back positive for Cryptosporidium (or "Crypto"). The health department puts out
an  alert  to  encourage  testing  for  Crypto  (since  it's  not  routinely  done  in  most
laboratories). Soon after, a local hospital reports 13 new Crypto infections in patients
who did not attend the birthday party. What is Cryptosporidium (or "Crypto")? Crypto is
a parasite that can cause watery diarrhea (that lasts a week or more), stomach cramps
or  pain,  vomiting,  and  tiredness.  Crypto  is  easily  spread  between  people  and  from
animals  to  people.  You  can  get  Crypto  by:  Symptoms  usually  begin  within  a  week  of
infection and can last a week or more in people with healthy immune systems. Learn
how to protect yourself from getting sick. Kids and adults can take steps to help protect
themselves  and  others  from  Crypto  and  other  germs:  You  are  right  on  target!  A  less
experienced Disease Detective might have simply assumed the patients are connected
since  they  are  all  infected  with  Crypto.  The  best  way  to  find  out  if  the  cases  are
connected is to interview the patients to see what (if anything) they have in common.
Keep  working  to  solve  this  outbreak!  If  it  isn't  food  that's  causing  these  cases,  you'll
need  to  figure  out  how  this  parasite  is  being  spread.  The  best  way  to  find  out  if  the
cases are connected is to interview the patients to see what (if anything) they have in
common. Keep working to solve this outbreak! Even though you know Crypto caused
these cases, you need to do a little more investigating. It's important to figure out how
patients were infected with the parasite to help prevent others from getting sick. So,
you decide to call the new patients to see what (if anything) they have in common and
determine if their sickness is connected to the outbreak from the party. Keep working
to solve this outbreak! After talking with several of the new patients, you discover that
they  all  swam  in  the  Community  Swim  Club's  activity  pool  on  the  weekend  of  July
31-August 1. In reviewing the data, you learn that most of the individuals got sick within
1  week  of  swimming  in  the  activity  pool.  Data  about  each  of  the  known  cases  were
collected, including: So far, you have learned that: Learn more about an epidemic curve
(epi curve). Data about each of the known cases were collected. The data showed that
many of the people who are sick were in the activity pool on the morning of Saturday,
July  31,  for  an  infant-parent  swim  class.  Others  were  in  the  activity  pool  during  the
birthday party on the afternoon of Sunday, August 1.  What's an epidemic curve (epi
curve)? An epi curve shows how an outbreak changes over time. It includes: Epi curves
are updated as new data come in, so they are always changing. The shape of the curve
can provide clues about the possible source of an outbreak. Learn how to read an epi
curve. The data show that only 4 of the patients were over the age of 12 years. With 18
of the patients under the age of 13 years, you'll need to find out why so many kids are
getting  sick.  Twelve  males  and  10  females  are  sick,  so  the  sex  of  the  patient  isn't  a
clue. The key to this outbreak is the age of the patients. Did you notice that 18 of the
patients are under the age of 13 years? There's something fishy going on here. In order
to solve this outbreak, you'll need to find out why so many kids are getting sick. You are
correct!  The  key  to  this  outbreak  is  the  age  of  the  patients.  With  18  of  the  patients
under the age of 13 years, there's something fishy going on here. In order to solve this
outbreak, you'll need to find out why so many kids are getting sick. The source of the
outbreak  is  likely  the  swim  club,  so  you  request  the  attendance  records  for  the
weekend of interest.  During the interviews, you ask each person what they did at the
swim club during their visit and ask one of the EIS officers to calculate the "attack rate"
for each activity. Based on the interviews, the following attack rates were calculated:
Hint:  To  identify  the  likely  source  of  the  outbreak,  look  for  a  high  attack  rate  among
those who participated in a specific activity and low attack rate among those who did
not participate. During the interviews, several parents report that the diaper of one of
the infants leaked diarrhea into the activity pool water during the infant-parent swim
class. When you review pool records for the day of this class, you find that the pool did
not receive any extra chlorine treatment after the diaper leaked.  Most germs are killed
by chlorine within minutes, but Crypto can survive for days even in a pool with proper
chlorine levels. To kill Crypto in a pool, the pool must be closed to swimmers and the
chlorine levels must be raised to high levels for hours. This is why it's important to keep
germs out of the water in the first place. Based on the data from the interviews, it looks
as though the activity pool was the source of the outbreak. In fact, 98% of those who
swallowed water from the activity pool got sick. You and the team suspect the outbreak
began on the morning of July 31 during the infant-parent swim class and was probably
the result of the diarrheal incident in the water (or in plain language, a poopy diaper,
eeew!).  Since  the  activity  pool  is  mainly  used  by  children,  including  the  kids  at  the
birthday party on August 1, many children got sick after using the pool. Based on the
data  from  the  interviews,  it  looks  as  though  the  activity  pool  was  the  source  of  the
outbreak. In fact, 98% of those who swallowed water from the activity pool got sick. You
and  the  team  suspect  the  outbreak  began  on  the  morning  of  July  31  during  the
infant-parent  swim  class  and  was  probably  the  result  of  the  diarrheal  incident  in  the
water (or in plain language, a poopy diaper, eeew!). Since the activity pool is mainly
used by children, including the kids at the birthday party on August 1, many children
got sick after using the pool. Your detective skills are right on! Based on the data from
the interviews, it looks as though the activity pool was the source of the outbreak. In
fact,  98%  of  those  who  swallowed  water  from  the  activity  pool  got  sick.  You  and  the
team  suspect  the  outbreak  began  on  the  morning  of  July  31  during  the  infant-parent
swim class and was probably the result of the diarrheal incident in the water (or in plain
language,  a  poopy  diaper,  eeew!).  Since  the  activity  pool  is  mainly  used  by  children,
including the kids at the birthday party on August 1, many children got sick after using
the pool. Recreational water illnesses (RWIs), like those in this fictional outbreak, are
caused  by  Crypto  and  other  germs,  which  are  spread  by  swallowing,  coming  into
contact  with,  or  inhaling  mists  or  aerosols  of  contaminated  water.  All  swimmers  can
actively protect themselves and other swimmers from RWIs by following these simple
steps every time they swim: Parents of young children should take a few extra steps:
CDC's Healthy Swimming Program works to protect the health of swimmers by studying
RWIs  and  how  to  prevent  them.  The  Healthy  Swimming  Program  is  part  of  CDC's
National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases  (NCEZID).  It  has  been
raining for weeks in Kenya's North Eastern Province. The rain should be a welcome sight
after  last  year's  drought.  However,  several  villages  are  flooded  and  hundreds  of
villagers are complaining of fever, muscle pain, weakness, and dizziness. Local health
workers called to report a possible outbreak and asked CDC for help. A Kenyan health
worker  reports  that  the  villagers  are  in  a  panic.   More  than  400  people  in  the  North
Eastern  Province  have  flu-like  symptoms.  Most  of  the  sick  are  complaining  of  fever,
muscle pain, weakness, and dizziness. Although many of the sick felt better within the
week,  more  than  100  were  hospitalized  due  to  extremely  high  fevers,  blindness,  and
seizures. Some have slipped into a coma and some have bled to death. During your talk
with the health worker, you learn that most of the cases are quite mild, while others are
more severe. In reviewing the data, you find that most of the individuals got sick from
December  15  -  30,  but  recovered  quickly  (within  the  week).  Learn  more  about  an
epidemic  curve  (epi  curve).   Find  more  detailed  information  on  how  to  read  an  epi
curve.  What's  an  epidemic  curve  (epi  curve)?  An  epi  curve  shows  how  an  outbreak
changes over time. It includes: Epi curves are updated as new data come in, so they are
always changing. The shape of the curve can provide clues about the possible source of
an  outbreak.  Learn  how  to  read  an  epi  curve.  Most  of  the  cases  are  mild.  Sending
everyone  to  the  hospital  now  will  only  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  staff  to  pay  full
attention to the people who need it the most. Instead, ask the health worker to identify
all of the sick and interview them to find out what they have in common. Keep working!
Start interviewing those who have become sick to find out what they have in common.
You  should  also  find  out  if  anything  else  unusual  is  happening  in  the  villages.  Keep
working!  Time  is  critical  and  we  have  a  lot  of  work  to  do.  Have  the  health  worker
interview those who are sick and find out what they have in common. You need to find
out what is causing the outbreak before everyone in the villages becomes sick. Keep
working!  The  health  worker  walks  through  heavy  mud  for  many  miles  to  identify  the
sick  and  interview  them  about  their  experience.  After  reviewing  the  data  from  the
interviews, you discover that many of the sick are herdsmen, farmers, and housewives.
The interviews also reveal that thousands of the villages' sheep have died. Many more
sheep are starting to show signs of sickness. You have found that many of the people
who are sick have been in contact with some of the sick animals.  In fact, of those who
are sick:
                                                             Sorry, many of the people who are ill are spread
out among several rural villages and very few have other family members who are also
sick.  Those  who  are  sick  seem  to  have  a  few  other  things  in  common.   Many  are
herdsmen,  farmers,  and  housewives  who  have  reported  touching  sick  animals  or
handling  raw  meat.  Keep  investigating  to  find  out  more.  Correct!   Many  of  the
herdsmen,  farmers,  and  housewives  reported  touching  sick  animals  or  handling  raw
meat. Keep investigating to find out more. Sorry, not many of the sick people had a sick
family  member.  However,  many  of  the  herdsmen,  farmers,  and  housewives  have
reported  touching  sick  animals  or  handling  raw  meat.   Keep  investigating  to  find  out
more.   More  than  1,000  villagers  were  interviewed,  those  who  were  sick  as  well  as
those  who  were  healthy.   Each  person  was  asked  what  they  did  one  week  before
getting sick. One of the health workers calculated the "attack rate" of each item. Based
on  the  interviews,  attack  rates  were  calculated  for  those  who  participated  in  the
following activities: Hint:  To find a possible source of the outbreak, look for both a high
attack rate for those who participated in an activity and a low attack rate among those
who did not participate. Nope, sorry.  In fact, only 10 out of the 200 sheep (or about
5%) were affected by parasites. So, it's not likely that the parasites are to blame. If you
study the data, you'll notice that 83% of people who were bitten by a mosquito became
sick and only 4% of people who were NOT bitten by a mosquito became ill. It looks like
the  mosquitoes  may  play  a  role  in  this  outbreak.   No.  Other  animals  have  eaten  the
same crops and seem to be just fine. In this case, it might be the insects. Mosquitoes
can  carry  diseases,  and  the  attack  rate  for  those  with  mosquito  bites  was  83%.  The
attack rate was only 4% for those without mosquito bites. It looks like the mosquitoes
may play a role in this outbreak. The attack rate for those with mosquito bites was 83%,
and only 4% for those without mosquito bites. Since there has been so much flooding in
the  area,  there  are  more  insects  than  ever  this  year  and  insects  are  known  to  carry
certain  diseases.  It  looks  like  mosquitoes  may  play  a  role  in  this  outbreak.  The
mosquitoes are getting worse. You have noticed insect bites on the sick sheep as well
as  on  the  people  who  are  ill.  Since  you  suspect  mosquitoes  play  a  role  in  how  the
disease is being spread, you decide to test the sick for two diseases that cause similar
symptoms  in  humans:  yellow  fever  and  Rift  Valley  fever  (RVF).  Yellow  fever  or  Rift
Valley fever (RVF)? Both diseases are spread to humans by mosquito bites. The most
common  symptoms  of  both  yellow  fever  and  Rift  Valley  fever  include:  While  yellow
fever primarily affects humans, Rift Valley fever may affect both animals and humans.
RVF  can  also  be  spread  by  exposure  to  blood,  body  fluids,  or  tissues  of  infected
animals.  Outbreaks  usually  happen  during  years  of  very  heavy  rainfall  and  flooding.
Learn how to protect yourself from getting sick. The best way to prevent yellow fever or
Rift Valley fever (RVF) is to: Yes, it looks like there is a strong link between the outbreak
and  mosquito  bites.  While  the  sick  are  being  treated,  make  sure  other  people  stay
healthy. Use mosquito nets, insect repellents, and wear long sleeves, pants, and socks
to  avoid  mosquitoes.  Not  yet.  You  aren't  sure  which  virus  is  to  blame.  Besides,  not
every person who has been bitten by a mosquito is sick. Instead, take steps to prevent
others from being bitten by a mosquito to help keep the outbreak under control. There
is a whole village depending on you to help them. They need to know what is causing
the outbreak in order to keep others from becoming sick. Keep looking for clues. The
blood test results are in. It looks like Rift Valley fever is to blame. In your talks with the
locals, you've uncovered a few key findings that may help uncover how the outbreak
spread: What is Rift Valley fever? Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a disease caused by a virus
that  affects  several  species  of  domestic  animals  and  humans.   Both  humans  and
animals get Rift Valley fever from the bite of an infected mosquito. Humans may also
get Rift Valley fever by exposure to blood, body fluids, or tissues of infected animals.
Outbreaks typically happen during years of unusually heavy rainfall and flooding. The
most  common  symptoms  include:  Most  people  who  have  Rift  Valley  fever  get  better
within two days to one week, but some can die from more serious complications. It all
started with the mosquitoesRising floodwaters caused more mosquitoes to hatch this
year.   Mosquitoes  carrying  the  Rift  Valley  fever  virus  spread  the  virus  by  biting  the
sheep and the people in the villages. The investigation revealed that while some of the
patients got sick after being bitten by the mosquitoes, others came into contact with
the blood, guts, or raw meat or milk of sheep that were sick. It looks like both sheep
and  mosquitoes  are  to  blame  for  this  outbreak.  Your  detective  skills  have  helped  to
solve this outbreak. Although the flood waters may have been contaminated with other
items that could cause problems, this is not how the Rift Valley fever virus is spread.
Instead,  rising  floodwaters  caused  more  mosquitoes  to  hatch  this  year.   Mosquitoes
carrying the Rift Valley fever virus spread the virus by biting the sheep and the people
in the villages.  The investigation revealed that while some of the patients got sick after
being bitten by the mosquitoes, others came into contact with the blood, guts, or raw
meat or milk of sheep that were sick. It looks like both sheep and mosquitoes are to
blame for this outbreak. Your detective skills have helped to solve this outbreak. This
fictional  outbreak  was  based  on  a  real-life  outbreak  in  the  North  Eastern  Province  of
Kenya in 2006. In mid-December, several unexplained deaths associated with fever and
generalized  bleeding  were  reported  to  the  Kenya  Ministry  of  Health  (KMOH).   On
December 20, an investigation was launched by KMOH and involved several partners,
including  CDC-Kenya's  Global  Disease  Detection  Center  and  the  World  Health
Organization  (WHO).  Teams  of  investigators  interviewed  patients,  reviewed  medical
records, and met with village elders and healthcare providers in villages where cases
had been reported. Blood samples from patients were collected and antibodies for Rift
Valley  fever  (RVF)  were  found.   Reports  of  livestock  deaths  and  unexplained  animal
abortions provided further evidence of an outbreak. As of January 25, 2007, a total of
404  cases  of  RVF  had  been  reported  in  Kenya  with  118  deaths.   To  prevent  further
spread, live animals were vaccinated and a ban on livestock slaughtering was put into
place.  Note:   Several  aspects  of  the  original  outbreak  and  investigation  have  been
altered to fit the format and length of this application. Many students at a university in
Texas haven't been able to keep their lunch down for the last 2 days. They've stopped
showing  up  for  their  fall  midterm  exams.  Instead,  they've  started  showing  up  at  the
student health center. A couple of students are feeling miserable after a late night of
partying  and  eating  pizza  following  a  big  win  by  the  university's  football  team.  Two
students called the student health center asking for an official excuse to skip midterm
exams.  The  nurse  at  the  health  center  didn't  think  much  of  this  until  more  students
started showing up with vomiting and diarrhea. Dozens of students are sick and staff at
the health center suspect that a stomach bug might be going around. Within the last 2
days, 53 students have come to the student health center with similar symptoms, all of
which began suddenly. Of the 53 students: The medical staff tells you that they have
diagnosed  the  students  with  acute  gastroenteritis.  However,  the  routine  tests  at  the
student  health  center  did  not  identify  the  cause.  What  is  Gastroenteritis?
Gastroenteritis  is  an  inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  intestines.  The  most  common
symptoms  include:  The  symptoms  typically  last  for  1  to  3  days.  Although  viruses  are
the most frequent cause, gastroenteritis can also be caused by bacteria, parasites, or
chemicals.   Some  students  have  fever  along  with  vomiting,  diarrhea,  and  other
symptoms.  So,  there's  more  to  this  story.   Keep  investigating  to  solve  this  outbreak.
There's no need to keep the students away from others until their symptoms are gone.
Besides, keeping 53 students in the same area for more than a few hours will probably
make you and them bonkers! Keep investigating to solve this outbreak. It's important to
find out if others are sick too. You call the local hospital and ask if they've had patients
in the last 24 to 48 hours with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and stomach cramps. The
nurse tells you that they haven't seen more than a handful of new patients with these
symptoms  all  week.  It  looks  like  only  students  from  the  university  are  getting  this
illness. Keep investigating to solve this outbreak! Things are getting worse. Since the
beginning of the week, 76 students have visited the student health center with similar
symptoms. Most of the students are getting better in a day or two. But 3 students have
become dehydrated and are being treated in a local hospital. The student health center
collected  stool  samples  from  the  sick  students  and  performed  bacterial  testing.  The
results  came  back  negative  for  the  common  bacteria  and  parasites  that  could  have
made the students sick. So, the samples were sent to the health department laboratory
for  viral  testing.  To  find  out  what  caused  the  outbreak,  you  need  to  know  when  it
started.  After  talking  with  the  staff  at  the  student  health  center,  you  find  out  that:
Symptoms  from  a  typical  stomach  bug  usually  start  1  to  2  days  after  coming  into
contact  with  the  virus.  Based  on  the  data,  you  suspect  that  the  first  person  was
exposed around March 8 and that the "exposure period" (the time when the students
were likely exposed to the contamination) is March 7-10. View the epidemic curve (epi
curve) to see when the outbreak started. Learn more about an epi curve. The best ways
to  stay  hydrated  when  you  have  gastrointestinal  illness  are  to:  What's  an  epidemic
curve (epi curve)? An epi curve shows how an outbreak changes over time. It includes:
Epi curves are updated as new data come in, so they are always changing. The shape of
the  curve  can  provide  clues  about  the  possible  source  of  an  outbreak.  Learn  how  to
read  an  epi  curve.  You're  correct!  You  need  to  find  out  what  the  students  have  in
common, such as: To narrow down what might be causing the illness, interview the sick
students as well as a sample of students who did not get sick ("controls") and compare
their answers. You don't need to send anyone home. The symptoms of this illness are
no fun, but they usually don't last long. Most of the sick students get better in a few
days. To narrow down what might be causing the illness, interview the sick students as
well  as  a  sample  of  students  who  did  not  get  sick  ("controls")  and  compare  their
answers.  This  may  be  the  only  time  that  telling  a  university  student  to  "drink,  drink,
drink!"  is  the  right  thing  to  do.  The  students  need  to  drink  plenty  of  clear  liquids  to
replace fluids lost from vomiting and diarrhea. This can help prevent dehydration. In the
meantime,  you  need  to  know  if  more  people  are  getting  sick.  To  narrow  down  what
might be causing the illness, interview the sick students as well as a sample of students
who did not get sick ("controls") and compare their answers. Great news! The outbreak
seems to be slowing down. No other students have gotten sick in the last 3 days. Those
who are sick are beginning to feel better. In the meantime, you've been trying to find
out  what  caused  the  outbreak  by  interviewing  the  students  and  have  learned  some
important information. Now, you need to look for patterns in the data to find the source
of  the  outbreak  and  stop  further  spread  of  the  illness.  In  looking  over  the  students'
school records, you find that the 76 sick students have some things in common for the
time  when  they  were  most  likely  exposed  to  the  contamination  (March  7-10):  The
outbreak could be caused by the water in the dorms. But if that were so, many more
students  and  people  in  the  community  would  be  sick.  But  that's  not  the  case.  Upon
further investigation, you learn that the dorms use the same water as the city and no
one else in the community is reporting any symptoms. In looking at the data again, you
notice that all of the sick students ate at the food court during the time when they were
most likely exposed to the contamination (March 7-10).  The food court is only 1 of 3
cafeterias on campus, so it's unusual that all of the students who are sick ate at the
food court. Perhaps there's something at the food court that is causing this sickness? 
It's your job to find out! That's incorrect. Only a few students share the same classes.
Most of the sick students don't even know each other. In looking at the data again, you
notice that all of the sick students ate at the food court during the time when they were
most likely exposed to the contamination (March 7-10). The food court is only 1 of 3
cafeterias on campus, so it's unusual that all of the students who are sick ate at the
food court. Perhaps there's something at the food court that is causing this sickness?
It's your job to find out! Yes! All the sick students ate at the food court during the time
when they were most likely exposed to the contaminated food (March 7-10). The food
court is only 1 of 3 cafeterias on campus, so it's unusual that all of the students who are
sick ate at the food court. Take a look at what the students ate and drank to see if the
illness could be caused by a particular food.  It's your job to find out what's causing this
outbreak. While you suspect the outbreak started at the food court, you need to confirm
your suspicions.  So, you decide to interview other students from campus who are not
sick ("controls"). You're able to talk with 273 students who don't have any symptoms. 
You  discover  that  most  of  these  students  did  not  eat  at  the  food  court  during  March
7-10 and instead chose to eat at one of the other cafeterias on campus. However, 100
of the students who are not sick did eat at the food court during this time. In order to
identify why some students got sick and others did not, you need to identify the source
of the exposure. So, you ask the students about the foods they ate at the food court
and also interview the staff who work in the food court. Of the 76 students who are sick,
you  were  able  to  interview  62  students.  You  were  also  able  to  interview  the  100
students who ate at the food court between March 7-10 but did not get sick ("controls").
You ask all of the students to list the foods they ate at the food court during the days in
question. Take a look at the data to figure out which foods are causing students to get
sick. You use the data from the interviews to calculate the "attack rate" for each of the
foods eaten at the food court during March 7-10. Interestingly, you discover that most
of the students who are sick ate sandwiches, while the students who are well tended to
eat  foods  from  the  salad  bar,  the  grill,  the  soup  line,  or  the  pizza  counter.   So,  you
calculate the attack rate of the foods from the sandwich line to find out what is causing
students to get sick. Hint: To identify the likely source of the outbreak, look for a high
attack rate among those who ate a specific food and low attack rate among those who
did not eat this food.
                                                                                     You also interview the workers in
the food court. Helen, the person in charge of making sandwiches, tells you that she
wasn't  feeling  well  and  had  diarrhea  and  stomach  cramps  a  few  days  before  the
outbreak began. While you are interviewing her, you notice that she frequently touches
other surfaces, including the cash register, and then goes back to handling food without
washing her hands. You also notice that there aren't any signs posted about employee
handwashing. You're partially right. While some students who ate the ham are sick, it
looks like there were several items from the sandwich line that caused students to get
sick.  You  start  to  wonder  if  the  food  worker  did  not  wash  her  hands  properly  and
contaminated more than one of the items used to make sandwiches when she was sick.
Keep going! There's still more you need to know to prevent this from happening again.
You're  partially  right.  While  some  students  who  ate  the  cheese  are  sick,  it  looks  like
there were several items from the sandwich line that caused students to get sick. You
start to wonder if the food worker did not wash her hands properly and contaminated
more than one of the items used to make sandwiches when she was sick. Keep going!
There's  still  more  you  need  to  know  to  prevent  this  from  happening  again.  You're
exactly right. It looks like there were several items from the sandwich line that caused
students  to  get  sick.  You  start  to  wonder  if  the  food  worker  did  not  wash  her  hands
properly and contaminated more than one of the items used to make sandwiches when
she  was  sick.  Keep  going!  There's  still  more  you  need  to  know  to  prevent  this  from
happening  again.  The  results  are  in!  The  health  department  calls  to  tell  you  that  the
samples from the sick students tested positive for norovirus. You suspect that the sick
food court worker spread the virus when she was sick with diarrhea and handled the
foods in the sandwich line. Learn how you can protect yourself from norovirus. What is
Norovirus?  Norovirus  is  very  contagious.  You  can  get  infected  with  this  virus  by:  The
most  common  symptoms  are  diarrhea,  vomiting,  nausea,  and  stomach  pain.  Most
people who get sick with norovirus feel better within 1 to 3 days. Learn how to protect
yourself  from  norovirus.  The  best  way  to  help  prevent  norovirus  infection  is  to:  You
should  also  remind  the  food  court  workers  to  always:  In  addition,  throw  away  all  left
over  food  items  that  the  sick  food  court  worker  may  have  handled  and  disinfect  the
food court. You should remind the food court workers to always: In addition, throw away
all left over food items that the sick food court worker may have handled and disinfect
the food court. It's not necessary to test all the food court workers. Testing for norovirus
is  not  widely  available  and  tests  may  be  positive  after  you're  no  longer  contagious.
Instead, food court workers should not handle food while they are sick and for 3 days
after they feel better.  You should remind the food court workers to always: In addition,
throw away all left over food items that the sick food court worker may have handled
and disinfect the food court. This outbreak was fictional but parts of it were based on a
real-life investigation at a university in Texas in 1998. To solve the real outbreak, many
epidemiologists  and  scientists  worked  closely  with  the  university  and  the  health
department. The best course of action to prevent outbreaks such as this is to:  It's late
in the year in Guinea, a country in West Africa. People from one of the villages have
been  going  to  the  local  healer  with  fevers,  headaches,  vomiting,  and  muscle  pains.
Sadly, several people have already died and more are getting sick. As an officer in the
CDC Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS), you'll help solve the outbreak in the village of
Dandano. Village elders don't know what is causing about 30 of the villagers to get sick.
Family members are doing their best to care for them. You need to find out how these
people got sick. By tracking their activities, you can narrow down the initial source of
the illness. This is a critical step in disease prevention and the start of contact tracing.
You start by interviewing the 30 sick people to find out what they were doing before
becoming ill. Many villagers work in the nearby fields with livestock or crops. Several
others draw water from a well a few miles away. Some travelled outside the village to
the  closest  city  for  work.  Most  of  the  sick  villagers  visited  the  traditional  healer.  A
traditional healer helps treat most minor illnesses and problems. They use knowledge
and  skills  unique  to  their  culture  to  help  treat  and  prevent  illness.  Contact  tracing  is
finding everyone who comes in direct contact with a sick person. Doctors then watch
those people for symptoms for several days. If that person starts to show symptoms,
there  are  3  possible  next  steps:  isolation,  testing  or  additional  care.  Then  the  cycle
starts  again,  the  new  sick  person's  contacts  will  be  located  and  watched  for  days.
Contact tracing can be a lot of work, but it is important to help stop the spread of a
disease.  It  seems  like  the  traditional  healer  might  be  the  common  thread  among  the
sick people so far. Lots of people seem to have developed the same kind of symptoms
after visiting him. Finding out what the sick people have in common means you can find
out more about the disease. Keep working to solve the outbreak! It's not entirely clear
what  the  disease  even  is  yet.  It's  too  early  to  announce  that  a  disease  is  spreading.
Announcing something like this could scare the public! You need to know exactly what
you're dealing with before telling everyone. It seems like the traditional healer might be
the  common  thread  among  the  sick  people  so  far.  Lots  of  people  seem  to  have
developed  the  same  kind  of  symptoms  after  visiting  him.  Finding  out  what  the  sick
people have in common means you can find out more about the disease. Keep working
to solve the outbreak! Isolating everyone could keep the outbreak from spreading. But
it also means you won't be able to work closely with the villagers anymore. It's also too
early to isolate the sick people since you don't know what the disease is yet. There's
also no evidence yet of what's causing it to spread. Many of the sick people saw the
village healer. You should probably investigate that a little more. Keep working to solve
the outbreak! After talking with those who saw the traditional healer you learn that he
was also sick and later died. You use the dates that people visited the healer to help
with  your  investigation.   There  are  now  35  people  confirmed  sick  in  Dandano  and  3
have died. There may be more, but you can't confirm how many because the healer hid
the actual numbers of sick people. Other villages nearby are starting to experience the
same problems. You send blood samples of sick people for testing to find out what is
causing  people  to  get  sick.  Other  organizations  like  the  World  Health  Organization
(WHO)  and  Doctors  Without  Borders  are  called  in  to  help  fight  the  disease.  It's
important to find how long it takes for a disease to appear after coming in contact with
another sick person. This is called the incubation period. It is calculated by the longest
amount of time between when a person is exposed to a disease and when they begin to
show  symptoms.  This  information  helps  medical  officers  know  how  long  to  monitor
someone before deciding if they are sick or well. You gather data on a sample of the
sick people who saw the healer. You note how long it took before they started to show
symptoms. You find out that most people visited the healer for unrelated reasons like
back aches or broken arms. They later started to exhibit similar symptoms. The disease
can take anywhere from 2 to 21 days to show up, and the average is 8-10 days. To be
safe, you tell medical workers to monitor people who might be sick for 42 days (two
incubation periods) after symptoms first appear. This is a common practice so that you
are  absolutely  certain  that  someone  doesn't  have  the  disease.  Anyone  who  shows
symptoms  in  that  time  should  be  considered  sick!  Keep  working  to  save  lives!  The
disease can take anywhere from 2 to 21 days to show up, and the average is 8-10 days.
To be safe, you tell medical workers to monitor people who might be sick for 42 days
(two incubation periods) after symptoms first appear. This is a common practice so that
you are absolutely certain that someone doesn't have the disease. Anyone who shows
symptoms  in  that  time  should  be  considered  sick!  Keep  working  to  save  lives!  Good
eye! The disease can take anywhere from 2 to 21 days to show up, and the average is
8-10 days. To be safe, you tell medical workers to monitor people who might be sick for
42  days  (two  incubation  periods)  after  symptoms  first  appear.  This  is  a  common
practice  so  that  you  are  absolutely  certain  that  someone  doesn't  have  the  disease.
Anyone who shows symptoms in that time should be considered sick! Keep working to
save  lives!  The  test  results  confirm  that  these  villagers  have  Ebola.  In  the  village  of
Dandano,  75  more  people  have  gotten  sick,  and  10  more  have  died.  This  brings  the
total to 110 sick and 13 deaths. The disease is spreading fast in neighboring villages as
well.  You  need  to  figure  out  who  the  disease  affects  and  if  certain  people  are  more
prone to getting sick. At the local missionary clinic, the medical workers who are caring
for  the  sick  people  are  also  getting  sick  themselves.  Two  nurses  are  now  showing
symptoms:  fevers,  headaches,  vomiting,  and  muscle  pains!  They  have  been  giving
meals, washing, and taking blood samples from sick people. You warn the rest of the
staff  to  be  very  careful  while  caring  for  them.  You  recommend  they  wear  protective
clothing to prevent the spread of the disease. What is Ebola? Ebola is a rare and deadly
disease caused by infection with an Ebola virus species. These virus species are found
in several African countries. Since its discovery in 1976, Ebola outbreaks have appeared
occasionally  in  Africa  and  in  the  Philippines.  The  natural  host  of  Ebola  remains
unknown, but researchers believe the virus starts in animals - most likely bats. Ebola
can  be  spread  among  people  through  direct  contact  with:  Symptoms  of  Ebola  can
include  fever,  severe  headache,  muscle  pain,  weakness,  fatigue,  diarrhea,  vomiting,
abdominal  (stomach)  pain  and  unexplained  hemorrhage  (bleeding  or  bruising).  Now
that  you  know  the  disease  is  Ebola,  you  want  to  find  out  what  groups  of  people  are
particularly  affected.  You  need  to  find  out  what  the  people  who  are  sick  have  in
common. This will help you determine if one group is affected more than another. You
note ages, occupations, and gender of people who are sick and compile it into charts.
You compare the same information to people who are well, and look for any trends in
the  data.  A  partner  organization  shares  the  data  they  have  also  collected  on  attack
rates in their regions. You can compare your results to the rest of the country to see if
certain  regions  are  particularly  affected  by  the  disease.  In  order  to  minimize  contact
with  people  who  are  sick,  healthcare  workers  begin  wearing  personal  protective
equipment (PPE). PPE is specialized clothing or equipment worn for protection against
infectious  diseases.  PPE  might  include  gloves,  masks,  goggles,  boots  and  protective
gowns. PPE helps by creating a protective barrier between sick person and a healthcare
worker.  Wearing  PPE  will  help  the  Guinean  healthcare  workers  provide  care  to  sick
people, while protecting themselves from getting sick. After healthcare workers begin
wearing  PPE,  you  notice  that  fewer  healthcare  workers  are  getting  sick.   The  PPE  is
working! It seems like the disease is affecting everyone! Based on the data all people -
young and old, male and female - are getting sick. This means that Ebola isn't restricted
to  certain  kinds  of  people.  If  the  disease  can  affect  anyone  that  also  means  it  can
spread  quickly!  Nobody  is  safe  from  Ebola  -  you'll  need  to  work  fast  and  solve  the
outbreak soon to save lives!     It seems like the disease is affecting everyone! Based on
the data all people - young and old, male and female - are getting sick. This means that
Ebola isn't restricted to certain kinds of people. If the disease can affect anyone that
also means it can spread quickly! Nobody is safe from Ebola - you'll need to work fast
and  solve  the  outbreak  soon  to  save  lives!      It  seems  like  the  disease  is  affecting
everyone! Based on the data all people - young and old, male and female - are getting
sick. This means that Ebola isn't restricted to certain kinds of people. If the disease can
affect anyone that also means it can spread quickly! Nobody is safe from Ebola - you'll
need to work fast and solve the outbreak soon to save lives!     The best way to stop the
spread  of  Ebola  is  to  isolate  the  people  who  are  sick.   Once  you  know  this,  you  can
separate  people  and  observe  them  for  symptoms  over  a  42-day  period.  But,  you  are
struggling  to  identify  the  people  who  are  sick.  Many  sick  people  are  saying  they  are
healthy  so  that  friends  and  family  won't  ignore  them.  This  is  a  big  problem  when
conducting contact tracing.  It's hard for you to trace who has come in contact with a
sick person and who hasn't. Mothers and fathers are doing their best to stay with, hold,
and comfort their sick children. But healthy villagers want to isolate the sick and keep
them  away  by  boarding  up  their  homes.  You  hear  that  a  neighboring  village  held  a
funeral  for  a  midwife  who  passed  away  last  month.  Over  100  people  attended  the
funeral; 18 of the people who attended died soon after the funeral. You find out that the
midwife  had  shown  symptoms  of  Ebola  before  passing  away.  Through  your
investigation you know that Ebola is transmitted through contact with corpses or bodily
fluids of an infected person. Many of the traditional burial practices in this area typically
involve washing, touching, and kissing the body of the dead. So it's possible that the
funeral attendees could have had direct contact with the body and body fluids. At this
point, there's still a lot you can do to help save lives. Encouraging the use of PPE as well
as  safe  burial  practices  can  help  contain  the  spread  of  Ebola.  By  communicating  the
benefits of these behaviors, you can get the public to stay safe! Keep working to save
lives There is a lot of conflict between what people want to do and what people should
be doing. It might be hard to convince people to use modified body handling and burial
practices. But you have to keep teaching them that it will save lives in the long run.
Stopping  all  traditional  burials  is  difficult.  Many  people  are  dying  and  people  want  to
pay their respects to their loved ones who are dying from Ebola. Instead, encourage the
village  to  use  safe  burial  and  body  handling  practices.  This  way,  people  can  still  pay
their respects while preventing the spread of Ebola. There are still cases occurring, so
keep working to save lives! You develop some Public Service Announcements (PSAs) to
teach people about safe burial practices and other ways to prevent Ebola. Local TV and
radio stations are starting to play the PSAs you helped create. A trusted doctor shares
this  vital  information  over  the  airwaves.  The  villagers  begin  to  use  these  practices,
which  limits  the  spread  of  Ebola.  Nearby  villages  and  neighboring  countries  also
educate people in their areas to help keep the disease from affecting them. For now,
you've contained the spread of Ebola within Guinea. But symptoms don't appear until
several days after contact. So it's possible that people are traveling to other parts of the
continent  without  knowing  that  they  could  have  Ebola.  Your  public  health  notices
include  radio  messages,  posters,  and  other  informational  postings.  You  are  trying  to
share  the  facts  about  Ebola.  This  includes  how  it  can  be  transmitted,  prevented,
treated,  where  it  can  be  found,  symptoms,  and  other  information  to  help  people
understand the disease better. You want to help villagers understand their role in the
fight against Ebola. You know that simply sharing this information throughout Guinea
can actually save lives. People will become more aware of the risks and avoid actions
that  could  spread  Ebola.  This  is  definitely  an  effective  option  to  help  limit  spread.  At
airports, seaports, and bus stations, medical workers check travelers for symptoms of
Ebola. They ask if travelers have come into contact with someone who has had Ebola.
By screening travelers before they leave and after they arrive at their destination, you
can  help  limit  the  spread  of  disease.  These  screenings  keep  anyone  with  symptoms
from traveling while allowing healthy people to travel as needed. Congratulations, your
hard work helped to solve this outbreak and save lives! Keeping people from moving in
and out of the affected areas could pose serious problems. Some of the people work
outside their areas and won't be able to make a living if you prevent travel. And people
may not be able to get the care, medicine, or help they need to get better! Let's keep
the  borders  open  to  get  people  the  help  they  need.  At  airports,  seaports,  and  bus
stations, medical workers check travelers for symptoms of Ebola. They ask if travelers
have come into contact with someone who has had Ebola. By screening travelers before
they leave and after they arrive at their destination, you can help limit the spread of
disease.  These  screenings  keep  anyone  with  symptoms  from  traveling  while  allowing
healthy people to travel as needed. Your hard work helped to save lives! Requiring a
doctor's note for travelers only inconveniences people who are trying to move in and
out of affected areas. This could slow down the people who are trying to get medicine
or give care to those who are sick. To limit the spread of Ebola, screen travelers before
they leave and after they arrive. This will help you determine who is healthy enough to
travel. At airports, seaports, and bus stations, medical workers will check travelers for
symptoms of Ebola. They will also ask if they've come into contact with someone who
has  had  Ebola.  You  can  help  limit  the  spread  of  disease  by  keeping  anyone  with
symptoms from traveling while allowing healthy people to travel as needed. Your hard
work  helped  to  save  lives!  Your  hard  work  helped  solve  this  outbreak!  This  fictional
outbreak  is  based  on  the  Ebola  outbreaks  that  occurred  throughout  West  Africa  from
2014 until 2016. This was the largest outbreak of Ebola in history. More than 28,000
people became sick and more than 11,000 people died. Multiple health organizations
like the CDC and the World Health Organization (WHO) were sent to multiple countries
in Africa. Several other countries like the United States, the United Kingdom, Spain, and
Italy also reported cases of Ebola. At the height of the epidemic, there were thousands
of people dedicated to fighting the spread of Ebola. By using safe treatment methods
and effective travel screenings, the CDC was able to help limit the spread of Ebola. On
March  29,  2016,  the  WHO  declared  that  the  Ebola  outbreak  was  no  longer  an
international public health emergency. Note: Several aspects of the original outbreaks
and  investigations  have  been  altered  to  fit  the  format  and  length  of  this  application.
Refugees from South Sudan are fleeing to escape from armed violence and are settling
in  an  Ethiopian  refugee  camp.  You  hear  that  3  refugees  with  symptoms  of  fever,
fatigue, nausea, and yellow eyes have died in the past week, and more might be sick
with the same symptoms. Your help is needed to stop this outbreak! The population of
the Ethiopian refugee camp Jengo has surged to over 100,000 refugees, coinciding with
the onset of heavy rains and flooding. You are working with the United Nations' High
Commissioner  for  Refugees  to  assess  the  public  health  and  WASH  needs  of  the
population (WASH stands for water, sanitation, and hygiene). This week, the deaths of 2
pregnant women and 1 child are reported in the camp. Both women were in the third
trimester  of  their  pregnancies.  It  is  unknown  when  their  symptoms  began,  but  all  3
patients were reported to have the following symptoms: yellow eyes (jaundice), fever,
fatigue,  and  nausea.  Based  on  your  assessment  of  the  camp  so  far,  you  know  that:
Camp  doctors  suspect  that  the  deaths  are  from  yellow  fever  or  malaria,  which  are
common illnesses in the region. When you learn about these deaths, you worry that you
don't  yet  know  what  this  disease  is  and  when  it  began.  The  camp  clinic  can  conduct
rapid tests for malaria, but they don't have the equipment or supplies to test for other
diseases. There are over 100,000 refugees in the camp who have nowhere else to go. It
would be a huge undertaking to move them before you know exactly what is going on.
Learning more about what the people who are sick have in common may give you some
clues  about  the  source  of  the  outbreak.  Time  to  collect  more  information  about  the
cases. Keep investigating to find out more! Learning more about what the people who
are sick have in common may give you some clues about the source of the outbreak.
Good work! Time to start your investigation! Autopsies are not commonly done in this
part of the world. Also, you're a public health investigator, not a doctor! Even for the
camp  doctors,  autopsies  may  be  difficult  to  do  in  a  refugee  camp  without  the  right
equipment and supplies. There's no time to waste. You should try to learn more about
what  the  people  who  are  sick  have  in  common  as  it  may  give  you  clues  about  the
source  of  the  outbreak.  Over  the  next  couple  of  weeks,  community  health  workers
identify 8 more patients with yellow eyes. They send the jaundiced patients to the camp
clinic, but doctors can't make a final diagnosis. The symptom of jaundice is not unique -
patients  could  have  yellow  fever,  a  type  of  Hepatitis,  or  even  poisoning.  The  camp
doctors  want  to  know  exactly  which  disease  is  killing  patients  so  they  know  which
treatments  to  use,  and  how  to  prevent  future cases.  Because the camp's  lab  doesn't
have advanced diagnostic tests, blood samples are sent to a specialized laboratory in
Nairobi, Kenya for testing. However, it will take weeks to safely transport the samples
to the lab and get the test results. The camp doctors are overwhelmed with people who
are  sick.  The  clinic  is  overwhelmed  with  people  of  all  ages  battling  watery  diarrheal
diseases,  but  most  of  them  do  not  have  jaundice.  Doctors  are  having  a  hard  time
managing  the  high  number  of  patients  with  different  symptoms.  For  now,  they  are
treating all patients by giving them oral rehydration solution, which is water mixed with
sugar,  salt,  and  zinc  which  patients  drink  to  treat  dehydration.  Sicker  patients  are
hospitalized  for  IV  fluid  replacement.  Diarrhea  is  the  passage  of  3  or  more  loose  or
liquid stools per day. Diarrhea is usually a symptom of a stomach infection, which can
be caused by a variety of bacterial, viral, and parasitic organisms. Infection is spread
through contaminated food or drinking water, or from person-to-person because of poor
hygiene. Interventions to prevent diarrheal diseases include safe drinking water, use of
improved  sanitation,  and  hand  washing  with  soap;  all  of  which  can  reduce  risk  of
disease. These types of programs are known as WASH (water, sanitation, and hygiene).
Diarrhea can be treated with oral rehydration solution (clean water, sugar, and salt) and
with zinc tablets. While you're waiting for the lab to return test results from Nairobi, you
have some time to analyze information about the people who have become sick with
jaundice.  In  the  last  2  weeks,  11  patients  have  been  diagnosed  with  jaundice  and  7
have died, but only 4 of the 11 patients have tested positive for malaria. Most of these
patients have been experiencing symptoms from 5 - 23 days.  7 patients are female,
and 4 are male. The camp clinic also ran rapid tests for Malaria.  Now, you are able to
see all of the data in one place, so you can look for trends in the data. Next, you have
to  ask  yourself  some  tough  questions.  Do  the  patients  who  died  have  anything  in
common? Is there any relationship between malaria and this mysterious disease? Look
at  your  data  again;  none  of  the  cases  so  far  are  above  the  age  of  35.  A  couple  of
children have jaundice, but most of the cases are teens and young adults. You look at
the data more closely and realize that most of the female cases are pregnant women,
and  3  out  of  4  pregnant  women  have  died  -  more  than  any  other  group.   Don't  get
discouraged, keep working to solve the outbreak! Less than half of the jaundice cases
also had a positive malaria test. Malaria is endemic (meaning regularly found) in this
part of Ethiopia. In areas with endemic malaria, it is important to look for other diseases
these patients may also have. You look at the data again and realize that most of the
female patients are pregnant women, and 3 out of 4 pregnant women have died - more
than  any  other  group.  Keep  investigating,  people  are  depending  on  you!  Good  work,
you interpreted the data correctly.  Most of the female cases are pregnant women, and
3 out of 4 pregnant women have died - more than any other group. Keep investigating
to find out what is going on! Although the camp clinic was able to run rapid tests for
Malaria,  it  sent  samples  to  another  lab  for  more  advanced  diagnostic  tests.  After
several weeks, you get a phone call from the lab in Nairobi. You're expecting the test
results,  but  you  find  out  the  blood  samples  you  sent  weren't  kept  cold  enough  while
they  traveled  from  the  refugee  camp  to  the  lab  in  Nairobi.  The  lab  doesn't  want  to
waste  its  limited  resources  testing  damaged  samples  -  the  test  results  would  be
meaningless. That means the lab isn't able to tell you what is making patients sick. But
the refugees and camp doctors are still relying on you to help them! You want to act
quickly before the outbreak gets much worse. You're not sure exactly what is causing
pregnant  women  with  jaundice  to  die,  but  health  conditions  in  the  refugee  camp  are
poor. Many infectious diseases have related causes. For example, removing mosquitoes
prevents both malaria and yellow fever. You don't know what is causing the jaundice, so
you decide to focus on preventing diarrheal diseases, which will have a large impact on
the  whole  camp.  Fortunately,  community  health  workers  have  surveyed  almost  400
people  in  the  camp  about  hygiene  and  sanitation  practices  related  to  the  continuing
diarrhea outbreak. The data shows the cases (people who have had diarrhea) are less
likely than the controls (people who have not had diarrhea), to use the recommended
amount of chlorine to make their water safe to drink. Cases also are less likely to use a
latrine,  have  soap  in  the  home,  or  know  that  drinking  untreated  drinking  water  can
cause diarrhea.  Why put chlorine in water?Adding a safe amount of chlorine to water
(about one tablet or capful of watered down solution to about 20 liters of water) and
waiting  30  minutes  before  drinking  is  proven  to  reduce  most  bacteria  and  viruses.
Adding  chlorine  to  water  is  simpler  and  costs  less  than  other  ways  to  make  drinking
water safe. Giving refugees drinking water treated with chlorine is one important piece
of the puzzle, but it does not solve the other water, sanitation, and hygiene problems in
the  camp.  Refugees  also  don't  have  enough  handwashing  stations  or  latrines.  These
problems  all  contribute  to  the  spread  of  diarrhea.  Helping  people  with  clean  drinking
water, handwashing, and latrines, is known as WASH, and they work better together.
Keep going to solve this outbreak before it gets worse! Installing handwashing stations
and  adding  latrines  throughout  the  camp  will  help,  but  it  does  not  solve  the  whole
problem. Refugees also don't have enough access to clean drinking water treated with
chlorine. These problems all contribute to the diarrhea problem in the camp. If you only
try  one  or  two  types  of  projects,  you  won't  solve  the  whole  problem.  Helping  people
with clean drinking water, handwashing, and latrines, is known as WASH, and they work
better  together.  Keep  going  to  solve  this  outbreak  before  it  gets  worse!  Picking  and
choosing different projects might be easier, but it won't solve the whole problem. The
inadequate number and use of latrines, contaminated drinking water, and lack of good
hand hygiene all contribute to the diarrhea problem in the camp, so addressing them
together  will  make  the  most  difference.  Helping  people  with  clean  drinking  water,
handwashing,  and  latrines,  is  known  as  WASH,  and  they  work  better  together.  Keep
going  to  solve  this  outbreak  before  it  gets  worse!  As  the  conflict  in  South  Sudan
continues, a new group of refugees settle in Camp Jengo. This new group has not been
exposed to the diseases circulating in the camp, so they don't have immunity. Several
weeks  pass,  and  the  camp  improves  water,  sanitation,  and  hygiene  conditions  by
installing  handwashing  stations,  adding  latrines,  and  providing  clean  drinking  water
treated  with  chlorine.  Community  health  workers  also  conduct  small  group  education
sessions  on  the  importance  of  handwashing  with  soap,  using  latrines,  and  drinking
treated water. The number of cases of diarrhea and jaundice begins to fall. Even though
you  never  figured  out  what  exactly  was  killing  pregnant  women,  you  congratulate
yourself  on  a  job  well  done.  Just  as  you  are  beginning  to  feel  you  have  solved  the
outbreak,  a  reoccurrence  happens.   Two  months  later,  several  more  patients  have
jaundice again, with more pregnant women dying. You have no choice but to try again
to  get  lab  results.  You  collect  more  blood  samples,  and  make  sure  that  they  are
properly packed so they stay at the right temperature on the 3-day bumpy car ride to
Nairobi.
                                                                                 Immunity means the power to keep
yourself from being affected by a disease. Exposure to a pathogen (such as a virus or
bacteria)  triggers  the  immune  system  to  produce  antibodies  to  a  disease.  Antibodies
are proteins produced by the body that destroy disease-carrying organisms.  Antibodies
are  disease-specific.  For  example,  measles  antibody  will  protect  a  person  who  is
exposed to measles disease, but will have no effect if he or she is exposed to mumps.
An epi curve shows the number of cases over a 3-month period of time. During the first
month, cases briefly increase, then taper off as WASH projects are implemented. But 2
months later, clusters of cases start to pop up again. What has changed in the camp
that could explain this? The WASH projects you started had an impact at first. Although
it is possible that you could have done a better job with your projects, something else is
going  on.  Keep  investigating  to  solve  this  outbreak  once  and  for  all!  You  know  that
adding latrines, clean drinking water, and handwashing stations were an important step
in improving the overall health of the refugees in the camp. Plus, you saw an impact
right  away  when  the  number  of  cases  began  to  drop.  But  the  new  groups  of  people
arriving in the camp have not been exposed to the virus, so they do not have immunity
and are more likely to get sick. Keep investigating to solve this outbreak once and for
all! If refugees were scared to go to the clinic, it would take a longer time to realize that
cases  have  returned,  and  you  wouldn't  have  such  detailed  case  information.  None  of
the evidence indicates that this is a problem. Keep investigating to solve this outbreak
once and for all! You finally get the test results from Nairobi - it turns out that patients
are dying of Hepatitis E. There is no specific treatment for Hepatitis E, but fortunately
the  water,  sanitation,  and  hygiene  (WASH)  projects  you  started  to  reduce  diarrheal
disease also help prevent Hepatitis E. The oral rehydration solution given by doctors is
also  helpful.  Still,  Hepatitis  E  is  hard  to  control:  why  else  would  it  return  after  case
counts  dropped  for  months?  Water,  sanitation,  and  hygiene  actions  take  time  to
complete. If any piece of a WASH program is unreliable, (for example, cancelled soap
deliveries or a lack of chlorine to make water safe to drink), more people will continue
to  become  infected.  The  camp  managers  ask  you  to  write  a  report  with
recommendations  for  controlling  Hepatitis  E,  so  you  begin  by  looking  at  the  key  risk
factors. You open your field laptop computer to analyze the data again to see what the
cases have in common. The table shows that adults between 25-54 years old are most
likely to be infected. Nearly half of infected cases had contact with another jaundiced
person. Interestingly, many people who drank surface water got sick, and over twice as
many people who got sick also took care of animals. Many cases also shared a latrine
with 7 or more other households. Hepatitis E is a liver infection caused by the Hepatitis
E virus (HEV). In developing countries HEV infection does not result in chronic Hepatitis
E. While rare in the United States, Hepatitis E is common in many parts of the world. It
is usually associated with contaminated water supply in countries with poor sanitation.
After exposure it may take 2-8 weeks for symptoms to appear, and some people have
no symptoms at all.  Symptoms of Hepatitis E include: While it affects all ages, teens
and  young  adults  are  most  likely  to  get  Hepatitis  E.  As  you've  seen  in  this  outbreak,
Hepatitis  E  can  seriously  affect  pregnant  women.  There  is  no  commercially  available
Hepatitis E vaccine, and there is no specific treatment. The sickness usually improves
when  patients  rest  and  get  proper  food  and  hydration.  You're  right  that  ponds  of
standing  water  are  a  health  threat:  they  attract  disease-spreading  mosquitoes,  and
sometimes people drink dirty water right out of them. But that is just one piece of the
puzzle. If you just focus on draining the ponds, it will be a lot of work, and every time it
rains  you'll  have  to  start  over.  Most  importantly,  it  does  not  solve  the  other  water,
sanitation,  and  hygiene  problems  in  the  camp.  Helping  people  with  clean  drinking
water, handwashing, and latrines, is known as WASH, and all these projects work better
together. Even though the other answer choices are also connected to health, choosing
just  one  thing  to  work  on  won't  solve  the  whole  problem.  Hepatitis  E  and  diarrhea
spread in many different ways related to poor hygiene, water quality, and sanitation.
Constantly draining ponds or taking away people's livelihood by removing all domestic
animals  are  not  practical  solutions  for  the  camp.  Helping  people  with  clean  drinking
water, handwashing, and latrines, is known as WASH, and all these projects work better
together. The data shows that people who are around animals are more likely to get
sick. But this association doesn't mean that being around animals is causing people to
get  sick  with  Hepatitis  E.  You've  observed  that  young  women  are  likely  to  do
shepherding  work  in  the  camp.  Young  women  are  also  the  group  most  at  risk  for
Hepatitis  E.  Women  watching  animals  all  day  don't  have  access  to  clean  water  while
they're  working,  so  they  are  more  likely  to  drink  surface  water  that  could  be
contaminated. Also, it doesn't make sense to take people's income and food away by
removing  animals  from  the  camp.  Removing  animals  does  not  solve  the  main  water,
sanitation,  and  hygiene  problems  in  the  camp.  Helping  people  with  clean  drinking
water, handwashing, and latrines, is known as WASH, and all these projects work better
together.  Learn  more  about  the  real-life  outbreak  that  inspired  this  scenario.  This
fictional outbreak was based partly on a real outbreak of Hepatitis E in 4 refugee camps
in South Sudan. CDC sent experts in emergency response, WASH, and Hepatitis to help
solve  this  outbreak  in  2012.  They  collaborated  with  the  United  Nations  High
Commissioner for Refugees and Doctors Without Borders, as well as other humanitarian
health  partners.  The  objectives  of  their  mission  were  to  assess  the  water,  sanitation,
and hygiene (WASH) conditions in the camps. This helped to determine if Hepatitis E
virus  was  present  in  different  water  sources,  the  vulnerability  of  the  population  to
continued  spread  of  this  disease,  and  identified  risk  factors  for  infection.  While  the
disease detectives found that refugees could get clean water, soap, and use latrines,
knowledge of jaundice was low, and few households were using enough chlorine in their
drinking  water  to  make  it  safe.  About  25%  of  refugees  reported  drinking  untreated
surface water from ponds or streams because of poor water supply in the camp. The
team  also  discovered  that  over  20%  of  refugees  had  recently  been  infected  with
Hepatitis E, and more than half of the population was vulnerable to become infected.
Based  on  their  investigation,  the  team  recommended  that  water,  sanitation,  and
hygiene efforts be strengthened in all of the affected camps. They also suggested doing
more investigations to learn more about how taking care of animals is related to the
spread of Hepatitis E. Much like in this outbreak scenario, it took a while to figure out
what  was  really  going  on  in  the  camp.  But  once  they  knew  which  disease  they  were
dealing with, they took action by doing WASH projects to address as many sources of
infection  as  possible.  The  Arizona  Department  of  Public  Health  contacts  you  for  help
after learning that several people in a rural town in Arizona, near the Mexican border,
have developed a rare and grave condition. Within days of feeling ill, paralysis sets in,
making  it  nearly  impossible  for  patients  to  breath  or  move!  Five  are  hospitalized
because of their grave condition. What is it? How did they get it? Is it spreading? Karina
is  a  22-year-old  college  student  who's  studying  to  become  a  Spanish  professor.  She
commutes  from  Renalto,  a  town  in  Arizona  near  the  US-Mexico  border,  to  Saguaro,
Mexico,  Monday  through  Friday  to  attend  the  local  university,  known  for  its  excellent
Spanish curriculum. About 3 weeks ago in late April, Karina had diarrhea and fever for a
few days. She recovered and didn't think much of it. In the past few days she's noticed
unusual numbness and tingling in her hands and feet. Her legs started feeling heavy,
and she's finding it difficult to walk. Then yesterday she was unable to stand up when
she  got  out  of  bed,  and  her  arms  started  feeling  weak  as  well.  For  the  past  month,
Karina has been experiencing back pain. She suspected that it was from all the stress of
finals. She visited her doctor a few weeks ago, but her pain didn't go away. In fact, she
is  feeling  worse!  Frightened  by  these  unusual  symptoms,  Karina  rushes  to  the
emergency room. The doctor isn't sure what it is wrong, but he suspects it might be a
rare  condition  called  Guillain-Barr  syndrome  (GBS).   He's  treated  3  other  patients
suffering from a similar ailment this week. If Karina's doctor confirms that she and the
others  have  GBS,  this  cluster  of  cases  could  indicate  something  even  more  serious!
Guillain-Barr  syndrome  (GBS)  is  a  rare  disorder  in  which  a  person's  own  immune
system damages their nerve cells, causing an acute flaccid paralysis, in which people
develop  weakness  in  their  muscles  that  worsens  over  days  to  a  week  or  so.  The
affected  muscles  are  limp,  and  the  person  has  no  reflexes  when  a  doctor  tests  the
muscles with a hammer. GBS can cause symptoms that last for a few weeks to several
months.  Most  people  recover  fully  from  GBS,  but  some  people  have  lasting  nerve
damage. People sometimes die from problems related to GBS, such as having difficulty
breathing when their lung and chest muscles are involved. Doctors use a series of tests
and a patient's history to diagnose a person with GBS. About 1 out of 100,000 people in
the United States develops GBS each year. When a person has GBS, they usually have
been  sick  with  a  different  infection  first,  like  a  respiratory  infection  (an  infection  that
affects the lungs) or a gastrointestinal infection (an infection that affects the stomach).
It's  too  soon  to  close  the  border  since  you  don't  know  what's  causing  this  mystery
illness and if closing the border will help prevent additional cases. Closing the border
would have a big impact on the economy and the daily activities of people who live in
the border region. You need to work with the local health departments in Arizona and
Mexico to find out how many people have experienced weakness or paralysis without
an obvious cause who may be suffering from GBS. You should monitor the number of
people with GBS to see if there is an increase in the number of people getting sick; this
is called surveillance. It's too soon to know if isolating patients and having well people
stay  at  home  will  help  prevent  them  getting  this  mystery  illness.  There  must  be
something  else  you  could  do!  You  should  work  with  the  local  health  departments  in
Arizona  and  Mexico  to  find  out  how  many  people  have  experienced  weakness  or
paralysis without an obvious cause and may be suffering from GBS. You should monitor
the number of people with GBS to see if there is an increase in the number of people
getting  sick;  this  is  called  surveillance.  You  need  to  work  with  the  local  health
departments  in  Arizona  and  Mexico  to  find  out  how  many  people  have  experienced
weakness or paralysis without an obvious cause and may be suffering from GBS. You
recommend  that  local  officials  look  for  similar  cases  in  the  region  to  figure  out  how
many others may be affected. You will then need to monitor the number of people who
develop GBS to see if there is an increase in the number of people getting sick; this is
called surveillance. Karina's doctor confirms that she has GBS. The local Arizona health
department  informs  you  of  8  more  people  diagnosed  with  GBS  in  April  and  May,
bringing the number to 25. All of them live near the US-Mexico border. This is way more
cases  than  is  normal  in  this  area!  What  is  triggering  the  onset  of  these  cases?  You
decide  to  form  an  outbreak  investigation  team  made  up  of  state,  local,  and  federal
officials to figure out why so many people are getting sick with GBS. First, you interview
the sick patients located on the American side of the border in Renalto, Arizona. Next,
alongside Mexican disease investigators, you travel to the local hospitals in Saguaro to
speak  with  the  GBS  patients  so  you  can  review  medical  records  of  all  those  who  are
sick. You want to learn more about the people who are sick with GBS, including their
symptoms, when they got sick, their recent travel activity, foods they recently ate, and
more. It turns out that some patients can't speak with you since they're paralyzed and
machines  are  helping  them  breathe.  Their  families  help  answer  questions  for  them.
After the interviews are completed, you develop a Characteristics and Activities chart.
The  chart  details  the  responses  of  the  25  people  who  are  sick,  noting  the  town  and
country  they  live  in,  their  age  and  gender,  and  which  towns  they  traveled  to  in  the
weeks  prior  to  getting  GBS.  Several  medical  records  suggest  diarrhea,  with  a  few
specifically  mentioning  laboratory-confirmed  infections  of  Campylobacter  jejuni.
Campylobacter  jejuni  is  a  species  of  bacteria  that  can  cause  disease  in  humans  and
animals.  Many  infections  are  associated  with  eating  raw  or  undercooked  poultry,  or
from  eating  food  contaminated  by  raw  poultry.  These  infections  are  also  spread  by
drinking unpasteurized milk, untreated water, or water that is not treated well enough. 
These bacteria are not usually spread from one person to another, but this can happen
if people drink water or eat food contaminated with diarrhea from an infected person.
Campylobacter  jejuni  infections  are  one  of  the  most  common  causes  of  illness  with
diarrhea in the United States. Most cases occur as isolated, sporadic events and not as
part  of  recognized  outbreaks.  Although  illness  from  Campylobacter  jejuni  is  common,
with an estimated 1.3 million infections in the United States each year, most cases are
not  confirmed  by  laboratory  testing.  People  who  are  sick  typically  have  diarrhea,
cramping, stomach pains, and fever within 2-5 days after being exposed. Some infected
persons do not have any symptoms. The illness usually lasts about 1 week, and most
people  recover  completely  without  any  specific  treatment.  Campylobacter  jejuni
infection can sometimes lead to long-term health problems like arthritis or GBS. Some
simple  food-handling  practices  can  help  prevent  infections  of  Campylobacter  jejuni,
such  as:   The  two  things  many  of  the  patients  in  your  Characteristics  and  Activities
Chart have in common are that many spent time in Renalto, Arizona, and were ill with
diarrhea. Keep up the good work! It only looks like two of the people who are sick have
been  to  San  Pedro,  and  there's  no  mention  of  anyone  having  a  cold.  The  two  things
many of the patients in your Characteristics and Activities Chart have in common is that
many  spent  time  in  Renalto,  Arizona,  and  had  diarrhea.  Keep  working  on  preventing
more  people  from  getting  sick!  The  two  things  many  of  the  patients  in  your
Characteristics and Activities Chart have in common is that many spent time in Renalto,
Arizona, and had diarrhea. Keep working on preventing more people from getting sick!
Most  patients  remember  being  sick  with  diarrhea  before  getting  GBS,  and  a  few
patients tested positive for Campylobacter jejuni infections. You decide to learn more
about  what  may  have  caused  the  stomach  illness,  particularly  since  this  type  of
bacteria can trigger GBS. There is a report of more people who are sick, so you travel to
Renalto, Arizona, to see if you can find more clues to help you find the source of the
GBS outbreak. The number of people who have GBS climbs to 31. In Renalto, there are
6 new cases, one of them recently diagnosed with a Campylobacter jejuni infection. So
far, based on your investigation, you feel confident that Campylobacter jejuni infections
are responsible for the GBS cases for most, if not all, of the patients. Now you need to
find out how they got sick with these bacteria, and make sure other people don't suffer
the same fate. You interview the 6 new patients in Renalto. Then, for each of the 31
GBS  cases,  you  try  to  interview  three  healthy  people  who  are  similar  in  age  and
ethnicity to the people who are sick so they can act as controls. You talk to 75 healthy
people who serve as controls. It is important to compare what the people who are sick
with GBS ate and drank with what the healthy people (controls) ate and drank, as this
can help identify the source of outbreak. You then calculate and study the odds ratio to
see if you can find the source of the outbreak. Renalto is a small city in a rural part of
southern  Arizona.  The  biggest  industries  are  tourism  related  to  a  national  park,
agriculture, raising cattle, and the military. Because the area receives very little rainfall,
local  farms  rely  on  irrigation  water  from  the  Colorado  River  and  from  groundwater
pumped  up  by  wells.  A  case-control  study  is  designed  to  help  determine  if  being
exposed  to  something  (food,  water,  etc.)  is  related  to  the  people  who  are  sick.  To
conduct a case-control study, you must follow the steps below. An odds ratio (OR) is a
measure of association between an exposure and an outcome. The OR represents the
odds that an outcome will occur given a particular exposure, compared to the odds of
the outcome occurring without that exposure. Odds ratios are most commonly used in
case-control  studies,  however  they  can  also  be  used  in  other  study  designs  such  as
cross-sectional  and  cohort  studies  (with  some  modifications  and/or  assumptions).
Chicken is a common source of Campylobacter jejuni infection. Since all the people with
GBS had eaten chicken leading up to getting GBS, and a significantly higher number of
people with GBS ate chicken than healthy controls, you review the types of chicken that
patients reported eating during the interview. It looks like only 18% of the people with
GBS  had  eaten  pork,  which  isn't  that  many.  Chicken  is  a  common  source  of
Campylobacter jejuni infection. Since all the people with GBS had eaten chicken leading
up to getting GBS, and a significantly higher number of people with GBS ate chicken
than  healthy  controls,  you  review  the  types  of  chicken  that  patients  reported  eating
during  the  interview.  Even  though  raw  (unpasteurized)  milk  is  a  common  source  of
Campylobacter  jejuni  infection,  it  looks  like  only  5%  of  the  patients  drank  raw
(unpasteurized)  milk,  which  isn't  that  many.   Chicken  is  a  common  source  of
Campylobacter jejuni infection. Since all the people with GBS had eaten chicken leading
up to getting GBS, and a significantly higher number of people with GBS ate chicken
than  healthy  controls,  you  review  the  types  of  chicken  that  patients  reported  eating
during the interview. While investigating whether chicken could be the source of this
outbreak, you discover that the people with GBS ate different types of chicken (frozen,
fresh, pieces, whole) from various brands sold in big grocery stores on both sides of the
border. It turns out that no single store, restaurant, or chain was reported by more than
a  few  patients.  After  all  this  work,  chicken  doesn't  seem  to  be  the  source  of  the
outbreak  after  all!  None  of  the  foods  that  commonly  cause  Campylobacter  jejuni
infection seem to be the cause of this outbreak. But what about water? Both sick and
well people drank water in some form (as most people do), and almost all of them had
minimal  exposure  to  tap  water  (for  example  brushing  teeth  or  showering).
Contaminated foods are often distributed far and wide, but contamination of tap water
tends to be much more local. Since everyone who is sick spent time in Renalto, Arizona,
you decide to investigate the water systems next. You decide you need to learn more
about  local  water  systems.   You  know  just  where  to  start:  the  environmental  health
experts.  You  and  your  colleagues  meet  with  water  authorities  from  Saguaro  and
Renalto, and assemble a team for testing the local water quality. Together, you review
logbooks of water tests from water samples taken from wells, tap water, river water,
and  irrigation  canals  in  different  neighborhoods.  The  team  also  decides  to  test  other
sources of drinking water, such as kiosks where people fill large bottles of water.  Look
carefully at the log book! Campylobacter jejuni bacteria were found in samples taken
from  a  river  downstream  from  the  waste  water  treatment  plant  discharge  point  in
Renalto,  AZ.  This  was  no  surprise  since  many  people  had  been  ill  with  diarrhea  from
campylobacter  infection.  It  is  common  for  bacteria  to  be  found  in  natural  waterways
around  wastewater  treatment  plants'  discharge  points.  Use  caution  in  interpreting
positive  results  since  water  bodies  can  be  contaminated  by  other  sources  such  as
droppings  from  birds  or  other  wildlife,  or  nearby  water  streams.  Nearby  this  site  is  a
waterfall located under a known bird migration path. However, the rest of the locations,
including  all  of  the  samples  taken  from  drinking  water  sources  and  taps,  tested
negative for the bacteria. Only a few of the sick people drank water from the tap. Most
people living in the area drank bottled water or water from the filling kiosks; but the
kiosks don't seem to be the problem since no two people who were sick reported using
the  same  kiosk.  Also,  the  municipal  tap  water  is  chlorinated  and  it  only  takes  a  little
chlorine  in  water  to  kill  the  Campylobacter  jejuni.  So  you're  stumped.  You're
disappointed to find that many of the tests come up inconclusive. The only site with a
positive  result  for  the  Campylobacter  bacteria  was  a  river  downstream  from  the
wastewater treatment plant discharge point, the rest of the locations tested negative. It
is common for bacteria to be found in natural waterways around wastewater treatment
plants' discharge points. Use caution in interpreting positive results since water bodies
can be contaminated by other sources such as droppings from birds or other wildlife, or
nearby  water  streams.  Nearby  this  site  is  a  waterfall  located  under  a  known  bird
migration  path.  While  there  were  two  locations  where  high  levels  of  "total  coliform
levels"  (other  types  of  bacteria)  were  found,  these  weren't  necessarily  the  kind  of
bacteria that make people sick. This is not enough information to identify the source of
contamination.   Despite  most  people  having  had  a  minimal  level  of  exposure  to  tap
water  (for  example  brushing  their  teeth  or  showering),  only  a  few  of  the  sick  people
drank  water  from  the  tap  which  made  them  susceptible  to  a  higher  dose  of  the
campylobacter  bacteria.  Most  everyone  drank  bottled  water  or  water  from  the  filling
kiosks, but the kiosks don't seem to be the problem since no two people sick reported
using the same kiosk. Also, the municipal tap water is chlorinated, and it only takes a
little chlorine in water to kill Campylobacter. So you're stumped. The only site with a
positive  result  for  the  Campylobacter  bacteria  was  a  river  downstream  from  the
wastewater treatment plant discharge point, the rest of the locations tested negative.
While there were two locations where high levels of total coliform levels of other types
of bacteria were found, these weren't necessarily the kind of bacteria that make people
sick.  Only  a  few  of  the  sick  people  drank  water  from  the  tap;  most  everyone  drank
bottled  water  or  water  from  the  filling  kiosks,  but  the  kiosks  don't  seem  to  be  the
problem since no two people sick reported using the same kiosk. Also, the municipal
tap water is chlorinated, and it only takes a little chlorine in water to kill Campylobacter
jejuni. So you're stumped. After hours of reviewing your notes, it occurs to you  what
if  there  had  been  a  problem  with  chlorination  of  the  drinking  water?  Even  if  people
didn't  drink  tap  water,  they  may  have  used  it  to  rinse  off  some  of  their  food  (like
vegetables  or  fruits  that  people  eat  raw  without  peeling).  You  decide  to  look  back  at
what the patients, like Karina, told you about the fruits and vegetables they ate before
getting  sick.  It  turns  out  that  the  people  who  are  sick  with  GBS  ate  more  fruits  and
vegetables  that  are  typically  eaten  without  cooking  than  the  healthy  people  in  the
control group. People could have been exposed to contaminated tap water even if they
didn't  drink  it.  You  decide  to  look  back  at  the  possibility  of  tap  water  contamination
since the water samples tested only represented a single point in time.  But you still are
not  sure  how  the  tap  water  could  be  the  source  of  the  outbreak  since  chlorine  kills
Campylobacter  jejuni.  You  and  your  team  decide  to  talk  to  local  water  authorities  in
Renalto,  and  learn  the  city  gets  its  water  from  shallow  groundwater  wells.  The
groundwater  has  metals  in  it  that  discolor  the  water  when  chlorine  is  added.
Unfortunately,  some  people  complained  after  receiving  coffee-colored  water  coming
from  their  taps,  so  the  operators  lowered  the  chlorine  dosage  to  reduce  the
discoloration  because  of  the  chlorine.  The  water  authorities  also  mentioned  that  a
recent  earthquake  wreaked  havoc  on  part  of  the  irrigation  canals  of  Renalto  and
ruptured sewage pipes in some neighborhoods. They've been working overtime to fix it.
Next, you decide you need to gather more data about the chlorine levels of the water.  
Your environmental health colleagues design an environmental study to help determine
if groundwater contamination might have been the problem. The environmental study
includes: The log book shows chlorine levels at 50 homes in Renalto on May 9th and
June 1st. You create maps to show the chlorine levels in different sectors of the city. On
the  first  sampling,  on  May  9,  you  notice  lower  chlorine  levels  in  the  far  eastern  and
western sectors than in the rest of the city. You also see that one of the people who has
GBS lives near the eastern area. On the next sampling date, June 1, you see there are
more areas that had low levels of chlorine, and that most of the people who have GBS
live  in  areas  where  the  chlorine  levels  are  low.  About  a  month  before  people  started
getting sick, there were heavy rains and flooding in Renalto, and then the earthquake
happened. Runoff during the flooding from a local Renalto farm that has many cattle, as
well  as  sewage  leaking  into  the  groundwater  from  burst  pipes  after  the  Earthquake
could  have  contaminated  ground  water.   And  the  water  company  was  so  busy
responding to burst pipes, they didn't immediately notice that the automatic chlorinator
failed,  which  allowed  contaminated  water  to  go  from  source  to  tap.  People  in  certain
areas of Renalto may have briefly been at risk for exposure, so anyone exposed to the
contaminated tap water (most likely by washing fruits and vegetables that they later
ate  raw  since  most  people  did  not  drink  the  tap  water)  was  at  risk  for  getting  the
Campylobacter jejuni  infection.  As it turns out,  Karina  was washing  her vegetables in
tap water during the time the chlorinator failed. After looking at all these factors, this
outbreak was the result of many things happening at the same time. The perfect storm
for an unlikely outbreak! Low levels of chlorine were found throughout most of the city.
About a month before people started getting sick, there were heavy rains and flooding
in Renalto, and then the earthquake happened. Runoff during the flooding from a local
Renalto  farm  that  has  many  cattle,  as  well  as  sewage  leaking  into  the  groundwater
from burst pipes after the Earthquake could have contaminated ground water.  And the
water company was so busy responding to burst pipes, they didn't immediately notice
that  the  automatic  chlorinator  failed,  which  allowed  contaminated  water  to  go  from
source  to  tap.  People  in  certain  areas  of  Renalto  may  have  briefly  been  at  risk  for
exposure, so anyone exposed to the contaminated tap water (most likely by washing
fruits and vegetables that they later ate raw since most people did not drink the tap
water) was at risk for getting the Campylobacter jejuni infection. As it turns out, Karina
was washing her vegetables in tap water during the time the chlorinator failed.  After
looking at all these factors, this outbreak was the result of many things happening at
the  same  time.  The  perfect  storm  for  an  unlikely  outbreak!  About  a  month  before
people started getting sick, there were heavy rains and flooding in Renalto, and then
the earthquake happened. Runoff during the flooding from a local Renalto farm that has
many cattle, as well as sewage leaking into the groundwater from burst pipes after the
earthquake  could  have  contaminated  ground  water.   And  the  water  company  was  so
busy  responding  to  burst  pipes,  they  didn't  immediately  notice  that  some  of  the
automatic chlorinators failed, which allowed contaminated water to go from source to
tap. People in certain areas of Renalto may have briefly been at risk for exposure, so
anyone  exposed  to  the  contaminated  tap  water  (most  likely  by  washing  fruits  and
vegetables that they later ate raw since most people did not drink the tap water) was at
risk for getting the Campylobacter jejuni infection. As it turns out, Karina was washing
her vegetables in tap water during the time the chlorinator failed. After looking at all
these factors, this outbreak was the result of many things happening at the same time.
The perfect storm for an unlikely outbreak! CDC Works 24x7 Although this scenario is
not real, there have been other similar binational outbreaks for which CDC worked with
another country to investigate an outbreak. Disease Detectives from local, state, and
federal levels in the United States and Mexico worked together in 2011 to determine
the  reason  for  what  was  the  largest  outbreak  of  acute  flaccid  paralysis  cases  in  the
Western part of the world at the time. Like this scenario, the real outbreak occurred in a
remote  region  along  the  US-Mexico  border,  in  the  states  of  Arizona  and  Sonora
(Mexico).  In  Mexico,  public  health  experts  used  national  reporting  data  to  identify
people  with  GBS  in  Mexico.  In  Arizona,  active  case-finding  and  physician  outreach
helped identify suspected GBS cases. Normally, the expected incidence in the regional
population is four people with GBS per year, but between May 4 and July 21, authorities
found  31  cases  of  acute  flaccid  paralysis;  of  those,  26  classified  as  GBS.  Similar  to
previously  documented  outbreaks,  the  evidence  collected  during  this  outbreak  had
many  factors  that  likely  led  back  to  an  exposure  to  water,  which  possibly  contained
bacteria  such  as  Campylobacter.  The  Disease  Detectives  discovered  that  2  weeks
before suffering paralysis, many of the cases had been sick with diarrhea. Bacteria in
the  water  supply  and  the  increased  risk  of  illness  could  have  been  caused  by
unfavorable  environmental  conditions,  such  as  the  Colorado  River  overflowing,  a
disruption in well pipeline networks, and birds migrating over the region exposing crops
and  waterways  to  possible  infected  feces.  Because  of  this  2011  outbreak,  water  and
environmental  experts  from  the  United  States  and  Mexico  worked  together  to  better
monitor  water  quality  in  the  region  and  prevent  future  health  issues.  Lab-testing
capacity  improved,  allowing  labs  to  use  new  techniques  to  test  for  Campylobacter.  It
was an important milestone in US-Mexico binational outbreak collaboration, and since
then, federal, state, and local public health authorities continue to prevent disease in
this  border  region.  There's  a  mysterious  outbreak  in  a  small  country  in  Northwestern
part of Europe. The local public health department is asking for your help. It's spring
and  several  people  have  been  admitted  into  the  local  hospital  with  pneumonia  and
flu-like  symptoms  -  high  fever,  muscle  aches,  headache,  and  dizziness.   During  this
same  time,  a  general  practitioner  from  a  rural  village  reported  an  increase  in
pneumonia cases among patients in his community. It's not clear what the outbreak is
and how it is spreading.  Your help is needed to apply the A-Z's of epidemiology and
solve  the  case.  It's  late  spring  and  a  39-year-old  history  professor  named  Dieter  has
been enjoying the spring weather by reading outside, taking long hikes, and going on
bike rides through the countryside, zipping past local farms and beautiful scenery. In
early June, Dieter came down with a high fever, headache, and cough. Dieter went to
the doctor and was diagnosed with a viral illness and told to go home, drink plenty of
fluids, and get some rest. Over the next few days, Dieter's symptoms continued to get
worse and he was admitted to a local hospital where he received a chest x-ray and was
diagnosed with pneumonia. Dieter was placed on antibiotics, which didn't seem to help
make him feel any better. Unfortunately, Dieter is not the only one who is sick. While
reviewing  Dieter's  charts,  the  hospital  doctor  notices  that  Dieter  is  one  of  6  patients
admitted to the hospital in the last few weeks.  All had similar symptoms and none have
improved after receiving antibiotics. One of the other patients, Fionna, a stay-at-home
mom who lives on a small cattle ranch was pregnant when she was admitted.  After 5
days  with  a  high  fever,  Fionna  had  a  miscarriage.   Blood  tests  ruled  out  the  most
common  infectious  causes  of  miscarriage.  The  doctor  calls  the  local  department  of
public health, only to learn that Dieter and Fionna are not the only people who are sick.
There is a much larger outbreak happening. The local department of public health tells
you that there are: This brings the total number of people sick to 24.  Most of the sick
are adults, although there are 3 patients under the age of 19. The people seem to be of
different ages, have different careers, live in different regions, and even have different
diagnoses.   You  need  to  figure  out  how  these  people  are  connected,  what  is  causing
this  outbreak,  and  how  the  outbreak  is  spreading.  The  local  health  department  has
begun to collect data on the number of people sick.  So far, many people have similar
symptoms but the diagnoses are all different. You decide to chart the date that people
first  became  sick  in  an  Epi  Curve  to  see  if  you  can  see  a  trend  in  the  data.  An
epidemiologic curve, or epi curve, is a tool used by epidemiologists (better known as
Disease  Detectives),  while  investigating  an  outbreak.  An  epi  curve  can  be  used  to
understand how an outbreak is being spread. While it is still early, it appears that this
outbreak  is  a  point  source  outbreak.  In  a  point  source  outbreak,  people  come  into
contact with the source of the outbreak for a short time (such as a single event). The
number of cases increases rapidly and falls slowly, with most of the cases happening
around  the  same  time.  While  it  is  still  early,  it  appears  that  this  outbreak  is  a  point
source outbreak. In a point source outbreak, people come into contact with the source
of the outbreak for a short time (such as a single event). The number of cases increases
rapidly and falls slowly, with most of the cases happening around the same time. While
it is still early, it appears that this outbreak is a point source outbreak. In a point source
outbreak,  people  come  into  contact  with  the  source  of  the  outbreak  for  a  short  time
(such as a single event). The number of cases increases rapidly and falls slowly, with
most of the cases happening around the same time.  While it is still early, it appears
that this outbreak is a point source outbreak. In a point source outbreak, people come
into contact with the source of the outbreak for a short time (such as a single event).
The  number  of  cases  increases  rapidly  and  falls  slowly,  with  most  of  the  cases
happening around the same time. You're not sure what is causing this outbreak. Fionna
has been sick for 2 weeks and can't shake off the fever or night sweats. She is also one
of 3 people who are now suffering from photophobia (eye sensitivity to light), pain in
muscles  and  joints,  and  difficulty  sleeping.  You  also  don't  know  how  the  sickness  is
being  spread  as  there  are  multiple  people  in  one  family  who  are  sick,  but  in  other
households  only  one  person  in  a  family  is  sick.   You  aren't  sure  if  the  illness  is
contagious. Since Fionna is one of 6 people sick who live on a farm, you decide to ask
all of the sick people what kinds of animals they've come into contact with lately. The
local  public  health  department  interviews  all  the  people  who  are  sick  and  finds  that
while  a  fair  number  of  people  had  contact  with  household  pets  and  farm  animals.  
However,  57.7%  of  people  sick  did  not  have  any  contact  with  animals.  During  your
interviews, you learn that local veterinarian was called out to a local goat farm about a
month ago because of an "abortion storm" (an episode in which several pregnant goats
miscarry  at  about  the  same  time).   You  find  that  7.7%  of  people  who  are  sick  had
contact  with  an  animal  that  had  recently  given  birth  or  had  an  abortion.  A  zoonotic
disease can be passed between animals and humans. Zoonotic diseases can be caused
by viruses, bacteria, parasites, and fungi. These diseases are very common. Scientists
estimate  that  more  than  6  out  of  every  10  infectious  diseases  in  humans  are  spread
from animals. People can get zoonotic diseases in many different ways, including: It's
too soon to tell what's causing this outbreak.  Even though approximately 58% of the
people  did  not  have  contact  with  an  animal,  you  can't  rule  animals  out  just  yet,
especially since you just learned about the abortion storm. Keep investigating to find
out  what's  causing  this  outbreak.  It's  too  soon  to  tell  what's  causing  this  outbreak.  
Even though approximately 58% of the people did not have contact with an animal, you
can't  rule  animals  out  just  yet,  especially  since  you  just  learned  about  the  abortion
storm. Keep investigating to find out what's causing this outbreak. You're correct that
it's  too  soon  to  tell  what's  causing  this  outbreak.   Even  though  around  58%  of  the
people  did  not  have  contact  with  an  animal,  you  can't  rule  animals  out  just  yet,
especially since you just learned about the abortion storm. Keep investigating to find
out what's causing this outbreak. There are more than 50 cases of sick people and the
numbers keep rising every day.  You haven't figured out what is making everyone sick
or how it is spreading. Although nearly 58% of the sick haven't had any contact with
animals,  you  decide  to  follow  up  on  the  tip  about  the  goat  farm  where  there  was  an
abortion  storm  a  few  weeks  ago.  Herman,  the  owner  of  the  farm,  says  he  has  about
1,000 goats which produce goat milk and cheeses which he sells throughout the region,
including at the local famer's market. In the last 2 months, 35 pregnant goats on his
farm  have  aborted  and  Herman  says  his  farm  is  not  the  only  farm  to  have  a  recent
abortion storm. You ask Herman more about the abortion storm, as this can be a sign of
infection with a bacteria called Coxiella burnetii which causes a disease called Q fever.
Sheep, goats, and cattle are the animals which typically spread Q fever to people. The
bacteria  that  causes  Q  fever  are  shed  in  the  body  fluids,  including  reproductive
materials, of infected animals. Herman mentions that 3 other local farms have also had
recent  abortion  storms.   He  also  tells  you  that  he  and  his  oldest  son  had  flu-like
symptoms about a month ago. They never went to the doctor, and they got better after
about a week. The other 4 family members never felt sick. You begin to wonder if their
sicknesses could be part of the same outbreak you're investigating. Q Fever, or Coxiella
burnetii, the bacterium which causes Q Fever is usually shed in animals' reproductive
fluids, milk products, and manure. It is very hardy and can survive in the environment
for long periods and can be spread over long distances by the wind. Many people who
get Q fever will never have symptoms; others will get a bad flu-like illness which will
eventually  fade.   A  small  percentage  of  people  will  develop  severe  symptoms  or  a
chronic  infection.  Those  with  heart  conditions  are  most  at  risk  of  developing  major
complications,  and  women  who  were  infected  during  a  pregnancy  are  at  risk  for
miscarriages. Testing the goats for the Coxiella burnetii bacterium is the right answer! 
This is one test that you have a perfect score on! Before you decide to take additional
actions such as quarantine the goats or warning the public, you first need to be certain
what is causing this outbreak. Testing the goats for the Coxiella burnetii bacterium is
the right answer.  Before you decide to take additional actions such as quarantine the
goats or warning the public, you first need to be certain what is causing this outbreak.
Testing the goats for the Coxiella burnetii bacterium is the right answer.  Before you
decide to take additional actions such as quarantine the goats or warning the public,
you  first  need  to  be  certain  what  is  causing  this  outbreak.  After  testing  the  goats  on
Herman's farm and the 3 other farms that recently had abortion storms, you discover
the  goats  on  these  farms  are  infected  with  Coxiella  burnetii,  the  bacterium  which
causes Q fever. Widespread testing of nearby farms reveals that several farms in the
area have goats and sheep with Q fever. Ninety-five people are sick, but the diagnosis
have been different for many people.  There are several aspects of Q fever that make it
challenging for healthcare providers to diagnose and treat.  The symptoms vary from
patient to patient and can be difficult to distinguish from other diseases. The symptoms
usually  develop  within  2-3  weeks  of  exposure,  although  as  many  as  half  of  humans
exposed to Coxiella burnetii do not show symptoms. When the hospital doctor treating
Dieter, Fionna, and several others who have similar symptoms, learns that a local farm
has recently had abortion storms, caused by Coxiella burnetii, the doctor suspects that
the patients might be suffering from Q fever.   He orders test results for each of the
patients  in  his  care.  As  the  first  positive  results  come  in,  the  doctor  alerts  the  local
health department who promptly informs other doctors and hospitals in the area.  As
more and more cases are reported to the local health department, you begin to figure
out how this outbreak is spreading. An early diagnosis of Q fever must be made solely
on a doctor's suspicion.  Since Q fever symptoms are similar to many other illnesses,
diagnosing  Q  fever  can  be  challenging  and  may  be  missed.  Lab  tests  often  appear
negative in the first 7-10 days of illness.  Therefore, healthcare providers must use their
judgment  to  treat  patients  based  on  suspicion  alone.  Healthcare  providers  may  find
important information in the patient's history and physical examination which may aid
in the diagnosis. Information such as recent travel to rural or agricultural communities
where infected livestock may be present is helpful in making a diagnosis. Treatment is
most effective if started within the first 3 days.  Therefore, doctors should never delay
treatment until lab tests confirm Q fever. With 95 people sick with Q fever, you work to
figure out what all the people have in common and how the outbreak is spreading.  You
start by reviewing patients' medical records and interviewing all who are sick. You learn
that  most  of  the  people  sick  are  men  (60%),  aged  40  -  60  years  (68%),  and  that
pneumonia was the most common early diagnosis (62%). You also learn that only 3.2%
of the patients were working in agriculture and 0.5% in the meat-processing industry. 
Since there isn't a trend that helps you understand how the outbreak is spreading, you
continue  your  research.  Next,  you  look  at  where  the  goat  farms  with  the  abortion
storms are located and where the people who got sick live.  You notice that many of the
sick live within 5 km of an infected farm, but that's still a good distance away.  Since
you know that Q fever can be spread by the wind, you look at the number of people
who got sick each week and overlay the number of days with strong winds in that week.
 Looking at the data, you notice that during the week where there was a large abortion
storm, there were also strong winds.  In the 2-3 weeks that followed, there was a large
increase  in  the  number  of  people  getting  sick.  You're  exactly  right,  the  greatest  risk
factor  for  developing  Q  fever  was  the  strength  of  the  winds  following  the  abortion
storms.   You  are  one  savvy  detective.   Now  that  you  know  what  is  causing  this
outbreak, how can you help prevent this from happening again? The greatest risk factor
for  developing  Q  fever  was  the  strength  of  the  winds  following  the  abortion  storms.  
Now that you know what is causing this outbreak, how can you help prevent this from
happening again? The greatest risk factor for developing Q fever was the strength of
the  winds  following  the  abortion  storms.   Now  that  you  know  what  is  causing  this
outbreak, how can you help prevent this from happening again? A disease detective's
job is never done! Over the course of the next 3 years, dozens of disease detectives
worked to control this outbreak. As one of the largest outbreaks of Q fever in history,
it's your job to figure what can be done in the future to control and prevent this from
happening again. To do this, you decide to review all sides of this outbreak to better
understand what happened and why. In looking at the data, you see that over the last 3
years, 3,525 people got sick from Q fever and 749 people were hospitalized.  During
this time, abortion waves because of Coxiella burnetii were reported on 28 goat farms
and 2 sheep farms. Some goat farms had abortion rates up to 60%. As the lead disease
detective  on  this  case,  you  also  need  to  think  about  health  education  and  ways  to
educate the public about Q fever.  It's your job to create strategies for educating the
public  and  trying  to  change  health  behaviors  to  prevent  a  new  outbreak.  You
recommend and help the government create a mass education program, complete with
materials targeted to the public, veterinarians, physicians, and the news media. To help
stop  the  spread  of  Q  fever,  you  recommend  to  the  government  various  veterinary
measures,  including  new  hygiene  procedures,  limiting  the  movement  of  goats/sheep,
and placing a temporary ban on new breeding.  Based on your research, you believe
that  these  measures  will  control  the  outbreak.  However,  the  federal  government
decides to make a controversial decision to slaughter more than 50,000 dairy goats on
55  of  the  country's  nearly  400  farms  to  prevent  the  disease  from  spreading  further.
Last, you research the effectiveness of the educational campaigns you recommended. 
You'd like to identify trends and regional differences in public opinions and behaviors. 
As  a  disease  detective,  you  want  to  learn  which  measures  were  most  effective  in
improving  awareness  of  Q  fever  and  increasing  the  number  of  people  who  took
preventative  measures  to  protect  themselves.   So,  you  decide  to  conduct  a  study  to
learn  more.  In  your  study,  you  find  that  public  knowledge  about  Q  fever  increased
significantly  during  the  outbreak.  You  also  learn  that  the  assumed  severity  of  the
disease also increased among the public. However, the most surprising thing you learn
is  that  even  though  more  people  were  aware  of  the  diseases  and  the  severity,  there
were low levels of vulnerability (only 15% of people thought that they were susceptible
to getting Q fever) presumed. While you may be a risk taker, it's very concerning that
only a small number of people thought that they were vulnerable to getting Q fever.  If
people  do  not  think  they  are  at  risk,  they  are  not  likely  to  comply  with  preventative
measures. It's important that people perceive a risk (when there is one) and implement
health  behavior  changes  to  protect  themselves.   However,  you  don't  want  to
unnecessarily worry or scare the public.  A job of a disease detective is a tricky one and
is  never  done!  While  you  may  be  a  risk  taker,  it's  very  concerning  that  only  a  small
number of people thought that they were vulnerable to getting Q fever.  If people do
not think they are at risk, they are not likely to comply with preventative measures. It's
important that people sense a risk (when there is one) and implement health behavior
changes  to  protect  themselves.   However,  you  don't  want  to  unnecessarily  worry  or
scare the public.  A disease detective's job is a tricky one and is never done! While you
may be a risk taker, it's very concerning that only a small number of people thought
that they were vulnerable to getting Q fever.  If people do not think they are at risk,
they  are  not  likely  to  comply  with  preventative  measures.  It's  important  that  people
perceive a risk (when there is one) and implement health behavior changes to protect
themselves.  However, you don't want to unnecessarily worry or scare the public.  A job
of a disease detective is a tricky one and is never done! Although this scenario is not
real,  there  have  been  other  similar  outbreaks  in  other  European  countries.   This
outbreak is not typical, as this outbreak affected a large number of individuals. In fact,
the CDC only receives reports of a couple of hundred cases a year as cases of Q fever
are  grossly  under  reported.  Since  Q  fever  may  resemble  other  diseases,  be  mild,  or
even  cause  no  symptoms  in  some  people,  cases  of  human  Q  fever  are  likely  under
recognized  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere.  Around  3%  of  the  healthy  adult  U.S.
population and 10-20% of persons in high-risk occupations (veterinarians, farmers, etc.)
have antibodies to C. burnetii, suggesting past infection. There are several aspects of Q
fever  that  make  it  challenging  for  healthcare  providers  to  diagnose  and  treat.   The
symptoms  vary  from  patient  to  patient  and  can  be  difficult  to  distinguish  from  other
diseases.   Treatment  is  more  likely  to  be  effective  if  started  in  the  first  3  days  of
symptoms.  Diagnostic  tests  based  on  the  detection  of  antibodies  will  often  appear
negative in the first 7-10 days of illness.  Therefore, healthcare providers must use their
judgment  to  treat  patients  based  on  clinical  suspicion  alone.  After  an  adventurous
spring  break  trip,  a  group  of  fraternity  brothers  have  come  down  with  fever,  body
aches, eye pain, rash, and bleeding!  With school back in session, they need to get back
on their feet ASAP.  Can you find out what's gotten into these feverish frat brothers?
Four days after returning from an epic spring break trip, Craig and 2 of his housemates
went  to  the  campus  clinic  with  fever,  chills,  and  body  aches.  These  are  common  flu
symptoms  and  it  is  flu  season,  but  there  hasn't  been  much  flu  on  campus  this  year.
Craig  is  the  first  to  see  the  doctor,  who  runs  a  rapid  test  for  influenza  (flu).  The  test
comes back positive. Knowing that the 3 fraternity brothers are housemates, the doctor
thinks that they all probably have the flu.  She suggests that they stay in their rooms to
avoid getting others sick and get some rest When Craig arrived at the clinic he reported
pain all over his body, fever, an intense headache, and coughing. Brian and Jordan, who
came to the clinic with Craig, had fevers above 102F. Brian said it started when he was
in class the previous afternoon. He walked into class feeling fine, but suddenly felt like
something was wrong, and when class was over he was so tired he headed straight to
bed.  Jordan  said  he  felt  bad  earlier  in  the  day,  with  a  headache  that  didn't  let  him
concentrate. The next morning, Jordan went back to the clinic feeling worse and with an
odd-looking  rash  on  his  chest.  The  doctor  was  concerned  and  ordered  a  flu  test.  As
Jordan  waited  for  the  result,  3  more  sick  frat  brothers  came  in.  Each  of  them  had  a
fever,  two  reported  splitting  headaches  and  one  had  nausea.  He  said  he  felt  like  his
"bones were breaking"! These symptoms are concerning and seem less like flu. When
Jordan's  flu  test  comes  back  negative,  the  doctor  calls  a  Disease  Detective  for  help!
Nausea (noun): the feeling you have in your stomach when you think you are going to
vomit.  Correct!  Getting  more  information  on  how  the  fraternity  brothers'  bodies  are
responding  to  their  illness  may  shed  some  light  on  what  is  causing  the  sickness,
whether it's the flu or something else. Keep going, you have a lot of work ahead of you!
Not  quite.  Right  now  you  don't  have  any  evidence  that  the  fraternity  brothers  are
suffering from an illness caused by a bacteria. Over-prescribing antibiotics is one way
that  some  bacteria  develop  resistance,  so  careful  decision-making  in  prescribing
antibiotics  is  important.  Keep  going,  you  have  a  lot  of  work  ahead  of  you!  Not  quite.
While  this  could  help  rule  out  influenza,  some  of  the  brothers  are  showing  non-flu
symptoms.  Also, Jordan has already tested negative for flu. By conducting a blood test
you can get more information on how the fraternity brothers' bodies are responding to
their illness and may shed some light on what is causing the sickness, whether it's the
flu or something else. Keep going, you have a lot of work ahead of you! The phone at
the clinic has been ringing off the hook all day with worried parents calling to find out
what is wrong with their sons. Meanwhile, the blood tests come back with evidence of a
viral infection that is not the flu. In the last couple of hours, 3 of the 6 sick fraternity
brothers have been admitted to the hospital.  Their blood cell counts are low, which can
result in severe bruising, nose bleeds, and bloody gums! To make matters worse, the
clinic  just  found  out  that  there  are  4  more  sick  fraternity  brothers  with  symptoms
similar to the other guys! In the course of interviewing the patients, you find out that 20
fraternity  brothers  went  on  a  trip  to  the  Caribbean.  They  had  been  planning  the  trip
ever since Craig had found a deal on some bungalows near the beach. You also learn
that the fraternity brothers spent 7 days and 6 nights in the Caribbean.  They returned
to campus on March 22nd, the day before classes were back in session. To get a better
handle on the data you've collected, you make an epidemic curve, which can help you
determine the pathogen (bacteria or virus) that's infected the brothers. Since all of the
brothers got sick 2-6 days after returning to campus, you look for a pathogen that has
an  incubation  period  (the  time  from  when  a  person  gets  infected  to  the  time  when
symptoms  start)  of  3  to  12  days.  An  epidemic  (epi)  curve  shows  how  an  outbreak
changes  over  time.  It  includes:   Learn  more  about  epi  curves.  The  brothers  had  to
unexpectedly share their bungalows with some annoying mosquitoes, and after 1 night
of being bitten, half of the group left and got hotel rooms. But they didn't let this pesky
setback ruin their vacation.  In fact, they met up every day to hang out and soak up the
"island life"trying local cuisines (including foods that may not have been cooked in the
most  sanitary  conditions),  surfing,  hiking,  and  lounging  by  the  pool.  From  what  they
remember, no one felt sick on the trip. Not quite.  If they had all been exposed for a
long period of time, their dates of when they first got sick (illness onset) would probably
not have been so close together. Instead, notice how all of the brothers felt sick around
the same short period of time.  This means that they were exposed to the same disease
source for a short amount of time. Your job now is to find out what they were exposed
to that has made them so sick. But hurry, time is of the essence! You nailed it!  Since
the dates of when each brother first got sick (illness onset) are clustered around each
other, it's likely that they were all exposed around the same time. Your job now is to
find out what they were exposed to that has made them so sick. But hurry, time is of
the essence! If the brothers were passing the disease to each other, you would expect
to see sporadic dates of when each brother first felt sick (illness onset), which would
look like many peaks on the epi curve. Instead, notice how all of the brothers felt sick
around the same short period of time.  This means that they were exposed to the same
disease source for a short amount of time. Your job now is to find out what they were
exposed to that has made them so sick. But hurry, time is of the essence! You take a
closer look at the activities each fraternity brother participated in while on vacation. 
Maybe there is a link between a specific activity and the illness. The doctor calls to let
you know that another fraternity brother stopped by the clinic with similar symptoms as
his friends.  That brings the total case count to 11! You organize the list of activities
that each fraternity brother did on vacation into a table. Then, you calculate the attack
rate for each activity based on those who did and did not participate.  If any activity
stands out, it may be a potential cause or link to the sickness. Tip: To identify the likely
source of the outbreak, look for an activity that has a high attack rate among those who
performed a specific activity AND a low attack rate among those who did not. That's
right!  The brothers who stayed in the mosquito-infested bungalows during the entire
vacation  were  most  likely  to  get  sick.  So,  it  seems  like  you  have  a  mosquito-borne
pathogen on your hands. Keep going, you need to figure out what the disease is! Close,
but not quite.  Although several of the sick brothers went swimming, not all of them did
and  many  of those who  went swimming  are well. What should  grab  your attention  is
that  the  attack  rate  is  highest  for  the  brothers  who  were  in  the  mosquito-infested
bungalows.  It  looks  like  mosquitoes  could  be  the  cause  of  all  this  trouble.  But  keep
going, you need to figure out what the disease is. Nope. Lots of the brothers, both sick
and well, ate at street vendors and in restaurants, so food is less likely to be the culprit.
Notice that the attack rate is highest for the brothers who were in the mosquito-infested
bungalows.  It  looks  like  mosquitoes  could  be  the  cause  of  all  this  trouble.  But  keep
going, you need to figure out what the disease is. After deciding that this outbreak may
have  been  caused  by  a  mosquito-transmitted  pathogen,  you  ask  the  doctors  at  the
clinic  and  hospital  to  order  tests  for  mosquito-borne  diseases.   A  few  days  later,  lab
tests  for  several  patients  come  back  positive  for  dengue  virus  infection.   Dengue
viruses  are  transmitted  through  the  bite  of  infected  mosquitoes.  People  with  dengue
can have fever, headache, body and eye pain, weakness, and in some cases bleeding
(i.e.  bruising  and  nosebleeds).  The  fraternity  brothers  were  probably  exposed  to  the
virus at the bungalows, since that's where they all stayed for at least 1 night.  While all
of the brothers reported at least a few bites, even those who didn't get sick, some may
have  been  bitten  by  mosquitoes  that  weren't  infected  with  the  virus.  The  species  of
mosquito  that  transmit  dengue  are  Aedes  aegypti  (ay-deez  -gyp-tai)  and  Aedes
albopictus (ay-deez al-boh-pik-tus), which live in and around homes and typically bite
people  during  the  day.   Although  they  are  usually  most  abundant  in  the  summer
months, these mosquitoes are present year round.  So, people who live in or travel to
tropic or sub-tropics regions, including the Caribbean, can get sick with dengue at any
time  of  the  year.   (Areas  where  a  disease  is  naturally  occurring  are  referred  to  as
endemic regions). It usually takes 4-10 days to begin feeling sick after being bitten by
an  infected  mosquito.  Common  symptoms  of  dengue  include  fever,  aches  and  pains,
rash,  fatigue,  and  minor  hemorrhagic  manifestations  (e.g.,  nose  bleed,  unusual
bruising,  bleeding  from  the  gums,  etc.).  Although  there  is  no  specific  medication  or
vaccine  available  to  treat  or  prevent  dengue,  seeking  medical  attention  at  the  early
stages of the illness can reduce the likelihood of death for people who may experience
more  serious  symptoms.   The  best  way  to  avoid  getting  dengue  is  to  wear  mosquito
repellent, and sleep in places that have air conditioning and/or screens on windows and
doors.  Unless  there  is  risk  of  passing  the  disease  directly  from  person-to-person,  and
with dengue there is not, it's not necessary to quarantine the brothers. Instead, the first
step  is  to  notify  the  local  health  department  so  they  can  try  to  prevent  others  from
getting sick. Keep going! You're so close to solving the outbreak. Not a bad guess, but
this is probably going too far. We don't yet know how widespread the dengue activity is
in  the  region,  so  making  a  blanket  travel  restriction  is  probably  not  appropriate.
Instead, the first step is to notify the local health department so they can try to prevent
others from getting sick. Keep going!  You're so close to solving the outbreak. Right!
Although  dengue  is  endemic  throughout  the  Caribbean,  the  local  health  department
needs to be notified of these cases so that they can try to prevent others from getting
sick  by  initiating  mosquito  control  campaigns  (like  spraying  to  kill  mosquitoes).  Keep
going! You're so close to solving the outbreak. Now that you've figured out what made
the fraternity brothers sick, your job is over, right?  Not quite! You receive a call from
the  university  clinic  informing  you  that  another  fraternity  brother,  Alex,  has  been
hospitalized with what they suspect are dengue-like symptoms. However, Alex stayed
on campus during spring break and it's been about 3 weeks since the brothers returned
from the Caribbean! What's going on? One of the biggest risk factors for getting dengue
is  having  a  household  member  or  neighbor  who  recently  had  the  illness.   This  is
because  the  mosquitoes  that  transmit  dengue  (Aedes  aegypti  and  Aedes  albopictus)
live  nearby  and  inside  homes.   When  someone  is  home  sick  with  dengue,  the
mosquitoes  feed  on  them  and  then  become  infected.   After  10  days  or  so,  the
mosquitoes become infectious and can transmit the virus to humans when they feed
again.  If  you  reside  in  a  part  of  the  world  that  has  Aedes  mosquitoes  and  live  in  the
same  household  or  near  someone  who  has  dengue,  it's  very  important  to  take  the
following  steps  to  protect  yourself:  It  looks  like  the  fraternity  brothers  introduced  the
dengue  virus  to  campus.   Since  there  are  mosquitoes  in  the  area  that  can  carry  the
disease,  a  few  probably  bit  the  sick  brothers  and  are  now  infecting  others.   In  other
words, there's a local dengue outbreak!
                                                                                                
                                                                                                 To confirm your suspicion
that the 2 outbreaks are linked, you update the epi curve to see if the time sequence
matches.
                                                                                                
                                                                                             Yes!  Before you do anything
else, call the local health officials. They need to know about this case so that they can
notify  health  care  providers  in  the  area  to  be  on  the  lookout  for  dengue  cases,  and
make recommendations to the public. Well done! You solved the outbreak. Oops, you're
getting ahead of yourself. It's the responsibility of the local health department to notify
other hospitals, not the Disease Detective. Well done though. You solved the outbreak!
Although the media may want to know about this outbreak, there are more important
steps  to  take  first.  Call  the  local  health  department  so  they  can  notify  health  care
providers  in  the  area  to  be  on  the  lookout  for  dengue  cases,  and  make
recommendations  to  the  public.  Well  done  though.  You  solved  the  outbreak!  This
fictional  outbreak  scenario  was  inspired  by  two  real-life  outbreaks.  In  2010,  US
missionaries  went  on  a  week-long  trip  to  Haiti.  After  staying  in  a  house  with  no  air
conditioning and windows that had no screens, 7 of the 25 missionaries became ill with
dengue after they returned to the US.  5 of the 7 cases were then hospitalized. All of the
missionaries  recovered,  but  the  patients'  physicians  and  family  members  were  very
worried about the "mystery illness" that they all had.  CDC's Dengue Branch, including
EIS officers, worked with the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and
Georgia Department of Public Health to investigate the cases, collect specimens, and
identify risk factors for infection.  It turns out that most of the missionaries didn't know
that Haiti was endemic (naturally occurring) for dengue, so they didn't wear mosquito
repellent  during  their  visit.  The  second  part  of  the  scenario  was  based  on  recent
experiences in south Florida, where travelers returning from the Caribbean introduced
the virus. After local mosquitoes bit the infected travelers they transmitted it to other
people in Florida, resulting in a local dengue outbreak. You'll need a strong stomach if
you  want  to  solve  this  outbreak!  Twenty-eight  people,  mostly  kids,  have  come  down
with  a  nasty  stomach  bug  in  one  California  county.  Diarrhea,  vomiting,  stomach
cramps, the works! This is a bad illness, and the fact that so many people in one county
got  it  quickly  is  suspicious  of  a  foodborne  illness.   There  are  already  6  people  in  the
hospital. We need your help to find the source before anyone else gets sick, especially
if  there  is  a  contaminated  food  still  on  the  market!   It's  early  June,  the  last  week  of
school for this California community, and everyone's getting ready for summer break.
But the worst illness of the year has waited until now to rear its head! Over a 3 day
period, 1 county health department received reports of 25 kids and 3 adults who are
sick with diarrhea, vomiting, fever, and stomach cramps. All but 2 of the sick kids go to
the same elementary school. One of the sick adults is a teacher at the school, too. The
health  department  follows  up  with  the  doctors  who've  been  treating  the  cases  and
learns that several physicians have ordered lab tests on their patients' stool samples to
see what kind of infection is causing their symptoms. The tests indicate Salmonella, a
type of bacteria. The health department then asks the hospital laboratories to send the
isolates to the public health laboratory so they can determine the "DNA fingerprint" of
the  Salmonella  bacteria.  Just  like  humans,  Salmonella  bacteria  have  unique  "DNA
fingerprints". As you compare the test results, you realize that the "DNA fingerprints"
match for all of the sick people, which means that they're infected with the same strain
of Salmonella. From now on, we'll call this the "outbreak strain". You need to find out
what the source of the outbreak is before more people get sick! One of the first things
you need to do is to make an epidemic curve, which is also known as an epi curve. This
shows how an outbreak changes over time. It includes:  Epi curves are updated as new
data come in, so they are always changing. The shape of the curve can provide clues
about the possible source of an outbreak.  Learn how to read an epi curve.  What is
Salmonella?  Salmonella  is  a  bacterium  that  causes  an  infection  called  salmonellosis.
Most people infected with Salmonella get diarrhea, fever, and abdominal cramps 12 to
72 hours after they're infected. The illness usually lasts 4 to 7 days, and most people
recover without treatment.  For some people, like children under the age of 5, people
with weakened immune systems, and older adults over the age of 65, the illnesses can
be more severe. Sometimes the diarrhea can be so bad that the person needs to be
hospitalized. In some cases, the infection can spread from a person's intestines to the
blood stream, and can cause death unless treated promptly with antibiotics.  Although
the  majority  of  infections  are  foodborne  (e.g.,  from  animal  or  plant-derived  foods),
zoonotic  (from  infected  animals)  Salmonella  infections  are  an  important  public  health
problem.  DNA is short for deoxyribonucleic acid, which carries genetic information in
the cells of animals, plants, bacteria, and some viruses.  DNA provides instructions on
how living organisms and viruses should look, grow, and sometimes behave.  It can also
be  used  to  identify  one  organism  from  another,  just  like  a  fingerprint.    That's  right!
Because  so  many  of  the  sick  people  first  felt  ill  on  May  18,  and  since  people  usually
show symptoms 12-72 hours after being exposed to Salmonella, it's likely that they first
got the bacteria on May 16 or a day or so earlier.  Keep investigating before it spreads! 
The epi curve shows you that most of the sick people first showed their symptoms on
May 18. But because Salmonella usually has an incubation period of 12-72 hours, which
is the time it takes after being exposed to a germ to start feeling sick, it's likely that
they first got the bacteria on May 16 or a day or so sooner. It also could have been May
17.  Keep investigating before it spreads!  Sorry, most people had already been sick for
a day or two by May 19, so this can't be the day they were first exposed to the bacteria.
Unless they had a time machine or something.  Keep investigating! Most of the sick kids
go to the town's main elementary school. One of their teachers, Lisa, isn't sick, but she
blames  herself  for  the  illnesses.  She  took  a  large  group  on  a  field  trip  to  the  local
community garden on May 16, and she wonders if the kids ate something bad at the
picnic. They had brought boxed lunches from the cafeteria, but she wonders if she left
them out in the heat too long before the kids ate them.  She's also worried that some of
the kids played in the small stream at the garden, as there were posted signs warning
that it might have high levels of bacteria in it.  You interview the sick people and the
parents of the sick children to find out what the cases have in common. You need to
find out what foods they ate, what activities they did, and what kinds of animals they've
been  around  during  the  week  before  they  got  sick.  Since  most  of  them  went  on  the
school field trip, a lot of the cases ate the same foods. You notice that many of them
also have pets at home, which can spread germs to people. In addition to the sick kids
who went on the field trip, there are two sick kids and one sick adult who don't seem to
have any connection to the school. To avoid Salmonella infection, be sure to:  Sorry, not
quite.  You  might  have  heard  that  there  have  been  outbreaks  where  people  got  sick
from eating chicken contaminated with Salmonella. That's true, and we will keep that in
mind, but we should also consider other possible sources.  While it may seem that 14 of
the  28  (50%)  sick  people  ate  chicken  is  a  high  number,  there's  another  activity  that
occurred even more frequently that may be causing the illnesses. Notice that 26 of the
28 (93%) sick people visited the local community garden before they got sick.  It's time
to take a field trip of your own and find out what happened at the community garden! 
Good  answer!  While  it's  true  that  there  have  been  recent  outbreaks  of  Salmonella
infection  due  to  contact  with  pets  (like  small  turtles  and  hedgehogs)  or  from  eating
contaminated foods, (like cantaloupe, peanut butter, or chicken) you didn't let that fool
you.   Instead,  you  noticed  that  26  of  the  28  (93%)  sick  people  went  to  the  local
community  garden  before  they  got  sick.  That  means  you  need  to  find  out  what
happened  there.   You're  doing  great.  Keep  going!   Good  try,  but  not  quite.  Perhaps
you've  heard  that  there  have  been  past  outbreaks  where  people  were  infected  with
Salmonella from pets, including small turtles and hedgehogs. That's true, and we will
keep  that  in  mind,  but  we  should  also  consider  other  possible  sources.   Instead,  you
notice that 26 of the 28 (93%) sick people went to the local community garden before
they got sick.  It's time to take a field trip of your own and find out what happened at
the community garden!  Most of the sick people (26 out of 28) went to the community
garden. Twenty of them came as part of the school field trip on a Friday, and another 6
went there the next day. You ask one of the teachers, Lisa, more about the field trip to
find out what her kids did.  She tells you that 75 kids from her school visited the garden.
A gardener showed them where they grow vegetables and flowers, and the kids helped
dig holes and plant seeds in the soil. After lunch, they played in a sand box and in an
adobe  hut.  A  few  visited  the  chicken  coop  and  a  couple  others  played  in  the  nearby
stream. She doesn't think any of them visited the beekeeper's area or the goat pen. 
Bad  news:  5  more  people  from  the  same  community  have  been  identified  with  the
outbreak  strain  of  Salmonella!  But  this  doesn't  necessarily  mean  that  they  were
infected  by  the  same  source  as  the  earlier  group  of  sick  people.  You'll  need  to  work
quickly  to  find  out  if  there  is  a  connection  between  the  two  groups.   To  get  a  better
sense of what it was at the community garden that potentially made people sick, you
also need to talk to people who went to the community garden but aren't sick. So you
talk to every child (or their parent) and teacher who went on the field trip, whether they
later got sick or not.  You need to ask each person what they did at the garden so you
can calculate the "attack rate" for each exposure that might have made people sick. So,
you quickly to try to contact as many of the sick and well persons who went on the field
trip. You were able to interview 20 sick people and 55 people who didn't get sick about
what  they  did  at  the  garden.  To  identify  the  likely  source  of  the  outbreak,  look  for  a
high attack rate among those who participated in a specific activity AND a low attack
rate among those who did not participate.  The kids' teacher may have been worried
about the level of bacteria in the stream, but the data did not show that the kids who
played in the stream were any more likely to get sick than those that did not.  What
should grab your attention are the attack rates for people who played in the sandbox
(68%) and people who had contact with the chickens (67%). The attack rates among
those who did not do these things are much lower.  These higher attack rates mean you
should investigate these activities more closely.  You need to take a closer look to solve
the outbreak!  It's true that 19 of the people who dug in the garden got sick. But lots of
healthy  people  did  that,  too,  and  there  is  only  a  small  difference  in  the  attack  rates
between those who did and those who did not.  What should grab your attention are the
attack rates for people who played in the sandbox (68%) and people who had contact
with the chickens (67%). These higher attack rates mean you should investigate these
activities more closely.  You need to take a closer look to solve the outbreak!  Great
job!  You're  right,  the  attack  rate  for  people  who  played  in  the  sandbox  is  68%.  The
attack  rate  for  those  that  did  not  play  in  the  sandbox  was  only  8%.   That  is  a  big
difference.  You may have also noticed that people who visited the chicken coop also
had a high attack rate at 67%, while the attack rate was only 24% for those that did
not.  Those  two  things  most  likely  have  something  to  do  with  the  outbreak.   Keep
investigating!  It might seem strange that two seemingly unrelated things would both
have pretty high attack rates. But then you talk to one of the workers at the community
garden, and it starts to make more sense!  It turns out that the night before the field
trip someone forgot to latch the door of the chicken coop. When the gardener showed
up  early  Friday  morning,  the  chickens  were  loose!  They  were  having  a  great  time
digging around in the sandbox and searching for scraps of food under the picnic tables.
Since  the  chickens  spent  most  of  the  night  in  and  around  the  sand  box,  they  left
chicken  droppings  behind.   They  were  eventually  rounded  up  and  put  away  in  their
coop  just  before  the  school  kids  arrived.   It's  important  to  remember  that  you  don't
have to eat contaminated food to get sick with a Salmonella infection. You can also get
it from live animals that carry the bacteria in their intestines or on their bodies whether
they  have  skin,  scales,  feathers,  or  fur.  Also,  anywhere  the  infected  animals  live  and
roam can be potentially contaminated with harmful bacteria that can make people sick
even  if  they  didn't  touch  the  animals.   Laboratory  tests  confirm  that  the  community
garden's chickens have the same strain of Salmonella as the sick people. So it's safe to
say  that  the  infected  chickens  spread  their  germs  around  the  garden  when  they
escaped from their coop. Since the chickens spent a lot of time in the sandbox, the kids
who played in the sand and later put their hands in their mouths or noses (yuck!) were
most  likely  to  get  sick.    Other  people  may  have  gotten  infected  if  they  touched  the
chickens  or  anything  in  the  coop  area  without  washing  their  hands  afterward.   Your
colleagues  at  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  have  been  carefully
monitoring PulseNet, a national database of bacterial DNA fingerprints to see if anyone
else has been infected with the outbreak strain of Salmonella. Sure enough, there are
18 other people who have been infected with Salmonella with the same DNA fingerprint
but  they  live  in  Missouri  and  Wyoming,  hundreds  of  miles  from  California!   Your
colleagues in Missouri and Wyoming work to contact the 18 sick people to find out what
they might have in common with the ill people in California.  That's right. Since the sick
people in California got infected with the outbreak strain of Salmonella from chickens,
there's a strong chance that the new cases in these other states got it that way as well.
But we'll need to do some investigating first to find out.  You've almost figured it out,
only one step to go!  Remember, it wasn't the garden itself that got people sick, it was
the chickens!  Since the sick people in California got infected with the outbreak strain of
Salmonella from chickens, there's a strong chance that the new cases in these other
states got it that way as well. But we'll need to do some investigating first to find out. 
You've almost figured it out, only one step to go!  Remember, it wasn't the field trip
itself that got people sick, it was the chickens!  Since the sick people in California got
the outbreak strain of Salmonella from chickens, there's a strong chance that the new
cases  in  these  other  states  got  it  that  way  as  well.  But  we'll  need  to  do  some
investigating first to find out.  You've almost figured it out, only one step to go!  You
need  to  figure  out  how  the  sick  people  in  Missouri  and  Wyoming  became  ill  with  the
outbreak  strain  of  Salmonella.   Your  colleagues  in  Missouri  and  Wyoming  are  able  to
interview the additional 18 sick people, and you learn that 16 of the 18 people recently
had  contact  with  chickens.  In  fact,  11  of  the  16  said  they  have  chickens  in  their
backyards, and they tell you they recently bought these chickens from several different
feed  stores.  (Feed  stores  are  places  where  people  can  buy  some  types  of  animals,
animal feed, and farm supplies.)  The next thing you try to find out is where the people
in California, Missouri, and Wyoming got their chickens.  You learn that all of the feed
stores identified in the traceback investigation got their chickens as baby chicks from
the same mail-order hatchery in Kansas, as did the community garden in California. A
mail-order  hatchery  is  a  company  that  hatches  and  sells  baby  chicks,  ducklings,  and
other  baby  poultry  to  consumers  and  feed  stores.   It  turns  out  that  the  mail-order
hatchery  supplies  chicks  to  customers  in  Wyoming,  California,  and  Missouri.   The
outbreak strain of Salmonella likely started at the mail-order hatchery and infected the
chicks, which were then shipped to feed stores. People who bought the chicks from feed
stores  brought  them  home  and  got  infected.   To  confirm  your  theory,  you  travel  to
Kansas to conduct tests for Salmonella bacteria at the hatchery. Not only do you find
Salmonella at the hatchery, it matches the DNA fingerprint of the outbreak strain that
infected the sick people in California, Wyoming, and Missouri.  A traceback investigation
is  conducted  to  find  the  ultimate  source  of  contamination  during  an  outbreak.
Information  is  gathered  such  as  purchase  receipts,  invoices,  and  shipping  records  to
determine where the outbreak first started. These investigations usually involve many
partners in human and animal health agencies at the local, state, and federal level.  The
information  gathered  during  traceback  investigations  can  also  help  suggest  ways  to
prevent  similar  outbreaks  from  happening  in  the  future.   To  help  avoid  Salmonella
infection  from  live  poultry,  follow  these  simple  tips:   DO  DON'T  There's  no  reason
people should avoid eating chicken, as you don't have any evidence that this strain of
Salmonella  has  infected  raw  poultry  that's  sold  as  food.   Instead,  you  need  to:   Your
hard work helped solve the outbreak!  People may want to keep their own chickens, if
local ordinances permit it. They just need to make sure they're following safety tips, like
washing their hands after touching chickens and their environments.  What you need to
do next is:  Your hard work helped solve the outbreak!  That's right! The next thing to
do  is  figure  out  who  else  bought  chickens  from  the  Kansas  hatchery.  Those  chickens
could  be  infected  too,  which  means  the  new  owners  could  get  sick.  You'll  need  to
communicate to the public about the outbreak and its source so that customers who
recently ordered chickens from this hatchery can take precautions to avoid becoming
ill.  Also, it's important to coordinate with local public health and agriculture officials in
Kansas to work with the hatchery to put interventions in place to eliminate this strain of
Salmonella  and  prevent  future  outbreaks.   Congratulations,  you  solved  the  outbreak!
Your hard work helped solve this outbreak! Though this scenario is not real, it's based
on  recent  outbreaks  involving  live  poultry.  Remember  that  you  can  become  infected
with Salmonella not only from contaminated foods but also from live animals and their
environments.  In addition to live poultry, there have been recent outbreaks in the U.S.
linked  to  chickens,  ducklings,  hedgehogs,  small  turtles,  and  frogs.   In  recent  years,
more people have been putting chicken coops in their backyards and buying their own
chickens  to  hatch  eggs  or  use  for  meat.  If  you  and  your  family  have  chickens  or  are
considering  getting  chickens,  be  sure  to  learn  and  follow  safety  tips  about  how  to
handle your birds, and always wash your hands after coming into contact with chickens
or their environment.  It is also important to never bring chickens and other live poultry
inside your house, in bathrooms, or especially in areas where food or drink is prepared,
served,  or  stored,  such  as  kitchens,  or  outdoor  patios.   Clean  any  equipment  or
materials associated with raising or caring for chickens and other live poultry outside
your house, such as cages or feed or water containers.  These recommendations are
important and apply to all live poultry regardless of the age of the birds or where they
were purchased.  Your doctor, veterinarian, and other groups such as extension agents
and 4-H leaders, are also an excellent resource about the risk of human salmonellosis
from  contact  with  live  poultry  and  how  to  reduce  that  risk.   Note:   Aspects  of  the
original outbreaks and investigations have been altered to fit the format and length of
this application.   Prison lock down! Hundreds of inmates in a Texas prison may have
been exposed to a highly contagious rash. One prisoner has been hospitalized and one
prison guard has contracted the rash. Inmates are confined to their cells and no visitors
are allowed to enter the prison. This has led to substantial disruptions in routine prison
activities  and  court  cases  grind  to  a  halt  with  cases  and  exposed  inmates  prohibited
from leaving the prison for scheduled court hearings.  We need your help. Your mission
is to find out what the disease is and how to stop it.  Sam is an inmate and kitchen staff
member  at  Bensil  federal  prison.   One  night,  while  loading  dishes,  he  notices  a  rash
with a few itchy blisters on his arm. He goes back to his cell and finds more blisters on
his chest and stomach so he decides to visit the prison's health clinic.  The doctor thinks
Sam has bug bites, since there's been a recent problem with bed bugs in the prison. He
sends Sam back to his cell with cream for his skin rash. The next day Sam is feeling a
little better and goes back to work in the kitchen.  Over the next two weeks, 9 other
inmates complain of not feeling well and very itchy rashes that have kept them up all
night.  Some  have  also  had  fever  and  felt  very  tired.  Greg,  a  prison  guard,  has  also
developed a rash with fever. All of the sick inmates rush to the health clinic demanding
creams, pills, basically anything that will relieve the itchiness and fever.  Since there
are many cases of rash illness occurring in a short period of time, the doctor suspects
that  he  may  have  an  outbreak  on  his  hands.  There  are  many  things  that  can  cause
rashes, but the doctor suspects chickenpox.   You start your investigation by checking
the medical logs and records of any inmate who was treated for a rash in the prison
health clinic in the last 4 weeks.  Since you think this might be chickenpox, you look up
the chickenpox clinical case definition: An illness that includes a rash with red bumps
and/or  fluid-filled  blisters  that  are  all  over  the  body  (generalized)  without  another
known diagnosis.  Based on the clinical definition, you organize the medical records of
the  inmates  that  have  rashes  into  two  piles,  probable  cases  and  confirmed  cases  of
chickenpox.  You  also  start  to  collect  specimens,  like  blister  fluid  and  scabs  from  as
many cases as possible for lab tests to help you figure out what's causing the rashes.
What  is  a  clinical  case  definition?  A  clinical  case  definition  is  used  to  figure  out  who
should  be  included  in  an  outbreak  investigation.   A  different  case  definition  is  used
depending on the type of suspected illness.   The clinical case definition for chickenpox
is: An illness that includes a rash with red bumps and/or fluid-filled blisters that are all
over  the  body  (generalized)  without  another  known  diagnosis.   In  this  situation,  the
clinical case definition for chickenpox is used to figure out who has the disease, which is
known as a confirmed case and who might have the disease, which is referred to as a
probable case.  Chickenpox is caused by a virus that spreads easily from an infected
person to others who have never had the illness or received the chickenpox vaccine. It
can  be  spread  by:   It  takes  10  to  21  days  after  exposure  for  someone  to  develop
chickenpox.   Symptoms  usually  include:   A  person  is  infectious,  meaning  they  can
spread the disease, starting 1 to 2 days before they get the rash, up until all of their
chickenpox blisters have formed scabs. Chickenpox can be serious, especially in babies,
adults,  and  people  with  weakened  immune  systems.  Some  people  develop
complications, like pneumonia, which can lead to hospitalizations, and even death.  Not
so  fast.  You  were  right  to  collect  specimens  from  cases  to  confirm  that  they  have
chickenpox.  But  you  don't  want  to  waste  a  lot  of  time  examining  every  inmate,
especially  since  there  are  hundreds  of  inmates  in  the  prison.   Focus  only  on  inmates
you  think  had  close  contact  with  a  probable  or  confirmed  case.  And  definitely  don't
quarantine everyone, especially if they aren't sick, or weren't exposed.  Let's go, you've
got  work  to  do!   You  want  to  isolate  the  people  who  are  considered  probable  and
confirmed cases of chickenpox to stop the disease from spreading.  If you Identify and
quarantine exposed inmates you can keep an eye on these individuals to see if they
develop  the  disease  and  if  they  should  get  vaccinated  to  help  protect  them.  Also,
separating inmates who are at risk of developing disease, allows you to prevent others
from getting sick.   Since you suspect chickenpox, collecting and testing specimens will
help you confirm your suspicion.  Let's go, you've got work to do!  You were right to
isolate probable and confirmed cases to stop the disease from spreading. You were also
right to quarantine exposed inmates. However, you don't want to spend lots of time and
money  vaccinating  every  inmate  in  prison.  Many  of  the  inmates  most  likely  had
chickenpox as a child and don't need to be vaccinated.  Let's go, you've got work to do!
 You receive word that Sam's kitchen supervisor has been hospitalized with pneumonia
and has a severe rash, with hundreds of blisters covering his body.  In order to learn
more about the disease that's devastating the prison, and identify who may have been
exposed  and  who  needs  to  be  placed  in  quarantine,  you  interview  and  gather
information from the confirmed and probable cases. Then, you create a line list to figure
out  where  the  outbreak  may  have  started  and  where  you  should  focus  your
investigation.  As you work, 5 more inmates visit the clinic with a rash on their hands
and  arms.  With  these new  cases  popping-up,  it  doesn't  look  like the prison  lockdown
will  end  anytime  soon.  The  prisoners  are  getting  restless  and  medical  supplies,  like
anti-itching creams, are running low!  Better work fast!  A line list is a table that has key
information about each sick person. Each row represents a case (sick person), and each
column has important information about the case, like age, sex, and symptoms. Other
characteristics like where a person lives or works can also be included in a line list to
help determine what characteristics put a person at higher risk of becoming a case. 
Sorry, you need to study your data more closely. Less than half of the cases worked in
the laundry room while most of the cases live in Unit A.  There also seems to be subtle
differences in some of the inmates' symptoms. Notice that the last 5 cases don't meet
the clinical case definition of chickenpox. They do NOT have a rash all over their body!
This  makes  you  think  you  may  be  dealing  with  two  different  illnesses.  You  need  to
quickly  figure  out  what  the  second  illness  is  and  stop  it,  especially  if  it's  contagious.
Otherwise, there could be 2 different outbreaks happening at the prison!   No time to
spare, let's see if the lab results can shed some light on what's really going on.  You
need to study the data more closely. The kitchen may seem like a good place to start
since that's where Sam worked. However, not many of the other cases worked in the
kitchen. It looks like you should look into living quarters instead.  But wait, there also
seems to be subtle differences in some of the inmates' symptoms. Notice that the last 5
cases don't meet the clinical case definition of chickenpox. They do NOT have a rash all
over their body. This makes you think you may be dealing with two different illnesses.
You need to quickly figure out what the second illness is and stop it, especially if it's
contagious. Otherwise, there could be 2 different outbreaks happening at the prison! 
No time to spare, let's see if the lab results can shed some light on what's really going
on.  Great job! You carefully studied the data and noticed that most of the cases live in
Unit  A.   You  may  have  also  noticed  subtle  differences  in  some  of  the  inmates'
symptoms. While the line list shows that most inmates have the same rash location and
red bumps, the last 5 cases don't meet the clinical case definition of chickenpox. They
do NOT have a rash all over their body!   This makes you think you may be dealing with
two  different  illnesses.  You  need  to  quickly  figure  out  what  the  second  illness  is  and
stop  it,  especially  if  it's  contagious.  Otherwise,  there  could  be  2  different  outbreaks
happening  at  the  prison!   Let's  see  if  the  lab  results  can  shed  some  light  on  what's
really going on.  Lab results are back and confirm that the hospitalized prisoner along
with  the  sick  inmates  from  Unit  A  and  the  guard  have  chickenpox.   However,  the  5
inmates  from  the  other  housing  units  do  not.  Their  lab  results  are  negative  for
chickenpox.   You  remember  from  the  line  list  that  all  5  inmates  work  in  the  laundry
room.  After  a  short  interview  with  one  of  them  you  learn  that  the  prison  recently
changed  laundry  detergents.  Since  each  inmate  only  has  a  rash  on  their  hands  they
have been diagnosed with contact dermatitis.  Now you can focus your efforts on the
inmates in Unit A, since that's where all of the confirmed cases live. You consider all
Unit  A  inmates  exposed,  which  is  about  100  people.  But  you  discover  that  only  21
inmates had close contact with cases, so you quarantine them immediately.   What is
contact dermatitis? Contact dermatitis is a condition where the skin becomes red, sore,
or  irritated  after  touching   something  that  you're  allergic  to  or  an  irritant  (such  as  a
chemical). It's not life threatening, but can be very uncomfortable. It can lead to itchy
or  burning  rashes.    Contact  dermatitis  isn't  contagious,  which  means  it  can't  spread
from  one  person  to  another.  The  rash  only  appears  soon,  sometimes  even  minutes,
after  touching  something  that  you're  allergic  to.  The  rash  usually  occurs  only  on  the
part of the body that touched the substance.  Contact dermatitis can be mistaken for
chickenpox since both lead to an itchy rash with red bumps. Both can also initially start
in only one location. However, the chickenpox rash will usually spread to the rest of the
body.  The guards are overworked and tired from working double shifts to monitor the
inmates  in  isolation  and  quarantine.  Even  worse,  inmates  are  becoming  restless  and
unruly because they can't have any visitors or even have their meals in the cafeteria.
You need to quickly figure out who of these 21 inmates is at risk for getting chickenpox
and who has evidence of immunity (protection against chickenpox). This will help you
decide who should be removed from quarantine.  Evidence of immunity to chickenpox
means a person has proof of protection against the disease. If you meet at least 1 of
the following criteria, then you have evidence of immunity to chickenpox:  You DO NOT
have evidence of immunity to chickenpox if you do not have any of the above.  Birth in
the  United  States  before  1980  should  not  be  considered  evidence  of  immunity  for
health  care  personnel,  pregnant  women,  and  immunocompromised  persons.   You
create another table to figure out who among the 21 exposed inmates have evidence of
immunity.  The 3 inmates who previously had chickenpox and the 8 inmates born in the
United States before 1980 have evidence of immunity. Also, the inmates who've had 2
doses of chickenpox vaccine also have evidence of immunity. That makes 13 in all who
can be removed from quarantine.  But for the people who've never had chickenpox or
only got 1 dose of the chickenpox vaccine, they don't have evidence of immunity and
must remain in quarantine for 21 days after their last exposure to a case.  Talk about
bad news.  The 3 inmates who previously had chickenpox and the 8 inmates born in the
United States before 1980 have evidence of immunity, which makes a total of 11. But,
don't forget about the people who've had 2 doses of the chickenpox vaccine, they have
evidence of immunity too. That makes 13 in all that can be removed from quarantine. 
But  the  inmates  who've  never  had  chickenpox  or  only  got  1  dose  of  the  chickenpox
vaccine,  they   don't  have  evidence  of  immunity  and  therefore  need  to  remain  in
quarantine for 21 days after their last exposure to a case.  Talk about bad news.  Let's
double  check  the  numbers.  The  3  inmates  who  previously  had  chickenpox  and  the  8
inmates born in the United States before 1980 have evidence of immunity. The inmates
who've had 2 doses of the chickenpox vaccine also have evidence of immunity. That
makes 13 in all who can be removed from quarantine.  The inmates who've never had
chickenpox  or  only  got  1  dose  of  the  chickenpox  vaccine  do  not  have  evidence  of
immunity  and  therefore  need  to  remain  in  quarantine  for  21  days  after  their  last
exposure to a case.   By letting a few more out of quarantine, you risk the chance of
having more people get sick with chickenpox.  Just as you're getting a handle on the
situation at Bensil, you receive a call from Gaplin Prison, which is another correctional
facility in the area. Eight inmates at Gaplin have chickenpox! You immediately wonder if
the two outbreaks are linked. After all, prisons share staff and inmates are sometimes
transferred between prisons. You head to Gaplin to learn more about the inmates with
chickenpox and what could have started the outbreak. You learn that Carl, one of the
inmates with chickenpox from Bensil, was on the same bus with inmates from Gaplin 7
days before his rash developed. The bus was pretty full, so he sat right next to a few of
the Gaplin prisoners during the ride.  Moreover, Greg, the sick guard from Bensil prison
also works at the Gaplin facility. Greg is newly married and has a baby on the way so he
picks  up  extra  shifts  whenever  he  can.  He  was  on  duty  at  Gaplin  the  day  before  he
developed  a  rash.   To  find  out  who  caused  the  outbreak  you  need  to  know  when  it
started.  After speaking with the sick Gaplin prisoners you find out that the first inmate
became  sick  on  March  11.  To  see  if  the  two  outbreaks  are  related  you  make  an  epi
curve showing the chickenpox outbreak at each prison.  What's an epidemic curve (epi
curve)?  An  epi  curve  shows  how  an  outbreak  changes  over  time.   It  includes:   Epi
curves are updated as new data come in, so they are always changing.  The shape of
the  curve  can  provide  clues  about  the  possible  source  of  an  outbreak,  or  how  the
outbreak may have started. It also helps to show you whether the outbreak is reaching
a peak or if it's coming to an end.  Learn how to read an epi curve.  Sorry! But Carl
didn't spread the disease to Gaplin prison.  Carl was on the bus 7 days before his rash
started.  People  are  infectious  (can  spread  this  disease)  1  to  2  days  before  the  rash
develops,  up  until  all  their  chickenpox  blisters  have  formed  scabs.  This  means  Carl
could  not  have  spread  the  disease  to  the  Gaplin  inmates  on  the  bus  ride.   You  are
getting close to ending this outbreak, only one more clue!  You got it! Greg spread the
disease  to  Gaplin  prison  because  he  was  on  duty  the  day  before  his  rash  started.  A
person with chickenpox can spread the disease 1 to 2 days before they get the rash, up
until all their chickenpox blisters have formed scabs. Since Greg was working at Gaplin
prison 1 day before his rash started, he likely spread the disease to Gaplin prison.  You
are getting close to ending this outbreak, only one more clue!  Sorry but a person with
chickenpox  can  spread  the  disease  1  to  2  days  before  they  get  the  rash  up,  until  all
their  chickenpox  blisters  have  formed  scabs.  Carl,  the  inmate,  did  not  spread  the
disease since he was on the bus 7 days before his rash started. However, Greg was on
duty  at  Gaplin  prison  the  day  before  his  rash  started.  So  he  caused  the  chickenpox
outbreak at Gaplin prison.  You are getting close to ending this outbreak, only one more
clue!  It's been 28 grueling days of quarantine for the exposed prisoners and relentless
double shifts for the guards!  The prison wardens at both facilities are anxious to return
to their normal routines and activities. The inmates are eager to be let out of their cells
and have visitors again.  While in quarantine, 3 of the 8 exposed Bensil prisoners ended
up  getting  sick  with  chickenpox.   The  others  did  not.    Now  that  you  know  what  the
disease is and how it spread, you work to make sure the outbreak is completely over. 
Correct! People who have evidence of immunity do not need to be vaccinated. Now you
can focus on vaccinating exposed people who are not protected against chickenpox and
end the outbreak. This includes inmates who have never had chickenpox or only had 1
dose of chickenpox vaccine.  It's also important to work with the prison to develop a
comprehensive  prevention  plan  to  avoid  outbreaks  like  this  in  the  future.  The  plan
should include chickenpox education for staff and inmates, early detection, isolation of
cases and quarantine of exposed persons, as well as vaccination of persons who are not
protected against chickenpox.  Congratulations, you solved the outbreak! The inmates,
staff, and all their families thank you for your hard work.   Vaccination is important but
people who have evidence of immunity do not need to be vaccinated. Only people who
have never had chickenpox or only had 1 dose of the chickenpox vaccine need to be
vaccinated.   It's  also  important  to  work  with  the  prison  to  develop  a  comprehensive
prevention  plan  to  avoid  outbreaks  like  this  in  the  future.  The  plan  should  include
chickenpox  education  for  staff  and  inmates,  early  detection,  isolation  of  cases  and
quarantine of exposed persons, as well as vaccination of persons who are not protected
against chickenpox.  Congratulations, you solved the outbreak! The inmates, staff and
all  their  families  thank  you  for  your  hard  work.    Vaccination  is  important  but  not
everyone needs to be vaccinated. Only people who do not have evidence of immunity
need to be vaccinated. This includes inmates who have never had chickenpox or only
had 1 dose of the chickenpox vaccine.  It's also important to work with the prison to
develop a comprehensive prevention plan to avoid outbreaks like this in the future. The
plan  should  include  chickenpox  education  for  staff  and  inmates,  early  detection,
isolation of cases and quarantine of exposed persons, as well as vaccination of persons
who are not protected against chickenpox.  Congratulations, you solved the outbreak!
The inmates, staff and all their families thank you for your hard work.   This outbreak
was fictional but parts of it were based on real-life events.  During January and February
1989,  3  cases  of  chickenpox  occurred  at  the  Federal  Correctional  Institution  in
Lexington,  Kentucky.  At  the  time  of  the  outbreak,  1,276  inmates  were  housed  in  the
facility.  The first case of chickenpox developed in a 25-year-old woman who was visited
by her 8-year-old daughter who had chickenpox. The second case occurred a few weeks
later  in  a  23-year-old  who  styled  the  hair  of  the  first  case  within  24  hours  of  case  1
developing a rash. The third case was identified in a 19-year-old woman who had class
with the second case.  The investigation found that 99% of the inmates had protection
against chickenpox. Despite this high number of inmates protected against the disease,
this outbreak shows how prison conditions, including close living quarters, are ideal for
the spread of a highly contagious disease, like chickenpox.  Developing a chickenpox
prevention  plan  is  one  way  for  the  prison  to  avoid  outbreaks  in  the  future.  The
prevention plan should include education of staff and inmates, early detection, isolation
of cases and quarantine of exposed persons, as well as vaccination of persons who are
not protected against chickenpox.  There's a new outbreak starting in the middle of the
country,  and  your  help  is  needed  to  make  sure  it  doesn't  spread!  It's  early  May  in  a
small, rural county in the Midwest. School kids are getting sick with what seems to be a
new illness that is spreading fast. Your help is needed to contain it before it becomes
more widespread! Laura is a 16-year-old high school junior who hopes to go to college
on a softball scholarship in a couple of years. She's been practicing for her upcoming
softball game, when suddenly she and two of her teammates come down with a fever,
cough, and extreme tiredness. Worried, the softball coach sends the girls home. Five
other students also come down with similar symptoms on the same day. Desperate to
get better and not miss another game, Laura and her friends head to the urgent care
clinic  to  get  checked  out.  While  doctors  are  waiting  for  test  results,  more  calls  start
coming in about similar illnesses. You gather medical records of the 15 sick people and
ask them questions to see what they have in common. Most of them have the following
symptoms:   One  person  also  has  nausea,  and  2  others  feel  light-headed  and  dizzy.
You're  right!  11  of  the  15  sick  people  are  teenagers.  You're  not  sure  if  this  is  a
coincidence  or  if  age  has  something  to  do  with  the  outbreak.  It's  definitely  worth
exploring further.   Keep working to figure out the illness and how everyone got sick!
Sorry, but most of those who are sick are teenagers. With 11 of the 15 patients being
between the ages of 13 and 18, age may have something to do with the outbreak. It's
definitely  worth  exploring  further.    Keep  working  to  prevent  this  outbreak  from
spreading further! It's true that a lot of the sick people go to school at Freemont High: 7
out of 15. But that doesn't count as "most." Here's what should grab your attention: 11
of the 15 sick people are teenagers.  You'll need to do some more digging around to
figure out if age has anything to do with the outbreak.   Keep working to prevent this
outbreak from spreading further!   The illness is spreading quickly. There are now 24
sick people! Laura and most of her friends are so sick that they've been out of school
for  more  than  a  week.  Worse,  a  2-year-old  boy  and  a  3-year-old  girl  have  been
hospitalized. The tests come back positive for an influenza (flu) virus infection, that's
caused by a very unusual influenza virus. It turns out that most of the sick people are
students, but they go to different schools in a large county. You need to figure out how
the illness could have spread across schools so fast.  What is novel influenza? Seasonal
flu is a respiratory disease (a disease affecting the lungs) caused by seasonal influenza
viruses. These are viruses that spread in people and cause flu epidemics every year,
usually  in  the  fall  and  winter  months  in  the  United  States.  Flu  is  usually  spread  from
close contact with people via coughing or sneezing. Seasonal flu viruses are constantly
changing, which means that the flu viruses that infect people one year can be different
from the flu people get sick with the next year. This is one reason why you need to get
a  flu  vaccine  every  season.  Each  season's  vaccine  is  tailored  to  match  what  experts
predict will be the most common viruses that season. Novel flu viruses are viruses that
are not usually seen in peoplethese viruses normally only infect animals such as birds
or pigs. But they can infect people too, and even change in ways that let them spread
between people like seasonal flu.  Although novel flu virus infections are rare, they can
be  dangerous  because  seasonal  flu  vaccines  usually  don't  protect  against  them  and
people usually won't have much natural immune protection against them. You decide to
interview  the  sick  teenagers,  with  the  consent  of  their  parents.    Based  on  the
information  you  gathered,  you  see  that  they  have  a  few  things  in  common.  Many  of
them played in or attended a state-wide baseball and softball tournament in Freemont,
featuring  teams  from  all  across  the  state.  Also,  the  county  fair  was  recently  in  town,
attracting  big  crowds.  A  few  of  the  sick  teenagers  have  traveled  to  other  states  and
even  other  countries.  In  order  to  get  a  better  idea  of  how  the  sick  teens  were  first
exposed to this particular novel flu virus, you need to take a closer look and see how
they spent their time over the past few weeks. You also need to interview a number of
healthy  teens  who  did  those  same  activities.  (We  call  this  a  case-control  study.)  To
figure out which activity most likely led to flu exposure, search through the data table
to find the activity with the highest value for prevalence (which means the proportion of
a population that has a certain condition) among sick teens AND the lowest value for
prevalence among healthy teens. You're right to suspect the Agriculture Club, since the
prevalence  rate  is  so  much  higher  among  the  sick  people  (67%)  than  the  healthy
people  (30%).  But  take  a  look  at  the  people  who  went  to  the  county  fair.  The
prevalence rate for those sick people (90%) is even higher, while people who didn't go
to the fair had a rate of only 20%. Keep investigating! That's right! Nearly all of the sick
people (90%) went to the county fair. That may be where they got sick, but you still
don't know how, or what it was that infected them.  Keep investigating! It is true that
the data shows you that all of those who are sick in this group are teenagers, but that's
because you were looking only at teenagers. So everyone in this data table is a teen,
even the healthy people. But take a look at the people who went to the county fair. The
prevalence rate for those sick people (90%) is high, while people who didn't go had a
rate of only 20%. Keep investigating! The illness is spreading! There are now 54 sick
people, including 9 adults. According to a recent update, a 67-year-old man and 3 kids
are in the hospital. You meet with the fair organizers who say that more than 10,000
people came to the fair during the 5 day event. There were carnival rides, food stands,
a concert, a barn dance, and a number of animal exhibits. Of course, many people who
went to the fair are perfectly healthy. Since this is a novel flu virus with no other cases
reported, you suspect that it may have come from an animal.  You take a closer look at
what  kinds  of  animals  the  sick  people  were  exposed  to.   As  you  talk  to  the  sick  and
healthy teens who went to the fair, you're especially interested in the types of animals
they  were  around.  Some  animals  get  the  flu  too,  but  their  flu  viruses  usually  aren't
passed on to people. However, every now and then, an animal's flu strain (or type of
flu) changes in a way that allows it to be spread among people easily. You learn that
many  of  the  sick  and  healthy  teens  that  you  interviewed  spent  time  around  cows,
chickens, and pigs. Some of them only spent an hour or two with animals, and some
spent as many as 10 hours with them. That's right! You've discovered that the more
time the teens you interviewed spent around pigs, the more likely they were to get sick.
In fact, 40% of the people you interviewed who spent 8 hours near pigs got sick, while
only 25% of the people who spent 6 hours were infected with the flu, and people who
didn't go near pigs were completely healthy. That's a pretty strong link. Flu outbreaks
can spread quickly, so you need to keep working before it spreads even more! Sorry.
The data do not seem to indicate that chickens were the source of infection. Instead,
the more time the teens you interviewed spent around pigs, the more likely they were
to get sick.  In fact, 40% of the people you interviewed who spent 8 hours near pigs got
sick, while only 25% of the people who spent 6 hours were infected with the flu, and
people who didn't go near pigs were completely healthy. That's a pretty strong link. Flu
outbreaks  can  spread  quickly,  so  you  need  to  keep  working  before  it  spreads  even
more!  Take  a  closer  look.  The  data  show  you  pretty  clearly  that  the  more  time  the
people  you  interviewed  spent  around  pigs,  the  more  likely  they  were  to  get  sick.  Flu
outbreaks can spread quickly, so you need to keep working before this spreads even
farther! It's been 19 days since Laura and her friends first got sick from this novel flu.
There are now at least 72 sick people in this county alone, 11 have been hospitalized,
and  one  person  has  died!  It  also  looks  like  the  flu  crossed  the  state  line!  You  talk  to
health  departments  across  the  country  and  learn  that  there  are  at  least  4,000
confirmed cases in 36 states, with dozens of people hospitalized. From the looks of it,
you have a large outbreak on your hands, which may even turn into a pandemic!  With
the  number  of  cases  quickly  rising  you  begin  to  wonder  whether  all  of  these  people
attended the county fair or if they got infected somewhere else. What's a pandemic? A
pandemic  occurs  when  a  disease  spreads  and  affects  a  very  large  number  of  people
across the globe.  Scientists monitor novel flu viruses carefully. A novel flu virus might
cause a pandemic if the virus can spread efficiently from person to person and if most
people  don't  have  any  immunity  to  the  new  virus.  If  the  new  flu  virus  can  only  be
spread from animals to people or from one person to another, but no further, then it
probably won't cause a pandemic. People can have some immunity to flu viruses that
are similar to viruses they've had in the past. If a new flu virus is very different from
earlier  flu  viruses,  it  may  be  more  likely  to  cause  a  pandemic.   Though  most  people
recover from seasonal flu after a week or two, a small percentage of people with flu die
every year. A novel flu virus could be much more serious, and if a novel flu virus caused
a severe pandemic, many people could die. This happened during the 1918 influenza
pandemic, during which millions of people died. After careful consideration, you rule out
the possibility that all of the new cases that are popping up across the country are a
result of people attending the county fair.  You arrange a virtual meeting with health
departments across the United States to get more information about the cases. Based
on  the  information  you  gathered,  you  calculate  the  relative  risk  to  figure  out  why  so
many people are getting sick. Relative Risk (RR) describes the likelihood of some event
(like getting food poisoning) occurring in a group of people with a potential risk factor
(like eating spinach) compared to a group without that risk factor (in this example, not
eating spinach). If the RR of getting sick after eating contaminated spinach was 5, then
people  who  ate  contaminated  spinach  would  be  5  times  more  likely  to  get  sick  than
people who did not eat contaminated spinach. The closer the relative risk is to 1, the
greater the likelihood that an event occurring (like getting food poisoning) is about the
same for both groups. You can forget about pigs now. It looks like people who live with
someone that has this flu are at high risk of getting sick too! This means the new flu
virus has developed the ability to be spread easily from person to person. It may have
started by spreading from pigs to people at that county fair, but now it's spreading from
person to person, and fast! Can you stop it from spreading even more? Hurry! Nope.
Mosquitoes  don't  spread  the  flu.  Most  flu  is  spread  between  people,  although  a  few
animals (i.e. birds and pigs) can spread it too.  From the looks of it, people who live with
someone who has this new flu virus are at a high risk of getting sick too.  This means
that the new flu virus has developed the ability to spread easily from person to person.
It may have started by spreading from pigs to people at that county fair, but now it's
spreading from person to person, and fast! Can you stop it from spreading even more?
Hurry! That's right! This new flu virus has developed the ability to be spread easily from
person to person. It may have started by spreading from pigs to people at that county
fair, but now it's spreading from person to person, and fast!  You're so close. One more
clue to solve the outbreak! After confirming your suspicion that the new flu virus is now
being  spread  from  person  to  person,  you  work  with  other  experts  at  the  Centers  for
Disease and Control and Prevention (CDC), as well as state health departments across
the country, to keep track of the number of people who are sick. At last count, there
were at least 52,100 sick people, 1,702 people in the hospital, and 94 deaths.  Worse,
you  learn  that  there  are  now  thousands  of  cases  in  different  countries.  People  are
scared; the story of the new flu is all over the newspapers, Internet, and TV news! You
tell people to stay home from work or school if they feel sick, so they don't spread the
flu to others.  To reduce your chances of getting the flu, follow these steps: That's right.
The  best  way  to  fight  the  flu  is  to  make  sure  that  as  many  people  as  possible  have
received a vaccine that will protect them from the virus. This is true for seasonal and
novel  flu  strains.   If  the  vaccine  isn't  available  yet,  you  should  work  to  educate  the
public on ways to prevent the flu and its spread, like avoiding contact with people who
are sick, washing hands often, and staying home if they're sick. Congratulations, you
solved  the  outbreak!  Everyone  should  avoid  contact  with  sick  people,  regardless  of
whether they've been vaccinated or not.  Since the flu vaccine is considered the best
form of protection, it's a good idea to recommend people to get vaccinated as soon as
possible.  If the pandemic vaccine isn't available yet, you should work to educate the
public on ways to prevent the flu and its spread, like avoiding contact with people who
are sick, washing hands often, and staying home if they're sick. Your hard work helped
solve the outbreak! It's always a good idea to wash your hands often, to avoid getting
sick. But if you're using your hands to cover your mouth while you cough or sneeze, be
sure  to  head  to  the  nearest  sink  to  wash  your  hands  right  after.  Otherwise,  you  can
easily spread your germs to whatever or whoever you touch next.   In general, the best
way to fight the flu is to make sure that as many people as possible get a vaccine that
will  protect  them  from  the  virus.  This  is  true  for  seasonal  and  novel  flu  viruses.   If  a
pandemic vaccine isn't available yet, you should work to educate the public on ways to
prevent the flu and its spread, like avoiding contact with people who are sick, washing
hands  often,  and  staying  home  if  they're  sick.  Your  hard  work  helped  solve  the
outbreak! Your hard work helped solve the outbreak! Although this outbreak was not
real, it's based on similar outbreaks that have occurred in the past. Experts at CDC are
constantly  on  the  watch  for  new  flu  viruses  that  could  potentially  spread  worldwide,
infecting  millions.  In  recent  years,  novel  influenza  viruses,  from  birds  and  pigs,  have
infected many people. Luckily none of these viruses have caused a pandemic since the
2009 H1N1 virus. Investigations into novel flu cases help scientists understand how and
where the next flu pandemic may begin and allow for the creation of new, targeted flu
vaccines that can protect us from novel flu viruses.   Millions of people get seasonal flu
every year. While most recover some people die.  People who are at greatest risk of
severe  or  fatal  flu  illness  include  very  young  children,  older  adults,  pregnant  women
and people with certain chronic health conditions.
                                                                                                    Make sure to "Take 3"
actions  to  fight  flu  every  year  (1)  get  a  seasonal  flu  vaccine,  (2)  follow  important
safety  steps  like  good  hand  washing  and  avoiding  others  when  sick,  and  (3)  take
antiviral  drugs  if  your  doctor  prescribes  them.  Antiviral  drugs  may  be  especially
important in a pandemic if vaccine is not available yet. Note:  Several aspects of the
original  outbreak  and  investigation  have  been  altered  to  fit  the  format  and  length  of
this application.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/digital-social-media-tools/mobile/applications/sto/508STO.html
