A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Pregnant Healthcare Personnel from the
Infection  Control  in  Healthcare  Personnel:  Epidemiology  and  Control  of  Selected
Infections  Transmitted  Among  Healthcare  Personnel  and  Patients  (2024)  guideline.
Recommendations For recommendations and additional information about counselling
healthcare  personnel,  including  those  who  are  pregnant  or  intending  to  become
pregnant,  please  see  Section  1,  Medical  Evaluations.  Pregnant  healthcare  personnel
(HCP) are temporarily immunocompromised, and occupational acquisition of infections
is of special concern to HCP of childbearing age and occupational health services (OHS)
for  several  reasons.  In  general,  pregnant  HCP  do  not  have  an  increased  risk  for
acquiring infections in the workplace, and pregnancy itself does not change HCP risk for
exposure to infectious diseases; however, pregnancy may make persons at higher risk
for  complications  of  some  diseases,  such  as  varicella  and  the  risk  for  developing
pneumonia,  and  may  pose  risks  to  their  fetus,  such  as  development  of  congenital
varicella syndrome.1 Pregnancy affects the safety of administering some recommended
immunizations and may require OHS to wait until pregnancy is over for administration.
Live  vaccines  administered  to  pregnant  HCP  pose  a  theoretical  risk  to  the  fetus;
therefore,
 live,
 attenuated
 virus
 and
 live
 bacterial
 vaccines
 are
 generally
contraindicated during pregnancy. However, all inactivated viral and bacterial vaccines
and  immunoglobulin  preparations  [e.g.,  Hepatitis  B  Immune  Globulin  (HBIV),  Varicella
Zoster Immune Globulin (VARIZIG)] may be administered, if indicated, to pregnant HCP.
Further,  Tetanus,  Diphtheria,  Pertussis  (Tdap);  inactivated  influenza;  and  COVID-19
vaccines are specifically indicated for pregnant persons.2 Counseling of pregnant HCP
and those planning to become pregnant is recommended as a part of providing episodic
medical evaluations to HCP, and is paramount for safety in the workplace (see Section
1,
 Medical
 Evaluations,
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/healthcare-personnel-infrastructure-routine-p
ractices/medical-evaluations.html).3  Such  counseling  typically  covers  the  risk  of
transmission of diseases (e.g., CMV, hepatitis, herpes simplex, HIV, parvovirus, rubella,
varicella) that, if acquired during pregnancy, may have adverse effects on the fetus, as
well  as  recommended  infection  prevention  and  control  measures  to  prevent
transmission. Routine exclusions from caring for patients with infections that have the
potential to harm the fetus are not typically applied to HCP only on the basis of their
pregnancy  or  intent  to  be  pregnant  because  recommended  precautions  protect  HCP
from  transmission. However, work restrictions for pregnant HCP may be recommended
by  public  health  authorities  for  some  novel  or  high  consequence  pathogens.  When
pregnant HCP or those intending to become pregnant have an occupational exposure or
occupational acquisition of an infectious disease, OHS will typically refer the individual
to their obstetric provider so that recommended treatment, postexposure management,
and  counseling  can  be  collaboratively  delivered.  Inclusion  of  an  individual’s  obstetric
provider (e.g., obstetrician, family medicine provider, midwife) in their medical care is
critical for their safety and health.  CDC provides information on infection control and
clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections among healthcare workers, patients,
and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/healthcare-personnel-epidemiology-control/pregnant-hcp.html
