A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Standard Precautions are designed to both
protect  dental  health  care  personnel  (DHCP)  and  prevent  DHCP  from  spreading
infections among patients. Standard Precautions are the minimum infection prevention
practices that apply to all patient care, regardless of suspected or confirmed infection
status  of  the  patient,  in  any  setting  where  health  care  is  delivered.  Standard
Precautions include: Each element of Standard Precautions is described in the following
sections. Education and training are critical elements of Standard Precautions, because
they help DHCP make appropriate decisions and comply with recommended practices.
When Standard Precautions alone cannot prevent transmission, they are supplemented
with  Transmission-Based  Precautions.  This  second  tier  of  infection  prevention  is  used
when  patients  have  diseases  that  can  spread  through  contact,  droplet  or  airborne
routes  (e.g.,  skin  contact,  sneezing,  coughing),  and  are  always  used  in  addition  to
Standard Precautions. Dental settings are not typically designed to carry out all of the
Transmission-Based Precautions (e.g., Airborne Precautions for patients with suspected
tuberculosis,  measles,  or  chickenpox)  that  are  recommended  for  hospital  and  other
ambulatory  care  settings.  Patients,  however,  do  not  usually  seek  routine  dental
outpatient  care  when  acutely  ill  with  diseases  requiring  Transmission-Based
Precautions.   Nonetheless,  DHCP  should  develop  and  carry  out  systems  for  early
detection and management of potentially infectious patients at initial points of entry to
the dental setting. To the extent possible, this includes rescheduling non-urgent dental
care  until  the  patient  is  no  longer  infectious  or  referral  to  a  dental  setting  with
appropriate infection prevention precautions when urgent dental treatment is needed.
Hand hygiene is the most important measure to prevent the spread of infections among
patients  and  DHCP.  Education  and  training  programs  should  thoroughly  address
indications  and  techniques  for  hand  hygiene  practices  before  performing  routine  and
oral surgical procedures. For routine dental examinations and nonsurgical procedures,
use  water  and  plain  soap  (hand  washing),  or  antimicrobial  soap  (hand  antisepsis)
specific  for  health  care  settings,  or  use  an  alcohol-based  hand  rub.  Although
alcohol-based  hand  rubs  are  effective  for  hand  hygiene  in  health  care  settings,  soap
and water should be used when hands are visibly soiled (e.g., dirt, blood, body fluids).
For  surgical  procedures,  A  perform  a  surgical  hand  scrub  before  putting  on  sterile
surgeon's  gloves.  For  all  types  of  hand  hygiene  products,  follow  the  product
manufacturer's  label  for  instructions.  Complete  guidance  on  how  and  when  hand
hygiene  should  be  performed,  including  recommendations  regarding  surgical  hand
antisepsis  and  artificial  nails,  can  be  found  in  the  Guideline  for  Hand  Hygiene  in
Health-Care  Settings.  Personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  refers  to  wearable
equipment that is designed to protect DHCP from exposure to or contact with infectious
agents. PPE that is appropriate for various types of patient interactions and effectively
covers  personal  clothing  and  skin  likely  to  be  soiled  with  blood,  saliva,  or  other
potentially infectious materials (OPIM) should be available. These include gloves, face
masks,  protective  eye  wear,  face  shields,  and  protective  clothing  (e.g.,  reusable  or
disposable  gown,  jacket,  laboratory  coat).  Examples  of  appropriate  use  of  PPE  for
adherence to Standard Precautions include: DHCP should be trained to select and put
on  appropriate  PPE  and  remove  PPE  so  that  the  chance  for  skin  or  clothing
contamination  is  reduced.  Hand  hygiene  is  always  the  final  step  after  removing  and
disposing of PPE. Training should also stress preventing further spread of contamination
while  wearing  PPE  by:  The  application  of  Standard  Precautions  and  guidance  on
appropriate selection and an example of putting on and removal of personal protective
equipment  is  described  in  detail  in  the  2007  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions.
Respiratory  hygiene/cough  etiquette  infection  prevention  measures  are  designed  to
limit  the  transmission  of  respiratory  pathogens  spread  by  droplet  or  airborne  routes.
The strategies target primarily patients and individuals accompanying patients to the
dental  setting  who  might  have  undiagnosed  transmissible  respiratory  infections,  but
also apply to anyone (including DHCP) with signs of illness including cough, congestion,
runny nose, or increased production of respiratory secretions. DHCP should be educated
on preventing the spread of respiratory pathogens when in contact with symptomatic
persons.  Respiratory  hygiene/cough  etiquette  measures  were  added  to  Standard
Precautions  in  2007.  Additional  information  related  to  respiratory  hygiene/cough
etiquette
 can
 be
 found
 in
 the
 2007
 Guideline
 for
 Isolation
 Precautions.
Recommendations  for  preventing  the  spread  of  influenza  are  available  at:  Infection
Control in Health Care Facilities | CDC. Most percutaneous injuries (e.g., needlestick, cut
with a sharp object) among DHCP involve burs, needles, and other sharp instruments.
Implementation  of  the  OSHA  Bloodborne  Pathogens  Standard  has  helped  to  protect
DHCP  from  blood  exposure  and  sharps  injuries.  However,  sharps  injuries  continue  to
occur  and  pose  the  risk  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission  to  DHCP  and  patients.
Most  exposures  in  dentistry  are  preventable;  therefore,  each  dental  practice  should
have  policies  and  procedures  available  addressing  sharps  safety.  DHCP  should  be
aware of the risk of injury whenever sharps are exposed. When using or working around
sharp devices, DHCP should take precautions while using sharps, during cleanup, and
during  disposal.  Engineering  and  work-practice  controls  are  the  primary  methods  to
reduce  exposures  to  blood  and  OPIM  from  sharp  instruments  and  needles.  Whenever
possible,  engineering  controls  should  be  used  as  the  primary  method  to  reduce
exposures to bloodborne pathogens. Engineering controls remove or isolate a hazard in
the  workplace  and  are  frequently  technology  based  (e.g.,  self-sheathing  anesthetic
needles, safety scalpels, and needleless IV ports). Employers should involve those DHCP
who  are  directly  responsible  for  patient  care  (e.g.,  dentists,  hygienists,  dental
assistants)  in  identifying,  evaluating,  and  selecting  devices  with  engineered  safety
features at least annually and as they become available. Other examples of engineering
controls  include  sharps  containers  and  needle  recapping  devices.  When  engineering
controls  are  not  available  or  appropriate,  work-practice  controls  should  be  used.
Work-practice controls are behavior-based and are intended to reduce the risk of blood
exposure by changing the way DHCP perform tasks, such as using a one-handed scoop
technique for recapping needles between uses and before disposal. Other work-practice
controls include not bending or breaking needles before disposal, not passing a syringe
with  an  unsheathed  needle  by  hand,  removing  burs  before  disassembling  the
handpiece  from  the  dental  unit,  and  using  instruments  in  place  of  fingers  for  tissue
retraction  or  palpation  during  suturing  and  administration  of  anesthesia.  All  used
disposable  syringes  and  needles,  scalpel  blades,  and  other  sharp  items  should  be
placed  in  appropriate  puncture-resistant  containers  located  close  to  the  area  where
they  are  used.  Sharps  containers  should  be  disposed  of  according  to  state  and  local
regulated  medical  waste  rules.  For  more  information  about  sharps  safety,  see  the
Guidelines  for  Infection  Control  in  Dental  Health-Care  Settings—2003,  the  CDC
Workbook  for  Designing,  Implementing,  and  Evaluating  a  Sharps  Injury  Prevention
Program,  and  the  CDC  Sample  Screening  and  Device  Evaluation  Forms  for  Dentistry.
Safe  injection  practices  are  intended  to  prevent  transmission  of  infectious  diseases
between one patient and another, or between a patient and DHCP during preparation
and  administration  of  parenteral  (e.g.,  intravenous  or  intramuscular  injection)
medications.  Safe  injection  practices  are  a  set  of  measures  DHCP  should  follow  to
perform  injections  in  the  safest  possible  manner  for  the  protection  of  patients.  DHCP
most  frequently  handle  parenteral  medications  when  administering  local  anesthesia,
during  which  needles  and  cartridges  containing  local  anesthetics  are  used  for  one
patient  only  and  the  dental  cartridge  syringe  is  cleaned  and  heat  sterilized  between
patients.  Other  safe  practices  described  here  primarily  apply  to  use  of  parenteral
medications  combined  with  fluid  infusion  systems,  such  as  for  patients  undergoing
conscious sedation. Unsafe practices that have led to patient harm include (1) use of a
single syringe—with or without the same needle—to administer medication to multiple
patients,  (2)  reinsertion  of  a  used  syringe—with  or  without  the  same  needle—into  a
medication vial or solution container (e.g., saline bag) to obtain additional medication
for  a  single  patient  and  then  using  that  vial  or  solution  container  for  subsequent
patients,  and  (3)  preparation  of  medications  in  close  proximity  to  contaminated
supplies  or  equipment.  Safe  injection  practices  were  covered  in  the  Special
Considerations section (Aseptic Technique for Parenteral Medications) of the 2003 CDC
dental guidelines. However, because of reports of transmission of infectious diseases by
inappropriate  handling  of  injectable  medications,  CDC  now  considers  safe  injection
practices to be a formal element of Standard Precautions. Complete guidance on safe
injection  practices  can  be  found  in  the  2007  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions.
Additional materials, including a list of frequently asked questions from providers and a
patient notification toolkit, are also available. CDC protects patients and providers by
developing  recommendations  that  guide  infection  prevention  and  control  practices
wherever  dental  care  is  delivered.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/summary/standard-precautions.html
