A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Sterilizing practices from the Guideline for
Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in  Healthcare  Facilities  (2008).  The  delivery  of  sterile
products  for  use  in  patient  care  depends  not  only  on  the  effectiveness  of  the
sterilization  process  but  also  on  the  unit  design,  decontamination,  disassembling  and
packaging  of  the  device,  loading  the  sterilizer,  monitoring,  sterilant  quality  and
quantity, and the appropriateness of the cycle for the load contents, and other aspects
of  device  reprocessing.  Healthcare  personnel  should  perform  most  cleaning,
disinfecting, and sterilizing of patient-care supplies in a central processing department
in  order  to  more  easily  control  quality.  The  aim  of  central  processing  is  the  orderly
processing of medical and surgical instruments to protect patients from infections while
minimizing risks to staff and preserving the value of the items being reprocessed957.
Healthcare  facilities  should  promote  the  same  level  of  efficiency  and  safety  in  the
preparation of supplies in other areas (e.g., operating room, respiratory therapy) as is
practiced in central processing. Ensuring consistency of sterilization practices requires a
comprehensive  program  that  ensures  operator  competence  and  proper  methods  of
cleaning and wrapping instruments, loading the sterilizer, operating the sterilizer, and
monitoring  of  the  entire  process.  Furthermore,  care  must  be  consistent  from  an
infection  prevention  standpoint  in  all  patient-care  settings,  such  as  hospital  and
outpatient facilities. A sterilization process should be verified before it is put into use in
healthcare  settings.  All  steam,  ETO,  and  other  low-temperature  sterilizers  are  tested
with  biological  and  chemical  indicators  upon  installation,  when  the  sterilizer  is
relocated, redesigned, after major repair and after a sterilization failure has occurred to
ensure they are functioning prior to placing them into routine use. Three consecutive
empty steam cycles are run with a biological and chemical indicator in an appropriate
test  package  or  tray.  Each  type  of  steam  cycle  used  for  sterilization  (e.g.,
vacuum-assisted,  gravity)  is  tested  separately.  In  a  prevacuum  steam  sterilizer  three
consecutive empty cycles are also run with a Bowie-Dick test. The sterilizer is not put
back into use until all biological indicators are negative and chemical indicators show a
correct end-point response811-814, 819, 958. Biological and chemical indicator testing
is also done for ongoing quality assurance testing of representative samples of actual
products  being  sterilized  and  product  testing  when  major  changes  are  made  in
packaging, wraps, or load configuration. Biological and chemical indicators are placed
in  products,  which  are  processed  in  a  full  load.  When  three  consecutive  cycles  show
negative  biological  indicators  and  chemical  indicators  with  a  correct  end  point
response, you can put the change made into routine use811-814, 958. Items processed
during  the  three  evaluation  cycles  should  be  quarantined  until  the  test  results  are
negative.  The  central  processing  area(s)  ideally  should  be  divided  into  at  least  three
areas:  decontamination,  packaging,  and  sterilization  and  storage.  Physical  barriers
should  separate  the  decontamination  area  from  the  other  sections  to  contain
contamination  on  used  items.  In  the  decontamination  area  reusable  contaminated
supplies  (and  possibly  disposable  items  that  are  reused)  are  received,  sorted,  and
decontaminated. The recommended airflow pattern should contain contaminates within
the  decontamination  area  and  minimize  the  flow  of  contaminates  to  the  clean  areas.
The American Institute of Architects 959recommends negative pressure and no fewer
than six air exchanges per hour in the decontamination area (AAMI recommends 10 air
changes per hour) and 10 air changes per hour with positive pressure in the sterilizer
equipment  room.  The  packaging  area  is  for  inspecting,  assembling,  and  packaging
clean, but not sterile, material. The sterile storage area should be a limited access area
with a controlled temperature (may be as high as 75°F) and relative humidity (30-60%
in all works areas except sterile storage, where the relative humidity should not exceed
70%).819  The  floors  and  walls  should  be  constructed  of  materials  capable  of
withstanding  chemical  agents  used  for  cleaning  or  disinfecting.  Ceilings  and  wall
surfaces  should  be  constructed  of  non-shedding  materials.  Physical  arrangements  of
processing areas are presented schematically in four references811, 819, 920, 957. As
repeatedly  mentioned,  items  must  be  cleaned  using  water  with  detergents  or
enzymatic cleaners 465, 466, 468 before processing. Cleaning reduces the bioburden
and removes foreign material (i.e., organic residue and inorganic salts) that interferes
with the sterilization process by acting as a barrier to the sterilization agent179, 426,
457,  911,  912.  Surgical  instruments  are  generally  presoaked  or  prerinsed  to  prevent
drying of blood and tissue. Precleaning in patient-care areas may be needed on items
that  are  heavily  soiled  with  feces,  sputum,  blood,  or  other  material.  Items  sent  to
central  processing  without  removing  gross  soil  may  be  difficult  to  clean  because  of
dried secretions and excretions. Cleaning and decontamination should be done as soon
as possible after items have been used. Several types of mechanical cleaning machines
(e.g.,  utensil  washer-sanitizer,  ultrasonic  cleaner,  washer-sterilizer,  dishwasher,
washer-disinfector)  may  facilitate  cleaning  and  decontamination  of  most  items.  This
equipment  often  is  automated  and  may  increase  productivity,  improve  cleaning
effectiveness,  and  decrease  worker  exposure  to  blood  and  body  fluids.  Delicate  and
intricate objects and heat- or moisture-sensitive articles may require careful cleaning by
hand.  All  used  items  sent  to  the  central  processing  area  should  be  considered
contaminated  (unless  decontaminated  in  the  area  of  origin),  handled  with  gloves
(forceps  or  tongs  are  sometimes  needed  to  avoid  exposure  to  sharps),  and
decontaminated by one of the aforementioned methods to render them safer to handle.
Items composed of more than one removable part should be disassembled. Care should
be  taken  to  ensure  that  all  parts  are  kept  together,  so  that  reassembly  can  be
accomplished efficiently811. Investigators have described the degree of cleanliness by
visual  and  microscopic  examination.  One  study  found  91%  of  the  instruments  to  be
clean visually but, when examined microscopically, 84% of the instruments had residual
debris.  Sites  that  contained  residual  debris  included  junctions  between  insulating
sheaths and activating mechanisms of laparoscopic instruments and articulations and
grooves of forceps. More research is needed to understand the clinical significance of
these  findings  960  and  how  to  ensure  proper  cleaning.  Personnel  working  in  the
decontamination  area  should  wear  household-cleaning-type  rubber  or  plastic  gloves
when  handling  or  cleaning  contaminated  instruments  and  devices.  Face  masks,  eye
protection such as goggles or full-length faceshields, and appropriate gowns should be
worn when exposure to blood and contaminated fluids may occur (e.g., when manually
cleaning  contaminated  devices)961.  Contaminated  instruments  are  a  source  of
microorganisms that could inoculate personnel through nonintact skin on the hands or
through  contact  with  the  mucous  membranes  of  eyes,  nose,  or  mouth214,  811,  813.
Reusable  sharps  that  have  been  in  contact  with  blood  present  a  special  hazard.
Employees  must  not  reach  with  their  gloved  hands  into  trays  or  containers  that  hold
these sharps to retrieve them214. Rather, employees should use engineering controls
(e.g., forceps) to retrieve these devices. Once items are cleaned, dried, and inspected,
those requiring sterilization must be wrapped or placed in rigid containers and should
be  arranged  in  instrument  trays/baskets  according  to  the  guidelines  provided  by  the
AAMI  and  other  professional  organizations454,  811-814,  819,  836,  962.  These
guidelines state that hinged instruments should be opened; items with removable parts
should be disassembled unless the device manufacturer or researchers provide specific
instructions or test data to the contrary181; complex instruments should be prepared
and  sterilized  according  to  device  manufacturer's  instructions  and  test  data;  devices
with concave surfaces should be positioned to facilitate drainage of water; heavy items
should be positioned not to damage delicate items; and the weight of the instrument
set should be based on the design and density of the instruments and the distribution
of metal mass811, 962. While there is no longer a specified sterilization weight limit for
surgical sets, heavy metal mass is a cause of wet packs (i.e., moisture inside the case
and  tray  after  completion  of  the  sterilization  cycle)963.  Other  parameters  that  may
influence drying are the density of the wraps and the design of the set964. There are
several choices in methods to maintain sterility of surgical instruments, including rigid
containers,  peel-open  pouches  (e.g.,  self-sealed  or  heat-sealed  plastic  and  paper
pouches), roll stock or reels (i.e., paper-plastic combinations of tubing designed to allow
the user to cut and seal the ends to form a pouch) 454 and sterilization wraps (woven
and  nonwoven).  Healthcare  facilities  may  use  all  of  these  packaging  options.  The
packaging material must allow penetration of the sterilant, provide protection against
contact  contamination  during  handling,  provide  an  effective  barrier  to  microbial
penetration, and maintain the sterility of the processed item after sterilization 965. An
ideal  sterilization  wrap  would  successfully  address  barrier  effectiveness,  penetrability
(i.e., allows sterilant to penetrate), aeration (e.g., allows ETO to dissipate), ease of use,
drapeability,  flexibility,  puncture  resistance,  tear  strength,  toxicity,  odor,  waste
disposal, linting, cost, and transparency966. Unacceptable packaging for use with ETO
(e.g.,  foil,  polyvinylchloride,  and  polyvinylidene  chlorine  [kitchen-type  transparent
wrap])  814  or  hydrogen  peroxide  gas  plasma  (e.g.,  linens  and  paper)  should  not  be
used  to  wrap  medical  items.  In  central  processing,  double  wrapping  can  be  done
sequentially or nonsequentially (i.e., simultaneous wrapping). Wrapping should be done
in such a manner to avoid tenting and gapping. The sequential wrap uses two sheets of
the standard sterilization wrap, one wrapped after the other. This procedure creates a
package within a package. The nonsequential process uses two sheets wrapped at the
same time so that the wrapping needs to be performed only once. This latter method
provides multiple layers of protection of surgical instruments from contamination and
saves time since wrapping is done only once. Multiple layers are still common practice
due  to  the  rigors  of  handling  within  the  facility  even  though  the  barrier  efficacy  of  a
single  sheet  of  wrap  has  improved  over  the  years966.  Written  and  illustrated
procedures  for  preparation  of  items  to  be  packaged  should  be  readily  available  and
used  by  personnel  when  packaging  procedures  are  performed454.  All  items  to  be
sterilized should be arranged so all surfaces will be directly exposed to the sterilizing
agent.  Thus,  loading  procedures  must  allow  for  free  circulation  of  steam  (or  another
sterilant) around each item. Historically, it was recommended that muslin fabric packs
should not exceed the maximal dimensions, weight, and density of 12 inches wide × 12
inches high × 20 inches long, 12 lbs, and 7.2 lbs per cubic foot, respectively. Due to the
variety  of  textiles  and  metal/plastic  containers  on  the  market,  the  textile  and
metal/plastic  container  manufacturer  and  the  sterilizer  manufacturers  should  be
consulted  for  instructions  on  pack  preparation  and  density  parameters819.  There  are
several  important  basic  principles  for  loading  a  sterilizer:  allow  for  proper  sterilant
circulation;  perforated  trays  should  be  placed  so  the  tray  is  parallel  to  the  shelf;
nonperforated  containers  should  be  placed  on  their  edge  (e.g.,  basins);  small  items
should be loosely placed in wire baskets; and peel packs should be placed on edge in
perforated or mesh bottom racks or baskets454, 811, 836. Studies in the early 1970s
suggested that wrapped surgical trays remained sterile for varying periods depending
on the type of material used to wrap the trays. Safe storage times for sterile packs vary
with  the  porosity  of  the  wrapper  and  storage  conditions  (e.g.,  open  versus  closed
cabinets). Heat-sealed, plastic peel-down pouches and wrapped packs sealed in 3-mil
(3/1000 inch) polyethylene overwrap have been reported to be sterile for as long as 9
months after sterilization. The 3-mil polyethylene is applied after sterilization to extend
the  shelf  life  for  infrequently  used  items967.  Supplies  wrapped  in  double-thickness
muslin  comprising  four  layers,  or  equivalent,  remain  sterile  for  at  least  30  days.  Any
item  that  has  been  sterilized  should  not  be  used  after  the  expiration  date  has  been
exceeded  or  if  the  sterilized  package  is  wet,  torn,  or  punctured.  Although  some
hospitals  continue  to  date  every  sterilized  product  and  use  the  time-related  shelf-life
practice,  many  hospitals  have  switched  to  an  event-related  shelf-life  practice.  This
latter  practice  recognizes  that  the  product  should  remain  sterile  until  some  event
causes the item to become contaminated (e.g., tear in packaging, packaging becomes
wet, seal is broken)968. Event-related factors that contribute to the contamination of a
product include bioburden (i.e., the amount of contamination in the environment), air
movement,  traffic,  location,  humidity,  insects,  vermin,  flooding,  storage  area  space,
open/closed  shelving,  temperature,  and  the  properties  of  the  wrap  material966,  969.
There  are  data  that  support  the  event-related  shelf-life  practice970-972.  One  study
examined the effect of time on the sterile integrity of paper envelopes, peel pouches,
and nylon sleeves. The most important finding was the absence of a trend toward an
increased  rate  of  contamination  over  time  for  any  pack  when  placed  in  covered
storage971.  Another  evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  event-related  outdating  by
microbiologically  testing  sterilized  items.  During  the  2-year  study  period,  all  of  the
items tested were sterile972.Thus, contamination of a sterile item is event-related and
the  probability  of  contamination  increases  with  increased  handling973.  Following  the
sterilization  process,  medical  and  surgical  devices  must  be  handled  using  aseptic
technique  in  order  to  prevent  contamination.  Sterile  supplies  should  be  stored  far
enough  from  the  floor  (8  to  10  inches),  the  ceiling  (5  inches  unless  near  a  sprinkler
head  [18  inches  from  sprinkler  head]),  and  the  outside  walls  (2  inches)  to  allow  for
adequate  air  circulation,  ease  of  cleaning,  and  compliance  with  local  fire  codes  (e.g.,
supplies must be at least 18 inches from sprinkler heads). Medical and surgical supplies
should  not  be  stored  under  sinks  or  in  other  locations  where  they  can  become  wet.
Sterile  items  that  become  wet  are  considered  contaminated  because  moisture  brings
with it microorganisms from the air and surfaces. Closed or covered cabinets are ideal
but  open  shelving  may  be  used  for  storage.  Any  package  that  has  fallen  or  been
dropped on the floor must be inspected for damage to the packaging and contents (if
the  items  are  breakable).  If  the  package  is  heat-sealed  in  impervious  plastic  and  the
seal is still intact, the package should be considered not contaminated. If undamaged,
items packaged in plastic need not be reprocessed. The sterilization procedure should
be monitored routinely by using a combination of mechanical, chemical, and biological
indicators to evaluate the sterilizing conditions and indirectly the microbiologic status of
the processed items. The mechanical monitors for steam sterilization include the daily
assessment of cycle time and temperature by examining the temperature record chart
(or  computer  printout)  and  an  assessment  of  pressure  via  the  pressure  gauge.  The
mechanical  monitors  for  ETO  include  time,  temperature,  and  pressure  recorders  that
provide  data  via  computer  printouts,  gauges,  and/or  displays814.  Generally,  two
essential  elements  for  ETO  sterilization  (i.e.,  the  gas  concentration  and  humidity)
cannot be monitored in healthcare ETO sterilizers. Chemical indicators are convenient,
are  inexpensive,  and  indicate  that  the  item  has  been  exposed  to  the  sterilization
process. In one study, chemical indicators were more likely than biological indicators to
inaccurately  indicate  sterilization  at  marginal  sterilization  times  (e.g.,  2  minutes)847.
Chemical indicators should be used in conjunction with biological indicators, but based
on  current  studies  should  not  replace  them  because  they  indicate  sterilization  at
marginal sterilization time and because only a biological indicator consisting of resistant
spores  can  measure  the  microbial  killing  power  of  the  sterilization  process.847,  974.
Chemical indicators are affixed on the outside of each pack to show that the package
has  been  processed  through  a  sterilization  cycle,  but  these  indicators  do  not  prove
sterilization has been achieved. Preferably, a chemical indicator also should be placed
on the inside of each pack to verify sterilant penetration. Chemical indicators usually
are  either  heat-or  chemical-sensitive  inks  that  change  color  when  one  or  more
sterilization  parameters  (e.g.,  steam-time,  temperature,  and/or  saturated  steam;
ETO-time,  temperature,  relative  humidity  and/or  ETO  concentration)  are  present.
Chemical  indicators  have  been  grouped  into  five  classes  based  on  their  ability  to
monitor one or multiple sterilization parameters813, 819. If the internal and/or external
indicator  suggests  inadequate  processing,  the  item  should  not  be  used815.  An
air-removal
 test
 (Bowie-Dick
 Test)
 must
 be
 performed
 daily
 in
 an
 empty
dynamic-air-removal sterilizer (e.g., prevacuum steam sterilizer) to ensure air removal.
Biological  indicators  are  recognized  by  most  authorities  as  being  closest  to  the  ideal
monitors  of  the  sterilization  process  974,  975  because  they  measure  the  sterilization
process directly by using the most resistant microorganisms (i.e., Bacillus spores), and
not by merely testing the physical and chemical conditions necessary for sterilization.
Since the Bacillus spores used in biological indicators are more resistant and present in
greater  numbers  than  are  the  common  microbial  contaminants  found  on  patient-care
equipment,  the  demonstration  that  the  biological  indicator  has  been  inactivated
strongly  implies  that  other  potential  pathogens  in  the  load  have  been  killed844.  An
ideal  biological  monitor  of  the  sterilization  process  should  be  easy  to  use,  be
inexpensive,  not  be  subject  to  exogenous  contamination,  provide  positive  results  as
soon  as  possible  after  the  cycle  so  that  corrective  action  may  be  accomplished,  and
provide  positive  results  only  when  the  sterilization  parameters  (e.g.,  steam-time,
temperature, and/or saturated steam; ETO-time, temperature, relative humidity and/or
ETO  concentration)  are  inadequate  to  kill  microbial  contaminates847.  Biological
indicators are the only process indicators that directly monitor the lethality of a given
sterilization process. Spores used to monitor a sterilization process have demonstrated
resistance to the sterilizing agent and are more resistant than the bioburden found on
medical devices179, 911, 912. B. atrophaeus spores (106) are used to monitor ETO and
dry  heat,  and  G.  stearothermophilus  spores  (105)  are  used  to  monitor  steam
sterilization,  hydrogen  peroxide  gas  plasma,  and  liquid  peracetic  acid  sterilizers.  G.
stearothermophilus is incubated at 55-60°C, and B. atrophaeus is incubated at 35-37°C.
Steam and low temperature sterilizers (e.g., hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, peracetic
acid) should be monitored at least weekly with the appropriate commercial preparation
of  spores.  If  a  sterilizer  is  used  frequently  (e.g.,  several  loads  per  day),  daily  use  of
biological  indicators  allows  earlier  discovery  of  equipment  malfunctions  or  procedural
errors and thus minimizes the extent of patient surveillance and product recall needed
in the event of a positive biological indicator811. Each load should be monitored if it
contains implantable objects. If feasible, implantable items should not be used until the
results  of  spore  tests  are  known  to  be  negative.  Originally,  spore-strip  biological
indicators  required  up  to  7  days  of  incubation  to  detect  viable  spores  from  marginal
cycles  (i.e.,  when  few  spores  remained  viable).  The  next  generation  of  biological
indicator was self-contained in plastic vials containing a spore-coated paper strip and a
growth media in a crushable glass ampoule. This indicator had a maximum incubation
of  48  hours  but  significant  failures  could  be  detected  in  £24  hours.  A  rapid-readout
biological indicator that detects the presence of enzymes of G. stearothermophilus by
reading  a  fluorescent  product  produced  by  the  enzymatic  breakdown  of  a
nonfluorescent  substrate  has  been  marketed  for  the  more  than  10  years.  Studies
demonstrate that the sensitivity of rapid-readout tests for steam sterilization (1 hour for
132°C gravity sterilizers, 3 hrs for 121°C gravity and 132°C vacuum sterilizers) parallels
that  of  the  conventional  sterilization-specific  biological  indicators  846,  847,  976,  977
and  the  fluorescent  rapid  readout  results  reliably  predict  24-  and  48-hour  and  7-day
growth978. The rapid-readout biological indicator is a dual indicator system as it also
detects acid metabolites produced during growth of the G. stearothermophilusspores.
This system is different from the indicator system consisting of an enzyme system of
bacterial  origin  without  spores.  Independent  comparative  data  using  suboptimal
sterilization cycles (e.g., reduced time or temperature) with the enzyme-based indicator
system have not been published979. A new rapid-readout ETO biological indicator has
been  designed  for  rapid  and  reliable  monitoring  of  ETO  sterilization  processes.  The
indicator  has  been  clearedby  the  FDA  for  use  in  the  United  States400.  The
rapid-readout  ETO  biological  indicator  detects  the  presence  of  B.  atrophaeus  by
detecting a fluorescent signal indicating the activity of an enzyme present within the B.
atrophaeus organism, beta-glucosidase. The fluorescence indicates the presence of an
active  spore-associated  enzyme  and  a  sterilization  process  failure.  This  indicator  also
detects  acid  metabolites  produced  during  growth  of  the  B.  atrophaeus  spore.  Per
manufacturer's  data,  the  enzyme  always  was  detected  whenever  viable  spores  were
present.  This  was  expected  because  the  enzyme  is  relatively  ETO  resistant  and  is
inactivated  at  a  slightly  longer  exposure  time  than  the  spore.  The  rapid-readout  ETO
biological  indicator  can  be  used  to  monitor  100%  ETO,  and  ETO-HCFC  mixture
sterilization cycles. It has not been tested in ETO-CO2 mixture sterilization cycles. The
standard  biological  indicator  used  for  monitoring  full-cycle  steam  sterilizers  does  not
provide  reliable  monitoring  flash  sterilizers980.  Biological  indicators  specifically
designed  for  monitoring  flash  sterilization  are  now  available,  and  studies  comparing
them have been published846, 847, 981. Since sterilization failure can occur (about 1%
for  steam)982,  a  procedure  to  follow  in  the  event  of  positive  spore  tests  with  steam
sterilization has been provided by CDC and the Association of periOperative Registered
Nurses (AORN). The 1981 CDC recommendation is that "objects, other than implantable
objects, do not need to be recalled because of a single positive spore test unless the
steam  sterilizer  or  the  sterilization  procedure  is  defective."  The  rationale  for  this
recommendation is that single positive spore tests in sterilizers occur sporadically. They
may  occur  for  reasons  such  as  slight  variation  in  the  resistance  of  the  spores983,
improper use of the sterilizer, and laboratory contamination during culture (uncommon
with self-contained spore tests). If the mechanical (e.g., time, temperature, pressure in
the steam sterilizer) and chemical (internal and/or external) indicators suggest that the
sterilizer  wasfunctioning  properly,  a  single  positive  spore  test  probably  does  not
indicate sterilizer malfunction but the spore test should be repeated immediately 983. If
the spore tests remain positive, use of the sterilizer should be discontinued until it is
serviced1. Similarly, AORN states that a single positive spore test does not necessarily
indicate a sterilizer failure. If the test is positive, the sterilizer should immediately be
rechallenged for proper use and function. Items, other than implantable ones, do not
necessarily  need  to  be  recalled  unless  a  sterilizer  malfunction  is  found.  If  a  sterilizer
malfunction is discovered, the items must be considered nonsterile, and the items from
the  suspect  load(s)  should  be  recalled,  insofar  as  possible,  and  reprocessed  984.  A
suggested protocol for management of positive biological indicators is shown in Table
12839. A more conservative approach also has been recommended 813 in which any
positive spore test is assumed to represent sterilizer malfunction and requires that all
materials processed in that sterilizer, dating from the sterilization cycle having the last
negative  biologic  indicator  to  the  next  cycle  showing  satisfactory  biologic  indicator
challenge  results,  must  be  considered  nonsterile  and  retrieved,  if  possible,  and
reprocessed. This more conservative approach should be used for sterilization methods
other  than  steam  (e.g.,  ETO,  hydrogen  peroxide  gas  plasma).  However,  no  action  is
necessary if there is strong evidence for the biological indicator being defective 983or
the  growth  medium  contained  a  Bacillus  contaminant985.  If  patient-care  items  were
used  before  retrieval,  the  infection  control  professional  should  assess  the  risk  of
infection  in  collaboration  with  central  processing,  surgical  services,  and  risk
management staff. The factors that should be considered include the chemical indicator
result  (e.g.,  nonreactive  chemical  indicator  may  indicate  temperature  not  achieved);
the results of other biological indicators that followed the positive biological indicator
(e.g.,  positive  on  Tuesday,  negative  on  Wednesday);  the  parameters  of  the  sterilizer
associated  with  the  positive  biological  indicator  (e.g.,  reduced  time  at  correct
temperature);  the  time-temperature  chart  (or  printout);  and  the  microbial  load
associated  with  decontaminated  surgical  instruments  (e.g.,  85%  of  decontaminated
surgical  instruments  have  less  than  100  CFU).  The  margin  of  safety  in  steam
sterilization is sufficiently large that there is minimal infection risk associated with items
in a load that show spore growth, especially if the item was properly cleaned and the
temperature  was  achieved  (e.g.,  as  shown  by  acceptable  chemical  indicator  or
temperature chart). There are no published studies that document disease transmission
via  a  nonretrieved  surgical  instrument  following  a  sterilization  cycle  with  a  positive
biological indicator. False-positive biological indicators may occur from improper testing
or  faulty  indicators.  The  latter  may  occur  from  improper  storage,  processing,  product
contamination,  material  failure,  or  variation  in  resistance  of  spores.  Gram  stain  and
subculture of a positive biological indicator may determine if a contaminant has created
a  false-positive  result839,  986.  However,  in  one  incident,  the  broth  used  as  growth
medium  contained  a  contaminant,  B.  coagulans,which  resulted  in  broth  turbidity  at
55°C985. Testing of paired biological indicators from different manufacturers can assist
in  assessing  a  product  defect839.  False-positive  biological  indicators  due  to  extrinsic
contamination when using self-contained biological indicators should be uncommon. A
biological indicator should not be considered a false-positive indicator until a thorough
analysis  of  the  entire  sterilization  process  shows  this  to  be  likely.  The  size  and
composition  of  the  biological  indicator  test  pack  should  be  standardized  to  create  a
significant challenge to air removal and sterilant penetration and to obtain interpretable
results. There is a standard 16-towel pack recommended by AAMI for steam sterilization
813,  819,  987  consisting  of  16  clean,  preconditioned,  reusable  huck  or  absorbent
surgical towels each of which is approximately 16 inches by 26 inches. Each towel is
folded  lengthwise  into  thirds  and  then  folded  widthwise  in  the  middle.  One  or  more
biological indicators are placed between the eight and ninth towels in the approximate
geometric  center  of  the  pack.  When  the  towels  are  folded  and  placed  one  on  top  of
another, to form a stack (approximately 6 inch height) it should weigh approximately 3
pounds and should have a density of approximately 11.3 pounds per cubic foot813. This
test  pack  has  not  gained  universal  use  as  a  standard  pack  that  simulates  the  actual
in-use conditions of steam sterilizers. Commercially available disposable test packs that
have been shown to be equivalent to the AAMI 16 towel test pack also may be used.
The test pack should be placed flat in an otherwise fully loaded sterilizer chamber, in
the  area  least  favorable  to  sterilization  (i.e.,  the  area  representing  the  greatest
challenge to the biological indicator). This area is normally in the front, bottom section
of the sterilizer, near the drain811, 813. A control biological indicator from the lot used
for testing should be left unexposed to the sterilant, and then incubated to verify the
presterilization viability of the test spores and proper incubation. The most conservative
approach would be to use a control for each run; however, less frequent use may be
adequate  (e.g.,  weekly).  There  also  is  a  routine  test  pack  for  ETO  where  a  biological
indicator is placed in a plastic syringe with plunger, then placed in the folds of a clean
surgical towel, and wrapped. Alternatively, commercially available disposal test packs
that have been shown to be equivalent to the AAMI test pack may be used. The test
pack is placed in the center of the sterilizer load814. Sterilization records (mechanical,
chemical,  and  biological)  should  be  retained  for  a  time  period  in  compliance  with
standards (e.g., Joint Commission for the Accreditation of Healthcare Facilities requests
3 years) and state and federal regulations. In Europe, biological monitors are not used
routinely to monitor the sterilization process. Instead, release of sterilizer items is based
on  monitoring  the  physical  conditions  of  the  sterilization  process  that  is  termed
"parametric release." Parametric release requires that there is a defined quality system
in place at the facility performing the sterilization and that the sterilization process be
validated  for  the  items  being  sterilized.  At  present  in  Europe,  parametric  release  is
accepted  for  steam,  dry  heat,  and  ionizing  radiation  processes,  as  the  physical
conditions are understood and can be monitored directly988. For example, with steam
sterilizers  the  load  could  be  monitored  with  probes  that  would  yield  data  on
temperature,  time,  and  humidity  at  representative  locations  in  the  chamber  and
compared  to  the  specifications  developed  during  the  validation  process.  Periodic
infection control rounds to areas using sterilizers to standardize the sterilizer's use may
identify  correctable  variances  in  operator  competence;  documentation  of  sterilization
records, including chemical and biological indicator test results; sterilizer maintenance
and  wrapping;  and  load  numbering  of  packs.  These  rounds  also  may  identify
improvement  activities  to  ensure  that  operators  are  adhering  to  established
standards.989 CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help
reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/sterilizing-practices.html
