A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 A summary of strategies for acute care facilities that want to implement interventions
to prevent hospital-onset Staphylococcus aureus Bloodstream Infections (HO SA BSIs).
The  specific  interventions  listed  below  are  not  intended  for  use  in  response  to  an
outbreak and are intended for adult inpatient units. Infection control practices should
be reinforced on an ongoing basis, including the use of competency-based training and
monitoring of adherence with feedback of results for practices including hand hygiene,
environmental  cleaning  and  disinfection,  and  use  of  personal  protective  equipment.
Hospitals  should  work  to  implement  the  CDC  Core  Elements  of  Hospital  Antibiotic
Stewardship  Programs.  Core  and  supplemental  strategies  for  consideration  are  listed
below.  Core  strategies  are  supported  by  published  evidence;  supplemental  strategies
are  generally  supported  by  less  evidence  and  could  be  considered  for  use  when
reduction  goals  are  not  met  after  implementation  of  core  interventions  or  when
facilities  need  to  implement  a  more  aggressive  prevention  strategy.  The  first  step  in
developing a HO SA BSI prevention strategy is to review recent episodes of HO SA BSI
to  identify  common  risk  factors  and  underlying  syndromes  that  can  help  identify  the
populations  to  prioritize.  Elements  that  could  be  reviewed  include  associated
syndromes  (e.g.,  wound  infections  or  pneumonia)  that  may  have  led  to  the  BSI,  unit
types,  presence  of  indwelling  devices  such  as  central  venous  catheters  (CVCs),  and
prior invasive procedures or surgeries. Based on this review of facility-level data, the
most impactful core and supplemental strategies can be chosen. Pursue a strategy to
reduce carriage of S. aureus among all patients admitted to intensive care units (ICUs)
(see table for summary of decolonization and pathogen reduction strategies) including:
 Pursue a strategy to reduce carriage of S. aureus for patients hospitalized with CVCs or
midline  catheters  outside  the  ICU  For  patients  undergoing  high  risk  surgeries  (e.g.
cardiothoracic
 (CT),
 orthopedic,
 and
 neurosurgery),
 use
 an
 intranasal
antistaphylococcal  antibiotic/antiseptic  (e.g.  mupirocin  or  iodophor)  and  chlorhexidine
wash or wipes prior to surgery.A Possible regimens:  Consider chlorhexidine bathing or
wipes  for  up  to  5  days  prior  to  surgery  for  all  surgical  patients*,  not  just  those
undergoing  high  risk  surgeries  Staphylococcus  aureus  (staph)  is  a  germ  found  on
people’s skin. Most of the time, staph does not cause any harm but sometimes staph
causes infections. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/staphylococcus-aureus/hcp/prevent-in-acute-care-facilities/index.html
