A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Healthy eating patterns help people live longer, strengthen their immune systems, and
have fewer chronic diseases.  However, many people have limited access to affordable,
convenient  places  that  offer  healthier  foods.  This  may  include  people  living  in
lower-income urban neighborhoods, rural areas, and tribal communities, as well some
racial and ethnic groups. In 2021, nearly 34 million U.S. residents lived in food insecure
households.  Healthy  eating  emphasizes  fruits,  vegetables,  whole  grains,  low-fat  or
fat-free dairy, and lean protein. Healthy eating also limits added sugar, saturated fat,
and sodium.  However, in 2019, only about 1 in 10 US adults met recommendations for
fruit and vegetable intake. Among adolescents, 7% met the recommendation for fruits,
while only 2% met the recommendation for vegetables.  In addition, federal guidelines
recommend that Americans 2 years and older keep their intake of added sugars to less
than 10% of their total daily calories. That means that in a 2,000-calorie diet, no more
than  200  calories—about  12  teaspoons—should  come  from  added  sugars.  Yet  in
2017–2018,  the  average  intake  of  added  sugars  was  17  teaspoons  for  children  and
adults. When healthy items are not readily available, people may settle for unhealthy
foods.  States  and  communities  can  increase  access  to  healthy  foods  in  a  variety  of
ways.  Applying  food  service  or  nutrition  guidelines  can  improve  healthy  food  choices
where  foods  and  beverages  are  sold,  served,  and  distributed.  The  Food  Service
Guidelines  for  Federal  Facilities  (federal  food  service  guidelines)  can  be  used  in
worksites and community settings. The Healthy Eating Research Nutrition Guidelines for
the Charitable Food System (HER guidelines) can be used in food banks and pantries.
On  this  page:   *  Indicates  short-term  activities  that  may  be  accomplished  in  1  to  2
years.+  Indicates  activities  that  may  take  up  to  5  years,  depending  on  the
organization's capacity, previous work in this area, and size of the project. Support the
development,  adoption,  and  application  of  state-wide  policies  that  apply  federal  food
service  guidelines  or  HER  guidelines  in  statewide  food  service  or  food  distribution
operations and procurement mechanisms. + Include all four domains of the federal food
service guidelines in statewide policies and implementation of food service guidelines:
With partners, complete a food security, health equity, or community needs assessment
in  relation  to  food  and  nutrition  to  prioritize  populations,  settings,  and  programs.*
Develop  or  revise  (if  needed)  food  service  or  charitable  food  distribution  policies  and
contracts in community institutions. Such settings include hospitals, state government
worksites, colleges and universities, food banks and pantries, or parks and recreation
centers. The policies should align with the federal food service guidelines or the HER
guidelines  (Healthy  Eating  Research).  Assess  the  cultural  food  preferences  of  your
priority  population.  Incorporate  findings  into  food  service  and  charitable  food
distribution  guidelines,  policies,  and  practices.*  Develop  or  refine  emergency
management  plans,  such  as  preparedness,  relief/response,  and  recovery.  Work  with
state or local officials to ensure equitable access to foods and beverages that meet food
service  guidelines.  Make  sure  to  address  training  needs  in  your  plans.+  Monitor  and
evaluate  food  service  guidelines  and  charitable  food  policies  and  programs  to  track
progress,  determine  future  needs,  and  improve  program  sustainability.  As  needed,
provide  training  or  technical  assistance  to  others  making  baseline  assessments  or
monitoring  progress.+  Create  or  expand  a  culturally  appropriate  communication
campaign  to  priority  communities  or  populations  to  promote  healthier  food  and
beverages.  Topics  may  include  increasing  the  consumption  of  fruits,  vegetables,  and
whole  grains  and  reducing  added  sugars.*  Support  development,  adoption,  and
application  of  municipal-  and  facility-level  food  service  guidelines  policies  and
procurement  practices.  Encourage  the  development  of  organizational  policies  and
contracts  in  other  institutional  settings,  including  charitable  food  settings.+  Work  on
food procurement, food distribution, and other food systems efforts where food service
guidelines  are  not  feasible.+  Form  a  food  service  guidelines  team  to  plan  and  apply
food service guidelines at the municipal or organizational level. Include representatives
from  various  functional  areas  (such  as  leaders,  food  service  vendors,  or  nutrition
experts) and cultures. Also include customers or clients who have experienced limited
access  to  affordable,  healthy  foods.*  Provide  technical  assistance  to  organizations  or
external  institutions  to  help  them  their  guidelines  with  the  federal  food  service
guidelines or the HER guidelines.* Train food service staff to use healthy food service
practices.  These  include  appropriate  portion  sizes,  healthier  entrée  recipes,  healthier
cooking methods, promotion of healthier items, and tracking of sales and procurement
of healthier items.* Train staff and volunteers at food banks, food pantries, faith-based
organizations, or other food distribution networks to ensure best practices are followed.
This  includes  implementing  nutrition  standards  for  foods  purchased  or  accepted
through  donations.  Use  inventory  tracking  and  ordering  systems  and  evaluate  the
quality and cultural desirability of foods.* Philadelphia Hospitals Offer Healthier Options
with  Good  Food,  Healthy  HospitalsGood  Food  Healthy  Hospitals  invited  hospitals  to
adopt standards in at least one of five hospital food environments: purchased food and
beverages,  cafeteria  meals,  patient  meals,  catering,  and  vending  machines.  After  1
year  in  action,  two  hospitals  saw  an  increase  in  sales  in  healthy  items.  2019  Food
Service Guidelines Local Action InstituteProvides examples of success from Multnomah
County, Oregon; Erie County, New York; and the University of Pittsburgh when healthier
food service and procurement practices were applied in various settings. Food Service
Guidelines  for  Federal  FacilitiesVoluntary  best  business  practices  to  increase  healthy
and safe food options for employees and visitors in worksite and community settings.
Use the guidelines to make cafeterias and other food service venues healthier, safer,
more  sustainable,  and  easier  to  select  healthier  foods  and  beverages.  Food  Service
Guidelines  Implementation  ToolkitIn-depth  guidance  on  using  building  blocks  to
implement food service guidelines. Useful features of this key resource include: Healthy
Eating  Research  Nutrition  Guidelines  for  the  Charitable  Food  SystemProvides  specific,
evidence-based nutritional guidance tailored for the charitable food system. Supporting
Wellness at Pantries (SWAP) ResourcesTips for applying the SWAP ranking system for
food  banks  and  pantries.  Healthier  Food  Donation  Guidelines  for  Retailers  and
DistributorsHow to donate nutritious foods and beverages to food banks, food pantries,
and other charitable food networks. Provides practical tips on identifying and tracking
items for donation.What is the Evidence for State and Local Laws Addressing Sodium
Reduction  among  the  US  Adult  Population?Assesses  the  strength  and  quality  of  six
policy  interventions  to  reduce  sodium  consumption  among  adults.  Behavioral  Design
ToolsContains  an  evidence  review,  sample  diagrams,  and  electronic  checklists  of
behavioral  design  strategies  to  facilitate  healthier  food  purchases.  Use  the  checklists
below to record if suggested strategies are already in use, planned for implementation,
or  may  be  considered  in  the  future.  Infant  and  Young  Child  Feeding  in  Emergencies
ToolkitHelps emergency preparedness and response personnel, families, and the public
ensure that children are fed safely when disaster strikes. Cultural Food Preferences in
Food ServiceConsiderations when seeking to offer cultural foods in food service. Covers
topics such as how to decide which foods to offer, how to communicate with vendors,
and  how  to  use  policies  and  contracts  to  ensure  these  foods  are  available.  Johns
Hopkins  Center  for  a  Livable  Future's  Food  Policy  NetworksA  comprehensive  online
directory  of  US  food  policy  councils.  Resources  for  fruit  and  vegetable  voucher
incentives and produce prescriptions. Communication tips to support program efforts.
Evaluation  framework  for  making  evaluations  useful,  feasible,  ethical,  accurate,  and
culturally responsive. Health equity tools to help remove barriers to health. Behavioral
design  uses  cognitive,  emotional,  behavioral,  and  informational  strategies  to  create
food  environments  that  support  healthier  choices.  It  modifies  the  way  foods  and
beverages  are  prepared,  placed,  presented,  promoted,  and/or  priced.  In  addition,
behavioral design optimizes building and facility design, construction, and management
to  improve  the  overall  experience.  Facility  efficiency,  environmental  support,  and
community  development  are  food  service  facility  and  management  practices  that:
Nutrition guidelines for charitable food systems are used in settings such as food banks
and  food  pantries  to  ensure  that  people  with  food  insecurity  have  nutritious  food
offerings.  The  HER  guidelines  are  recommended  for  these  types  of  settings.  For
charitable meal distribution programs, food service guidelines can be adapted to meet
consumer needs. Food and nutrition security refers to "having reliable access to enough
high-quality food to avoid hunger and stay healthy." Food service guidelines are specific
standards for healthier food and beverages and food service operations used in venues
such  as  cafeterias,  cafés,  grills,  snack  bars,  concession  stands,  micro  markets,  and
vending  machines.  The  venues  can  be  in  worksites,  such  as  hospitals,  colleges  and
universities, private workplaces, and state, local, or tribal government facilities. Venues
can also be in community settings, such as parks, recreational centers, and stadiums.
Food service guidelines do not apply to food served to children in childcare or school
settings  that  are  governed  by  federal  laws  and  regulations,  including  the  National
School  Lunch  Program,  the  School  Breakfast  Program,  the  Child  and  Adult  Care  Food
Program, and the Summer Food Service Program. Food Service Guidelines for Federal
Facilities was developed to improve food service at federal facilities but can be used as
a model in public and private settings in a state or community. It is one of the most
comprehensive sets of food service guidelines available. It contains standards for food
and nutrition; facility efficiency, environmental support, and community development;
food  safety;  and  behavioral  design.  The  food  and  nutrition  standards  align  with  the
2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Healthy food procurement is purchasing
foods  and  beverages  that  align  with  food  service  guidelines/nutrition  standards.
Procurement may be through statewide or acquisition mechanisms, such as bulk food
contracts,  which  maximize  the  collective  purchasing  power  of  state,  local,  tribal,  and
community-based  institutions.  Breastfeeding  Continuity  of  Care  Increasing  Physical
Activity  Through  Community  Design  Early  Care  and  Education  (ECE)  Policies  and
Activities Family Healthy Weight Programs Voucher Incentives and Produce Prescription
Programs Good nutrition is essential for health across the lifespan. See strategies, data,
and  resources  to  improve  nutrition  in  states  and  communities.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/php/public-health-strategy/food-service-and-nutrition-guidelines.html
