Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  N95  filtering  facepiece  respirators  (commonly  called  N95
respirators) include Surgical N95s, a type of respirator sometimes needed in healthcare
settings.  Surgical  N95s  have  fluid  resistance,  flammability,  and  biocompatibility
protections. In the United States, all N95 respirators used in occupational settings are
approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and used
in  accordance  with  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  standards.
Training on use and indications for use of N95 respirators
It is important to train healthcare personnel (HCP) on indications for use and the proper
use of N95 respirators. The OSHA Respiratory Protection standard requires employers
to  provide  respirator  training  to  an  employee  prior  to  use  in  the  workplace.  For
example,  HCP  should  be  educated  on  the  use  of  N95  respirators  when  caring  for
patients  managed  with  airborne  precautions,  and  other  instances  for  respirator  use,
such  as  when  indicated  for  the  performance  of  aerosol  generating  procedures.
Understanding  proper  use  of  respirators,  including  donning  (putting  on)  and  doffing
(taking off), limitations on their use, and maintenance, is essential for effective use of
respiratory protection. HCP should be thoroughly trained before they are fit tested to
ensure they are comfortable donning the respirator and know how to conduct a user
seal check. HCP should be trained on the respirator they are expecting to use at work.
Just-in-time fit testing
Just-in-time  fit  testing  refers  to  the  capacity  of  healthcare  facilities  to  do  larger  scale
evaluation, training, and fit testing of employees when necessary during a pandemic.
Facilities may adopt a plan to use the “just-in-time” method for fit testing, which has
been incorporated into pandemic plans for many facilities. For large facilities, it may not
be feasible to fit test all employees, especially if their job does not typically place them
at  risk  for  exposure  to  airborne  infectious  diseases  like  tuberculosis.  Healthcare
facilities should begin training and start to plan for fit testing as soon as they expect to
receive patients with a respiratory infectious disease requiring respiratory protection. It
is  essential  to  train  and  fit  test  HCP  prior  to  receiving  patients.  This  just-in-time  fit
testing approach could also be used when healthcare facilities must expedite fit testing
after  receiving  different  respirators  than  their  usual  supply  because  of  shortages.
Limiting respirators during training
To conserve the supply of N95 respirators, healthcare facilities should understand which
of  their  HCP  need  to  be  in  a  respiratory  protection  program  and  thus  medically
evaluated, trained, and fit tested. If training and fit testing are conducted during two
separate  steps,  it  is  possible  to  allow  one-time  re-use  of  N95  respirators  used  by
individual HCP during training and then fit testing. Employees should be fit tested after
they  are  comfortable  donning  the  respirator  and  have  performed  a  user  seal  check.
Qualitative fit testing
Preferential use of qualitative fit testing can preserve some respirators for further use in
training. Respirator fit test methods are classified as either qualitative or quantitative,
and there are multiple protocols of each classification that are NIOSH-recommended or
meet the requirements of OSHA’s Respiratory Protection Standard. A qualitative fit test
is  a  pass  or  fail  test  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  respirator  fit  that  relies  on  the
individual’s  sensory  detection  of  a  test  agent.  A  quantitative  fit  test  numerically
measures  the  effectiveness  of  the  respirator  to  seal  with  the  wearer’s  face,  without
relying on the wearer’s voluntary or involuntary response to a test agent. Quantitative
fit  tests  involve  adaptation  of  the  respirator  to  the  fit  testing  equipment,  which  can
involve making holes in the respirator. Many healthcare systems already use qualitative
fit  test  methods  for  fit  testing  HCP.  For  those  using  quantitative  fit  test  methods,
consider  using  qualitative  fit  test  methods  to  minimize  the  destruction  of  an  N95
respirator used in fit testing and allow for the re-use of the same N95 respirator by the
HCP  for  training.  Qualitative  fit  methods  may  also  allow  for  rapid  fit  testing  of  larger
numbers of HCP. Any switch in methods should be assessed to ensure proficiency of the
fit testers in carrying out the test. Use of NIOSH Approved® respirator alternatives to
N95 respirators
Use NIOSH Approved alternatives to N95 respirators where feasible. These include other
classes  of  filtering  facepiece  respirators,  elastomeric  half-mask  and  full  facepiece
air-purifying  respirators,  and  powered  air  purifying  respirators  (PAPRs).  All  of  these
alternatives  will  provide  equivalent  or  higher  protection  than  N95  respirators  when
properly worn. NIOSH maintains a searchable, online version of the Certified Equipment
List identifying all NIOSH Approved respirators. Filtering facepiece respirators
Every  other  NIOSH  Approved  filtering  facepiece  respirator  is  at  least  as  protective  as
the N95 respirator. These include N99®, N100®, P95®, P99, P100®, R95®, R99, and
R100. These respirators require annual fit testing. Elastomeric respirators
Half-mask and full-facepiece elastomeric respirators are tight-fitting respirators that are
made  of  synthetic  or  rubber  material  permitting  them  to  be  repeatedly  disinfected,
cleaned,  and  reused.  They  are  equipped  with  replaceable  filter  cartridges.  When
equipped  with  a  particulate  filter  (N95,  N99,  N100,  P95,  P99,  P100,  R95,  R99,  and
R100),  they  are  at  least  as  protective  as  anN95  respirator.  Elastomeric  respirators
require  annual  fit  testing.  Elastomeric  respirators  with  unfiltered  exhalation  valves
should  not  be  used  when  a  source  control  device  is  required.  The  NIOSH  Certified
Equipment List identifies the elastomeric respirators without exhalation valves or with
filtered  exhalation  valves  that  may  act  as  a  source  control  device.  Facilities  using
elastomeric  respirators  should  have  up-to-date  cleaning  and  disinfection  procedures,
which  are  an  essential  part  of  use  for  protection  against  infectious  agents.  Powered
air-purifying respirators (PAPRs)
PAPRs are reusable respirators that are typically loose-fitting hoods or helmets. These
respirators are battery-powered with a blower that pulls air through attached filters or
cartridges.  When  equipped  with  a  particulate  filter,  they  provide  a  higher  level  of
protection than N95 respirators. Loose-fitting PAPRs do not require fit-testing and can
be worn by people with facial hair. PAPRs should not be used in surgical settings due to
concerns  that  the  blower  exhaust  and  exhaled  air  may  contaminate  the  sterile  field.
Facilities  using  PAPRs  should  have  up-to-date  cleaning  and  disinfection  procedures,
which  are  an  essential  part  of  use  for  protection  against  infectious  agents.  Prioritize
respirators for HCP who use them for respiratory protection
In  times  of  anticipated  shortages,  prioritize  N95  respirators  for  HCP  who  are
recommended to wear them as respiratory protection when caring for patients. In this
scenario,  respirators  should  not  be  used  by  HCP  who  are  only  using  them  for  source
control. Temporarily suspend annual fit testing
Facilities  can  consider  temporarily  suspending  annual  fit  testing  of  HCP  in  times  of
expected  shortages;  this  may  require  enforcement  discretion  by  OSHA.  However,  an
initial fit test with the same model, style, and size is still necessary. In addition, a seal
check should be performed on each use as with any respirator use. Use of any NIOSH
Approved N95 respirator
In times of anticipated shortage, the FDA may issue an emergency use authorization to
allow healthcare settings to use N95 respirators without the additional fluid resistance,
flammability, and biocompatibility protections. If N95 respirators with these additional
protections  (i.e.,  Surgical  N95s)  are  not  available,  and  there  is  a  risk  that  the  worker
may be exposed to splashes, sprays, or splatters of blood or body fluids, then a face
shield should be worn in addition to the N95 respirator. HCP who are working in a sterile
field or who may be exposed to splashes, sprays, or splatters of blood or body fluids
should  be  prioritized  to  use  Surgical  N95s.  Use  of  N95  respirators  beyond  the
designated shelf life for training and fit testing
In times of anticipated shortage, consider using N95 respirators beyond the designated
shelf life. However, respirators beyond the designated shelf life might not perform to
the  requirements  for  which  they  were  approved.  Because  of  this,  use  of  respirators
beyond  the  designated  shelf  life  could  be  prioritized  for  situations  where  respiratory
protection  is  not  recommended,  such  as  training,  fit  testing,  and  source  control.  It  is
important to check that components such as the straps, nose bridge, and nose foam
material did not degrade, which can affect the quality of the fit, and seal and therefore
the effectiveness of the respirator. As respirators beyond the designated shelf life can
still  serve  an  important  purpose,  healthcare  facilities  should  retain  and  reserve  all
unused  N95  respirators  during  pandemics  or  epidemics.  Extended  use  of  N95
respirators as respiratory protection
During conventional use in patient care, a disposable respirator should be removed and
discarded  between  patients.  However,  practices  allowing  extended  use  of  N95
respirators  as  respiratory  protection,  when  acceptable,  can  also  be  considered  as  a
contingency capacity strategy. Extended use refers to the practice of wearing the same
N95  respirator  for  repeated  close  contact  encounters  with  several  different  patients,
without  removing  the  respirator  between  patient  encounters.  Extended  use  is  well
suited  to  situations  wherein  multiple  patients  with  the  same  infectious  disease
diagnosis, whose care requires use of a respirator, are cohorted (e.g., housed on the
same  hospital  unit).  Extended  use  can  also  be  considered  for  care  of  patients  with
tuberculosis,  varicella,  measles,  and  other  infectious  diseases  where  use  of  a  NIOSH
Approved particulate respirator is recommended. When practicing extended use of N95
respirators  over  the  course  of  a  shift,  consider  1)  the  ability  of  the  N95  respirator  to
retain its fit, 2) contamination concerns, 3) practical aspects (e.g., meal breaks), and 4)
comfort  of  the  user.  N95  respirators  should  be  discarded  immediately  after  being
removed. If removed for a meal break, the respirator should be discarded and a new
respirator  put  on  after  the  break.  N95  respirators  should  be  discarded  when
contaminated  with  blood,  respiratory  or  nasal  secretions,  or  other  bodily  fluids  from
patients.  HCP  can  consider  using  a  face  shield  over  the  respirator  to  reduce
contamination  of  the  respirator,  especially  during  aerosol  generating  procedures  or
procedures  that  might  generate  splashes  and  sprays.  A  medical  mask  should  not  be
placed over a respirator because it may compromise the fit of the respirator. For re-use
of  N95  respirators  in  addition  to  extended  use,  please  see  the  re-use  section  under
crisis capacity strategies below. Use of respirators beyond the designated shelf life for
healthcare delivery
Consider  using  NIOSH  Approved  N95  respirators  beyond  the  designated  shelf  life  for
care of patients with diseases for which a respirator is recommended during their care
(e.g., COVID-19, tuberculosis, measles, varicella). Many models found in U.S. stockpiles
and stockpiles of healthcare facilities were found to continue to perform in accordance
with  NIOSH  performance  standards.  However,  fluid  resistance  and  flammability  were
not assessed. Decisions to implement this strategy would require authorization by the
FDA  or  enforcement  discretion  by  OSHA.  It  is  optimal  to  use  these  respirators  in  the
context of a respiratory protection program that includes medical evaluation, training,
and fit testing. If used in healthcare delivery, it is important to check that components
such  as  the  straps,  nose  bridge,  and  nose  foam  material  did  not  degrade,  which  can
affect the quality of the fit, and seal and therefore the effectiveness of the respirator. It
is also particularly important that HCP perform the seal check prior to entering a patient
care area. CDC does not recommend using N95 respirators beyond the designated shelf
life  in  surgical  settings.  Use  of  respirators  conforming  to  international  standards  with
similar filtration efficiencies to NIOSH Approved respirators (International Respirators)
In the United States, OSHA mandates that workplaces must use respirators approved by
NIOSH to assure that these devices provide sufficient protection. Other countries have
standards  for  respirators  with  similar  filtration  efficiencies  to  NIOSH  Approved
respirators.  However,  some  evaluation  methods  are  different  such  as  approaches  to
ensure  the  ongoing  quality  of  the  respirators.  To  better  ensure  that  international
respirators  will  provide  the  protections  claimed,  purchasing  respirators  supplied  by
entities  that  are  also  NIOSH  approval  holders  for  other  respirator  products  is
recommended.  Therefore,  they  may  be  suitable  alternatives  to  provide  protection  in
healthcare facilities during pandemics when supplies are short. Decisions to implement
this  strategy  would  require  authorization  by  FDA  or  enforcement  discretion  by  OSHA.
When purchasing international respirators supplied by entities that are NIOSH approval
holders  for  other  respirator  products  is  not  possible,  verify  that  the  respirators  were
tested  to  the  standards  by  a  third-party  accredited  test  laboratory  to  increase
confidence  that  these  products  will  perform  as  indicated.  International  respirators
supplied by entities that are not NIOSH approval holders should not be used when an
N95 respirator is recommended to be worn. Limited re-use of N95 and other disposable
respirators
Re-use  refers  to  the  practice  of  using  the  same  disposable  respirator  by  one  HCP  for
multiple  encounters  with  different  patients  but  removing  it  (doffing)  after  each
encounter. This practice is often referred to as “limited reuse” because restrictions are
in place to limit the number of times the same respirator is reused. For pathogens for
which  contact  transmission  is  not  a  concern,  routine  limited  re-use  of  single-use
disposable  respirators  has  been  practiced  for  decades.  For  example,  for  tuberculosis
prevention, a respirator classified as disposable can be reused by the same provider as
long as the respirator maintains its structural and functional integrity. If reuse must be
implemented  in  times  of  shortages,  HCP  could  be  encouraged  to  reuse  their  N95
respirators  when  caring  for  patients  with  tuberculosis  disease  first.  Limited  re-use  of
N95  respirators  when  caring  for  patients  with  other  infections  where  respiratory
protection is recommended might also become necessary. However, it is unknown what
the  potential  contribution  of  contact  transmission  is  for  some  respiratory  pathogens,
and  caution  should  be  used.  It  is  important  to  consult  with  the  respirator  approval
holder  regarding  the  maximum  number  of  donnings  or  uses  they  recommend  for  the
N95 respirator model. If no approval holder guidance is available, data suggest limiting
the number of reuses to no more than five total uses (five total donnings) per device by
the  same  HCP  to  ensure  an  adequate  respirator  performance.  An  example  of  this
scenario  is:  an  HCP  wears  an  N95  respirator  to  care  for  a  patient,  removes  it  after
exiting  the  room,  and  then  later  returns  to  care  for  the  patient  and  puts  the  same
respirator  on  again.  This  would  count  as  two  uses  or  donnings.  HCP  should  always
inspect the respirator and perform a seal check upon donning a re-used respirator. N95
respirators  and  other  disposable  respirators  should  not  be  shared  by  multiple  HCP.
During times of crisis, practicing limited re-use while also implementing extended use
can be considered.
If  limited  re-use  is  practiced  on  top  of  extended  use,  caution  should  be  used  to
minimize  self-contamination  and  degradation  of  the  respirator.  If  no  manufacturer
guidance  is  available,  a  reasonable  limitation  should  continue  to  be  five  total
donnings regardless of the number of hours the respirator is worn. An example of this
scenario is: An HCP wears a respirator during the first 3 hours of their shift, removes the
respirator to eat lunch, and puts it back on after lunch. This would count as two uses or
donnings. Some N95 respirators might be worn after more than five donnings, but the
structural and functional integrity may be compromised. N95 respirators should not be
re-used  when  caring  for  patients  with  varicella  or  other  pathogens  that  can  also  be
transmitted  via  contact  routes,  as  contact  transmission  poses  a  risk  to  HCP  who
implement  this  practice.  Respirators  soiled  or  grossly  contaminated  with  blood,
respiratory or nasal secretions, or other bodily fluids from patients should be discarded.
HCP can consider using a face shield or medical mask over the respirator to reduce and
prevent  contamination  of  the  N95  respirator,  especially  during  aerosol  generating
procedures or procedures anticipated to generate splashes and sprays. It is important
to perform hand hygiene before and after the previously worn N95 respirator is donned
or  adjusted.  Use  Enhanced  Performance  and  Enhanced  Performance  Plus  barrier  face
coverings
Enhanced Performance and Enhanced Performance Plus barrier face coverings (BFCs)
are  disposable  or  reusable  BFCs  that  achieve  a  minimum  of  50%  filtration  efficiency
against particulates. They are intended to cover the nose and mouth. These BFCs meet
the  ASTM  F3502-21  consensus  standard  and  are  tested  by  a  laboratory.  The
manufacturer must specify how to wear it properly to reduce gaps and, if reusable, the
number of times you can wash the BFC. They are intended primarily for source control
and  to  provide  a  degree  of  particulate  filtration  to  reduce  the  amount  of  inhaled
particulate matter. However, they are not meant to replace respiratory protection, and
they may not offer fluid resistance. Prioritize the use of N95 respirators by activity type
Medical masks may need to be used when NIOSH Approved respirators and Enhanced
Performance  and  Enhanced  Performance  Plus  BFCs  are  so  limited  that  it  is  no  longer
possible to have HCP wear respiratory protection when entering the room or care area
of  a  patient  for  whom  respirator  use  is  recommended  for  their  care.  The  use  of  N95
respirators,  elastomeric  respirators,  or  PAPRs  should  be  prioritized  for  HCP  with  the
highest  potential  for  exposures  including  being  present  in  the  room  during  aerosol
generating procedures performed on persons with transmissible infectious diseases. If
medical masks are used instead of an N95 respirator, this strategy should be combined
whenever possible with other recommended actions to reduce the risk for transmission
including  properly  maintained  ventilation  systems,  use  of  airborne  infection  isolation
rooms,  source  control  (i.e.,  masking  of  individuals  who  may  be  contagious),  and
maintaining  physical  distance  from  the  patient.  Expedient  patient  isolation  rooms  for
exposure risk-reduction
Portable  fan  devices  with  high-efficiency  particulate  air  (HEPA)  filtration  that  are
carefully  placed  can  increase  the  effective  air  changes  per  hour  of  clean  air  to  the
patient  room,  reducing  risk  to  individuals  entering  the  room  without  respiratory
protection.  NIOSH  developed  guidance  for  using  portable  HEPA  filtration  systems  to
create  expedient  patient  isolation  rooms.  The  expedient  patient  isolation  room
approach  involves  establishing  a  high-ventilation-rate,  negative  pressure,  inner
isolation zone that sits within a “clean” larger ventilated zone. In the absence of any
remaining  supply  of  N95  respirators,  it  may  be  possible  to  use  this  technology  in
conjunction with HCP wearing Enhanced Performance and Enhanced Performance Plus
BFCs or well-fitting medical masks. Ventilated headboards for exposure risk-reduction
NIOSH developed the ventilated headboard that draws exhaled air from a patient in bed
into a HEPA filter, decreasing risk of HCP exposure to patient-generated aerosol. This
technology  consists  of  lightweight,  sturdy,  and  adjustable  aluminum  framing  with  a
retractable plastic canopy. The ventilated headboard can be deployed in combination
with  HEPA  fan  and  filter  units  to  provide  surge  isolation  capacity  within  a  variety  of
environments, from traditional patient rooms to triage stations, and emergency medical
shelters. In the absence of any remaining supply of N95 respirators, it may be possible
to  use  this  technology  in  conjunction  with  HCP  and  patients  wearing  Enhanced
Performance and Enhanced Performance Plus masks or well-fitting medical masks. N95
and  NIOSH  Approved  are  certification  marks  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and
Human  Services  (HHS)  registered  in  the  United  States  and  several  international
jurisdictions.    N99,  N100,  R95,  P95,  P100,  PAPR100-N,  PAPR100-P,  and  HE  are
certification  marks  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS)
registered in the United States.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/pandemic/strategies-n95.html
