Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Use  eye  protection  according  to  product  labeling  and  local,
state, and federal requirements
In healthcare settings, eye protection is used by healthcare personnel (HCP) to protect
their  eyes  from  exposure  to  splashes,  sprays,  splatter,  and  respiratory  secretions.
Single use eye protection should be removed and discarded. Reusable eye protection
should  be  cleaned  and  disinfected  after  each  patient  encounter.  Transition  eye
protection supplies from disposable (i.e., single use) to reusable devices (i.e., reusable
face shields or goggles) Implement extended use of eye protection
Extended use of eye protection is the practice of wearing the same eye protection for
repeated  close  contact  encounters  with  several  different  patients,  without  removing
eye  protection  between  patient  encounters.  Extended  use  of  eye  protection  can  be
applied  to  single  use  and  reusable  devices.  Use  eye  protection  devices  beyond  the
designated shelf life during patient care activities
If there is no date available on the eye protection device label or packaging, facilities
should contact the manufacturer. The user should visually inspect the product prior to
use  and,  if  there  are  concerns  (such  as  degraded  materials),  discard  the  product.
Re-use disposable (single use) eye protection
It  may  be  possible  to  re-use  disposable  (or  single  use)  eye  protection  during  severe
shortages. However, it is possible that the integrity of the single use eye protection may
be degraded after multiple uses or following contact with cleaners or disinfectants. If
implementing  reuse,  disposable  eye  protection  should  be  dedicated  to  one  HCP  and
appropriate  cleaning  and  disinfection  should  be  performed  after  each  use  and  if  it
becomes visibly soiled or difficult to see through during use. Eye protection should be
discarded if damaged (e.g., face shield or goggles can no longer fasten securely to the
provider,  if  visibility  is  obscured  and  cleaning  and  disinfecting  does  not  restore
visibility)..  Protocol  for  removing,  cleaning,  and  disinfecting  eye  protection  when
manufacturer instructions are unavailable
When manufacturer instructions for cleaning and disinfection are unavailable, such as
for  single  use  disposable  face  shields  or  goggles,  consider  the  following  process:
Prioritize  eye  protection  for  selected  activities  such  as:  Consider  using  safety  glasses
(e.g., trauma glasses) that have extensions to cover the side of the eyes
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/pandemic/strategies-eye.html
