A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  The  Summary  of  Infection  Prevention
Practices  in  Dental  Settings:  Basic  Expectations  for  Safe  Care  brings  together  CDC
recommendations  from  the  Guidelines  for  Infection  Control  in  Dental  Health-Care
Settings—2003, which is the standard of practice for clinical dentistry, as well as other
CDC  recommendations  published  since  2003.  This  comprehensive  resource  can  help
dental  health  care  personnel  (DHCP)  maintain  proper  infection  prevention  practices.
This document is a summary guide of basic infection prevention recommendations for
all dental health care settings. These include traditional settings such as private dental
practices,  dental  clinics,  dental  schools  and  educational  programs  (including  dental
assisting,  dental  hygiene,  and  laboratory)  and  nontraditional  settings  that  often  use
portable  dental  equipment  such  as  clinics  held  in  schools  for  sealant  and  fluoride
placement and in other sites for humanitarian dental missions.  While the information
included in this document reflects existing evidence-based guidelines produced by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), it is not intended as a replacement
for more extensive guidelines. This summary guide is based primarily upon elements of
Standard  Precautions  and  represents  a  summary  of  basic  infection  prevention
expectations  for  safe  care  in  dental  settings  as  recommended  in  the  Guidelines  for
Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings — 2003. Readers are urged to use the
Infection  Prevention  Checklist  for  Dental  Settings  (Appendix),  a  companion  to  the
summary;  and  to  consult  the  full  guidelines  for  additional  background,  rationale,  and
scientific evidence behind each recommendation. The Summary of Infection Prevention
Practices in Dental Settings: Basic Expectations for Safe Care is available for download
as  a  PDF  as  both  an  English  version  and  Spanish  version.  Additionally,  the  Infection
Prevention  checklist  and  CDC  DentalCheck  are  accessible  in  Spanish.  The  Spanish
version  of  CDC  DentalCheck  will  appear  if  your  device's  operating  system  default
language is set to Spanish.  If you would like to order printed copies of our Summary,
please  visit  https://wwwn.cdc.gov/pubs/#/222361.   For  questions,  please  reach  out  to
us  at  oralhealth@cdc.gov.  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  Summary  of
Infection  Prevention  Practices  in  Dental  Settings:  Basic  Expectations  for  Safe  Care.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Dept of Health and Human Services;
October  2016.  Adapted  from:  Guide  to  Infection  Prevention  for  Outpatient  Settings:
Minimum Expectations for Safe Care Transmission of infectious agents among patients
and  DHCP  in  dental  settings  is  rare.  However,  from  2003  to  2015,  transmissions  in
dental
 settings,
 including
 patient-to-patient
 transmissions,
 have
 been
documented.1234 In most cases, investigators failed to link a specific lapse of infection
prevention and control with a particular transmission. However, reported breakdowns in
basic infection prevention procedures included unsafe injection practices, failure to heat
sterilize dental handpieces between patients, and failure to monitor (e.g., conduct spore
testing) autoclaves.23 These reports highlight the need for comprehensive training to
improve  understanding  of  underlying  principles,  recommended  practices,  their
implementation,  and  the  conditions  that  have  to  be  met  for  disease  transmission.  All
dental  settings,  regardless  of  the  level  of  care  provided,  must  make  infection
prevention  a  priority  and  should  be  equipped  to  observe  Standard  Precautions  and
other infection prevention recommendations contained in CDC's Guidelines for Infection
Control  in  Dental  Health-Care  Settings  —  2003.  The  Summary  of  Infection  Prevention
Practices  in  Dental  Settings:  Basic  Expectations  for  Safe  Care  summarizes  current
infection prevention recommendations and includes a checklist (Appendix) that can be
used to evaluate compliance. The information presented here is based primarily upon
the  recommendations  from  the  2003  guideline  and  represents  infection  prevention
expectations for safe care in dental settings. It is intended for use by anyone needing
information  about  basic  infection  prevention  measures  in  dental  health  care  settings,
but  is  not  a  replacement  for  the  more  extensive  guidelines.  Readers  are  urged  to
consult the full guidelines for additional background, rationale, and scientific evidence
behind  each  recommendation.  For  the  purposes  of  this  document,  DHCP  refers  to  all
paid  and  unpaid  personnel  in  the  dental  health  care  setting  who  might  be
occupationally  exposed  to  infectious  materials,  including  body  substances  and
contaminated supplies, equipment, environmental surfaces, water, or air. This includes
By  highlighting  existing  CDC  recommendations,  this  summary  guide  CDC  protects
patients and providers by developing recommendations that guide infection prevention
and  control  practices  wherever  dental  care  is  delivered.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/summary/index.html
