 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Please note: 
Errata have been published for this article. To view the errata, please 
click here and here. 
 Prepared by
Scott J.N. McNabb, PhD
Ruth Ann Jajosky, DMD 
Patsy A. Hall-Baker, Annual Summary Coordinator
Deborah A. Adams
Pearl Sharp
Carol Worsham 
Willie J. Anderson
J. Javier Aponte
Gerald F. Jones
David A. Nitschke 
Araceli Rey, MPH 
Michael S. Wodajo 
Division of Integrated Surveillance Systems and Services,
National Center for Public Health Informatics,
Coordinating Center for Health Information and Service, CDC
 The Summary of Notifiable Diseases --- United States, 2006 
contains the official statistics, in tabular and graphic form, for the 
reported occurrence of nationally notifiable infectious diseases in the 
United States for 2006. Unless otherwise noted, the data are final 
totals for 2006 reported as of June 30, 2007. These statistics are 
collected and compiled from reports sent by state and territorial health 
departments to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS), 
which is operated by CDC in collaboration with the Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE). The Summary is available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/summary.html. This site also includes 
publications from previous years.
 The Highlights section presents noteworthy epidemiologic and prevention 
information for 2006 for selected diseases and additional information to 
aid in the interpretation of surveillance and disease-trend data. Part 1 
contains tables showing incidence data for the nationally notifiable 
infectious diseases during 2006.* The tables provide the number of cases 
reported to CDC for 2006 as well as the distribution of cases by month, 
geographic location, and the patient's demographic characteristics (age, 
sex, race, and ethnicity). Part 2 contains graphs and maps that depict 
summary data for certain notifiable infectious diseases described in 
tabular form in Part 1. Part 3 contains tables that list the number of 
cases of notifiable diseases reported to CDC since 1975. This section 
also includes a table enumerating deaths associated with specified 
notifiable diseases reported to CDC's National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS) during 2002--2004. The Selected Reading section 
presents general and disease-specific references for notifiable 
infectious diseases. These references provide additional information on 
surveillance and epidemiologic concerns, diagnostic concerns, and 
disease-control activities.
 Comments and suggestions from readers are welcome. To increase the 
usefulness of future editions, comments about the current report and 
descriptions of how information is or could be used are invited. 
Comments should be sent to Public Health Surveillance Team --- NNDSS, 
Division of Integrated Surveillance Systems and Services, National 
Center for Public Health Informatics at soib@cdc.gov.
Background
 The infectious diseases designated as notifiable at the national level 
during 2006 are listed on page 5. A notifiable disease is one for which 
regular, frequent, and timely information regarding individual cases is 
considered necessary for the prevention and control of the disease. A 
brief history of the reporting of nationally notifiable infectious 
diseases in the United States is available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/epo/dphsi/nndsshis.htm. In 1961, CDC assumed 
responsibility for the collection and publication of data on nationally 
notifiable diseases. NNDSS is neither a single surveillance system nor a 
method of reporting. Certain NNDSS data are reported to CDC through 
separate surveillance information systems and through different 
reporting mechanisms; however, these data are aggregated and compiled 
for publication purposes.
 Notifiable disease reporting at the local level protects the public's 
health by ensuring the proper identification and follow-up of cases. 
Public health workers ensure that persons who are already ill receive 
appropriate treatment; trace contacts who need vaccines, treatment, 
quarantine, or education; investigate and halt outbreaks; eliminate 
environmental hazards; and close premises where spread has occurred. 
Surveillance of notifiable conditions helps public health authorities to 
monitor the impact of notifiable conditions, measure disease trends, 
assess the effectiveness of control and prevention measures, identify 
populations or geographic areas at high risk, allocate resources 
appropriately, formulate prevention strategies, and develop public 
health policies. Monitoring surveillance data enables public health 
authorities to detect sudden changes in disease occurrence and 
distribution, detect changes in health-care practices, develop and 
implement public health programs and interventions, and contribute data 
to monitor global trends.
 The list of nationally notifiable infectious diseases is revised 
periodically. A disease might be added to the list as a new pathogen 
emerges, or a disease might be deleted as its incidence declines. Public 
health officials at state and territorial health departments and CDC 
collaborate in determining which diseases should be nationally 
notifiable. CSTE, with input from CDC, makes recommendations annually 
for additions and deletions. Although disease reporting is mandated by 
legislation or regulation at the state and local levels, state reporting 
to CDC is voluntary. Reporting completeness of notifiable diseases is 
highly variable and related to the condition or disease being reported (1). 
The list of diseases considered notifiable varies by state and year. 
Current and historic national public health surveillance case 
definitions used for classifying and enumerating cases consistently 
across reporting jurisdictions are available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/epo/dphsi/nndsshis.htm.
Revised International Health Regulations
 In May 2005, the World Health Assembly adopted revised International 
Health regulations (IHR) (2) that went into effect in the United 
States on July 18, 2007. This international legal instrument governs the 
role of the World Health Organization (WHO) and its member countries, 
including the United States, in identifying, responding to and sharing 
information about Public Health Emergencies of International Concern 
(PHEIC). A PHEIC is an extraordinary event that 1) constitutes a public 
health risk to other countries through international spread of disease, 
and 2) potentially requires a coordinated international response.
 The IHR are designed to prevent and protect against the international 
spread of diseases while minimizing the effect on world travel and 
trade. Countries that have adopted these rules have a much broader 
responsibility to detect, respond to, and report public health 
emergencies that potentially require a coordinated international 
response in addition to taking preventive measures. The IHR will help 
countries work together to identify, respond to, and share information 
about public health emergencies of international concern.
 The revised IHR represent a conceptual shift from a predefined disease 
list to a framework of reporting and responding to events on the basis 
of an assessment of public health criteria, including seriousness, 
unexpectedness, and international travel and trade implications. PHEIC 
are events that fall within those criteria (further defined in a 
decision algorithm in Annex 2 of the revised IHR). Four conditions 
always constitute a PHEIC and do not require the use of the IHR decision 
instrument in Annex 2: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), 
smallpox, poliomyelitis caused by wild-type poliovirus, and human 
influenza caused by a new subtype. Any other event requires the use of 
the decision algorithm in Annex 2 of the IHR to determine if it is a 
potential PHEIC. Examples of events that require the use of the decision 
instrument include, but are not limited to, cholera, pneumonic plague, 
yellow fever, West Nile fever, viral hemorrhagic fevers, and 
meningococcal disease. Other biologic, chemical, or radiologic events 
might fit the decision algorithm and also must be reportable to WHO. All 
WHO member states are required to notify WHO of a potential PHEIC. WHO 
makes the final determination about the existence of a PHEIC.
 Health-care providers in the United States are required to report 
diseases, conditions, or outbreaks as determined by local, state, or 
territorial law and regulation, and as outlined in each state's list of 
reportable conditions. All health-care providers should work with their 
local, state, and territorial health agencies to identify and report 
events that might constitute a potential PHEIC occurring in their 
location. U.S. State and Territorial Departments of Health have agreed 
to report information about a potential PHEIC to the most relevant 
federal agency responsible for the event. In the case of human disease, 
the U.S. State or Territorial Departments of Health will notify CDC 
rapidly through existing formal and informal reporting mechanisms (3). 
CDC will further analyze the event based on the decision algorithm in 
Annex 2 of the IHR and notify the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services (DHHS) Secretary's Operations Center (SOC), as appropriate.
 DHHS has the lead role in carrying out the IHR, in cooperation with 
multiple federal departments and agencies. The HHS SOC is the central 
body for the United States responsible for reporting potential events to 
the WHO. The United States has 48 hours to assess the risk of the 
reported event. If authorities determine that a potential PHEIC exists, 
the WHO member country has 24 hours to report the event to the WHO.
 An IHR decision algorithm in Annex 2 has been developed to help countries 
determine whether an event should be reported. If any two of the 
following four questions can be answered in the affirmative, then a 
determination should be made that a potential PHEIC exists and WHO 
should be notified:
Is the public health impact of the event serious? 
Is the event unusual or unexpected? 
Is there a significant risk of international spread? 
Is there a significant risk of international travel or trade 
restrictions? 
 Additonal information concerning IHR is available at
http://www.who.int/csr/ihr/en, 
http://www.globalhealth.gov/ihr/index.html, 
http://www.cdc.gov/cogh/ihregulations.htm, and 
http://www.cste.org/PS/2007ps/2007psfinal/ID/07-ID-06.pdf.
 At its annual meeting in June 2007, the Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) approved a position statement to 
support the implementation of the 2005 IHR in the United States (3). 
CSTE also approved a position statement in support of the 2005 IHR 
adding initial detections of novel influenza A virus infections to the 
list of nationally notifiable diseases reportable to NNDSS, beginning in 
January 2007 (4).
 * No cases of diphtheria, neuroinvasive or nonneuroinvasive western 
equine encephalitis virus disease, paralytic poliomyelitis, severe acute 
respiratory syndrome--associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV), smallpox, 
yellow fever, or varicella deaths were reported in the United States in 
2006; these conditions do not appear in the tables in Part 1. For 
certain other nationally notifiable diseases, incidence data were 
reported to CDC but are not included in the tables or graphs of this
Summary. Data on chronic hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus 
infection (past or present) are not included because they are undergoing 
data quality review. CDC is upgrading its national surveillance data 
management system for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). During this transition, CDC is not 
updating AIDS or HIV infection surveillance data. Therefore, no updates 
are provided for HIV and AIDS data in this 
Summary. 
 † The 2005 CSTE position statement approving changes to 
the AIDS case definition for adults and adolescents aged
>13 years is pending final review and publication in MMWR.
 § In accord with position statements approved by CSTE in 
2005, the national surveillance case definitions for hepatitis C virus 
infection (past or present), legionellosis, and meningococcal disease 
were revised.  ¶ Beginning in 2006, STEC replaced the Enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli infection category that was previously 
nationally notifiable.
 Provisional data concerning the reported occurrence of nationally 
notifiable infectious diseases are published weekly in MMWR. 
After each reporting year, staff in state and territorial health 
departments finalize reports of cases for that year with local or county 
health departments and reconcile the data with reports previously sent 
to CDC throughout the year. Notifiable disease reports are the 
authoritative and archival counts of cases. They are approved by the 
appropriate chief epidemiologist from each submitting state or territory 
before being compiled and published in the
Summary. 
 Data in the Summary are derived primarily from reports 
transmitted to CDC from health departments in the 50 states, five 
territories (American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands), New York City, 
and the District of Columbia. Data were reported for 
MMWR weeks 1--52, which correspond to the period for the week 
ending January 7, 2006, through the week ending December 30, 2006. More 
information regarding infectious notifiable diseases, including case 
definitions, is available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/epo/dphsi/phs.htm. Policies for reporting 
notifiable disease cases can vary by disease or reporting jurisdiction. 
The case-status categories used to determine which cases reported to 
NNDSS are published, by disease or condition, and are listed in the 
print criteria column of the 2006 NNDSS event code list (available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/epo/dphsi/phs/files/NNDSSeventcodelistJanuary2007.pdf).
 Final data for certain diseases are derived from the surveillance 
records of the CDC programs listed below. Requests for further 
information regarding these data should be directed to the appropriate 
program.
 Coordinating Center for Health Information and Service
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) 
Office of Vital and Health Statistics Systems (deaths from selected 
notifiable diseases)
 Coordinating Center for Infectious Diseases
National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention 
(NCHHSTP) 
Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention (AIDS and HIV infection)
Division of STD Prevention (chancroid; Chlamydia trachomatis, 
genital infection; gonorrhea; and syphilis)
Division of Tuberculosis Elimination (tuberculosis)
 National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases 
Influenza Division (influenza-associated pediatric mortality)
Division of Viral Diseases (poliomyelitis, varicella deaths, and 
SARS-CoV) 
National Center for Zoonotic, Vector-Borne, and Enteric Diseases
Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases (arboviral diseases) 
Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases (animal rabies)
 Population estimates for the states are from the NCHS bridged-race 
estimates of the July 1, 2000--July 1, 2005 U.S. resident population 
from the vintage 2005 postcensal series by year, county, age, sex, race, 
and Hispanic origin, prepared under a collaborative arrangement with the 
U.S. Census Bureau. This data set was released on August 16, 2005, and 
is available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/dvs/popbridge/popbridge.htm. 
Populations for territories are 2005 estimates from the U.S. Census 
Bureau International Data Base Data Access--Display Mode, available at 
http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/idb/summaries.html. The choice of 
population denominators for incidence reported in MMWR is based 
on 1) the availability of census population data at the time of 
preparation for publication and 2) the desire for consistent use of the 
same population data to compute incidence reported by different CDC 
programs. Incidence in the Summary is calculated as the number of 
reported cases for each disease or condition divided by either the U.S. 
resident population for the specified demographic population or the 
total U.S. residential population, multiplied by 100,000. When a 
nationally notifiable disease is associated with a specific age 
restriction, the same age restriction is applied to the population in 
the denominator of the incidence calculation. In addition, population 
data from states in which the disease or condition was not notifiable or 
was not available were excluded from incidence calculations. Unless 
otherwise stated, disease totals for the United States do not include 
data for American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands, or the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Interpreting Data  Incidence data in the Summary are presented by the date of 
report to CDC as determined by the 
MMWR week and year assigned by the state or territorial health 
department, except for the domestic arboviral diseases, which are 
presented by date of diagnosis. Data are reported by the state in which 
the patient resided at the time of diagnosis. For certain nationally 
notifiable infectious diseases, surveillance data are reported 
independently to different CDC programs. Thus, surveillance data 
reported by other CDC programs might vary from data reported in the
Summary because of differences in 1) the date used to aggregate 
data (e.g., date of report or date of disease occurrence), 2) the timing 
of reports, 3) the source of the data, 4) surveillance case definitions, 
and 5) policies regarding case jurisdiction (i.e., which state should 
report the case to CDC).
 Data reported in the Summary are useful for analyzing disease 
trends and determining relative disease burdens. However, reporting 
practices affect how these data should be interpreted. Disease reporting 
is likely incomplete, and completeness might vary depending on the 
disease. The degree of completeness of data reporting might be 
influenced by the diagnostic facilities available; control measures in 
effect; public awareness of a specific disease; and the interests, 
resources, and priorities of state and local officials responsible for 
disease control and public health surveillance. Finally, factors such as 
changes in methods for public health surveillance, introduction of new 
diagnostic tests, or discovery of new disease entities can cause changes 
in disease reporting that are independent of the true incidence of 
disease.
 Public health surveillance data are published for selected 
racial/ethnic populations because these variables can be risk markers 
for certain notifiable diseases. Race and ethnicity data also can be 
used to highlight populations for focused prevention efforts. However, 
caution must be used when drawing conclusions from reported race and 
ethnicity data. Different racial/ethnic populations might have different 
patterns of access to health care, potentially resulting in data that 
are not representative of actual disease incidence among specific 
racial/ethnic populations. Surveillance data reported to NNDSS are in 
either individual case-specific form or summary form (i.e., aggregated 
data for a group of cases). Summary data often lack demographic 
information (e.g., race); therefore, the demographic-specific rates 
presented in the
Summary might be underestimated.
 In addition, not all race and ethnicity data are collected uniformly 
for all diseases. For example, certain disease programs collect data on 
race and ethnicity using one or two variables, based on the 1977 
standards for collecting such data issued by the Office of Management 
and the Budget (OMB). However, beginning in 2003, certain CDC programs, 
such as the tuberculosis program, implemented OMB's 1997 revised 
standards for collecting such data; these programs collect data on 
multiple races per person using multiple race variables. In addition, 
although the recommended standard for classifying a person's race or 
ethnicity is based on self-reporting, this procedure might not always be 
followed.
Transition in NNDSS Data Collection and 
Reporting
 Before 1990, data were reported to CDC as cumulative counts rather 
than individual case reports. In 1990, states began electronically 
capturing and reporting individual case reports (without personal 
identifiers) to CDC using the National Electronic Telecommunication 
System for Surveillance (NETSS). In 2001, CDC launched the National 
Electronic Disease Surveillance System (NEDSS), now a component of the 
Public Health Information Network (http://www.cdc.gov/phin), 
to promote the use of data and information system standards that advance 
the development of efficient, integrated, and interoperable surveillance 
information systems at the local, state, and federal level. One of the 
objectives of NEDSS is to improve the accuracy, completeness, and 
timeliness of disease reporting at the local, state, and national level 
(5). CDC has developed the NEDSS Base System (NBS), a public 
health surveillance information system that can be used by states that 
do not wish to develop their own NEDSS-based systems. NBS can capture 
data that already are in electronic form (e.g., electronic laboratory 
results, which are needed for case confirmation) rather than requiring 
that these data be entered manually as in the NETSS application. In 
2006, NBS was used by 16 states to transmit nationally notifiable 
infectious diseases to CDC. Additional information concerning NEDSS is 
available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/NEDSS.   5.  National  Electronic  Disease  Surveillance
System Working Group. 
National Electronic Disease Surveillance System (NEDSS): a 
standards-based approach to connect public health and clinical medicine. 
J Public Health Manag Pract 2001;7:43--50.
Highlights for 2006  Below are summary highlights for certain national notifiable 
diseases. Highlights are intended to assist in the interpretation of 
major occurrences that affect disease incidence or surveillance trends 
(e.g., outbreaks, vaccine licensure, or policy changes).
Anthrax  In February 2006, the first naturally-occurring case of inhalation 
anthrax in the United States since 1976 occurred in a New York City 
resident. His exposure to Bacillus anthracis spores was 
determined to be the result of making traditional African drums using 
hard-dried animal hides that were contaminated with spores (1). 
The patient recovered with treatment (2). A subsequent, 
unrelated, fatal case of inhalation anthrax occurred in July 2006 in 
Scotland; exposure was suspected to result from the playing of 
traditional African drums. In both cases, the animal hides were 
suspected to originate from west Africa. These events demonstrate a 
previously unrecognized risk for serious illness and death from 
inhalation anthrax resulting from the making and playing of animal-skin 
drums.
 Naturally occurring anthrax epizootics in animal populations continue 
to be reported in the United States annually. In 2006, epizootics were 
reported in four states, affecting livestock in Minnesota, North Dakota, 
and South Dakota and livestock and wildlife in Texas.
 During 2006, for the second consecutive year, West Nile virus (WNV) 
activity was detected in all 48 contiguous states; in one state 
(Washington), human cases were reported for the first time (1). 
Cases of WNV disease in humans were reported from 731 counties in 43 
states and the District of Columbia. Of these cases, 35% were West Nile 
neuroinvasive disease (WNND), 61% were uncomplicated fever, and 4% were 
clinically unspecified. Of the cases with WNND, 12% were fatal. The 
number of WNND cases reported was the highest since 2003; approximately 
10% of these cases were from Idaho, which previously had reported very 
few cases. Since WNV was first recognized in the United States in 1999, 
a median of 1,229 (mean:1,238; range:19--2,946) WNND cases have been 
reported annually.
 Botulism is a severe paralytic illness caused by the toxins of 
Clostridium botulinum. Exposure to toxin can occur by ingestion 
(foodborne botulism) or by in situ production from C. botulinum 
colonization of a wound (wound botulism) or the gastrointestinal tract 
(infant botulism and adult intestinal colonization of botulism) (1). 
In addition to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, CDC 
maintains intensive surveillance for cases of botulism in the United 
States. In 2006, cases were attributed to foodborne botulism, wound 
botulism, and infant botulism.
 In 2006, two cattle herds in one state were reported by the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) to be affected by brucellosis. USDA has 
designated 48 states and three territories as being free of cattle 
brucellosis, with one state regaining and another state losing 
Brucellosis Class Free state status (1). Brucella abortus 
remains enzootic in elk and bison in the greater Yellowstone National 
Park area, and 
Brucella suis is enzootic in feral swine in the southeast. Hunters 
exposed to these animals might be at increased risk for infection. Human 
cases can occur among immigrants and travelers returning from countries 
with endemic brucellosis and are associated with consumption of 
unpasteurized milk or soft cheeses. Pathogenic Brucella species 
are considered category B biologic threat agents because of a high 
potential for aerosol transmission (2). For the same reason, 
biosafety level 3 practices, containment, and equipment are recommended 
for laboratory manipulation of isolates (3).
 Cases of cholera continue to be rare in the United States. The number 
of cases reported in 2006 was slightly higher than the average number of 
cases per year reported during 2001--2005 (4.6) (1). Foreign 
travel continues to be the primary source of illness for cholera in the 
United States. Cholera remains a global threat to health, particularly 
in areas with poor access to improved water and sanitation, such as 
sub-Saharan Africa (2). All patients with domestic exposure had 
consumed seafood (3). Crabs harvested from the U.S. Gulf Coast 
continue to be a common source of cholera, especially during warmer 
months, when environmental conditions favor the growth and survival of 
Vibrio species in marine water.
 In 2006, the number of cryptosporidiosis cases continued to increase. 
This follows a dramatic increase in the number of cases in 2005. The 
reasons for this increase are unclear but might reflect changes in 
jurisdictional reporting patterns; increased testing for 
Cryptosporidium 
following the introduction of nitazoxanide, the first licensed treatment for 
the disease (1); or a real increase in infection and disease 
caused by 
Cryptosporidium. This drug introduction might have affected clinical 
practice by increasing the likelihood of health-care providers 
requesting 
Cryptosporidium testing, leading to an increase in subsequent 
case reports.
 Although cryptosporidiosis is widespread geographically in the United 
States, a higher incidence is reported by northern states (2). 
However, this observation is difficult to interpret because of 
differences in cryptosporidiosis surveillance systems and reporting 
among states.
 As in previous years, cryptosporidiosis case reports were clearly 
influenced by cryptosporidiosis outbreaks. Although cryptosporidiosis 
affects persons in all age groups, the number of reported cases was 
highest among children aged 1--9 years. A tenfold increase in 
transmission of cryptosporidiosis occurred during summer through early 
fall compared with winter, coinciding with increased use of recreational 
water by younger children, which is a known risk factor for 
cryptosporidiosis. Transmission through recreational water is 
facilitated by the substantial number of 
Cryptosporidium oocysts that can be shed by a single person; the 
extended periods of time that oocysts can be shed (3); the low 
infectious dose (4); the resistance of 
Cryptosporidium oocysts to chlorine (5); and the prevalence of 
improper pool maintenance (i.e., insufficient disinfection, filtration, 
and recirculation of water), particularly of children's wading pools (6).
 Human monocytic ehrlichiosis and human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (now 
known as human [granulocytic] anaplasmosis) are emerging tick-borne 
diseases that became nationally notifiable in 1999. Because 
identification and reporting of these diseases remain incomplete, areas 
shown in the maps on pages 49--50 of this summary might not be 
definitive predictors for overall distribution or regional prevalence. 
Increases in numbers of reported cases of human rickettsial infections 
might result from several factors, including but not limited to 
increases in vector tick populations, increases in human-tick contact as 
a result of encroachment into tick habitat through suburban/rural 
recreational activities and housing construction; changes in case 
definitions, case report forms, and laboratory tests; and increased use 
of active surveillance methods to supplement previously passive 
surveillance methods as a result of increased resource availability and 
perception of high case density in newly surveyed areas.
 The pathogen responsible for human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, genus 
Ehrlichia, has been reclassified and now belongs to the genus 
Anaplasma. Diseases resulting from infection with Ehrlichia 
chaffeensis, Anaplasma phagocytophilum (formerly Ehrlichia 
phagocytophila), and other pathogens (comprising 
Ehrlichia ewingii and undifferentiated species) have been referred to 
respectively by the acronyms "HME," "HGE," and "Ehrlichiosis 
(unspecified or other agent)." The case definitions for these diseases 
have been modified by a resolution adopted at the June 2007 meeting of 
the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists; the new category 
names and the new case definitions became effective January 1, 2008 (1).
 In 2006, rates of gonorrhea in the United States increased for the 
second consecutive year (1). Increases in gonorrhea rates in 
eight western states during 2000--2005 have been described previously (2). 
Increases in quinolone-resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae in 2006 
led to changes in national guidelines that now limit the recommended 
treatment of gonorrhea to a single class of drugs, the cephalosporins (3). 
The combination of increases in gonorrhea morbidity with increases in 
resistance and decreased treatment options have increased the need for 
better understanding of the epidemiology of gonorrhea.
 Before the introduction of effective vaccines, 
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) was the leading cause of bacterial 
meningitis and other invasive bacterial disease among children aged <5 
years. Incidence of invasive Hib disease began to decline dramatically 
in the late 1980s, coincident with licensure of conjugate Hib vaccines; 
incidence has declined >99% compared with the prevaccine era (1). 
During 2006, approximately 8% of all cases of invasive 
Haemophilus influenzae (Hi) disease reported among children aged 
<5 years were attributed to Hib, reflecting successful delivery of 
highly effective conjugate Hib vaccines to children beginning at age 2 
months (2). Nevertheless, for approximately 50% of reported 
cases, serotype information was either unknown or missing, and some of 
these also might be Hib cases. Accurate laboratory information is 
essential to correctly identify the serotype of the causative Hi isolate 
and to assess progress toward elimination of Hib invasive disease (3).
 The number of cases of Hansen disease (HD) reported in the United 
States peaked at 361 in 1985 and has declined since 1988. In 2006, cases 
were reported from 20 states and two territories. HD is not highly 
transmissible; cases appear to be related predominantly to immigration. 
HD outpatient clinics operated under the guidance and direction of the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and 
Services Administration exist in Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, 
Martinez, and San Diego, California; Miami, Florida; Chicago, Illinois; 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Boston, Massachusetts; New York City, New York; 
San Juan, Puerto Rico; Austin, Dallas, Harlingen, Houston, and San 
Antonio, Texas; and Seattle, Washington. Services provided to HD 
patients include diagnosis, treatment, follow-up of patients and 
contacts, disability prevention and monitoring, education, and a 
referral system for HD health-care services. Approximately 6,500 person 
in the United States are living with HD. Additional information 
regarding access to clinical care is available at 
http://www.hrsa.gov/hansens.
Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome, Postdiarrheal
 Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is characterized by the triad of 
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal insufficiency. The most 
common etiology of HUS in the United States is infection with Shiga 
toxin-producing Escherichia coli, principally 
E. coli O157:H7 (1). Approximately 8% of persons infected with E. 
coli O157:H7 progress to HUS (2). During 2006, the majority of 
reported cases occurred among children aged <5 years.
 An early and severe influenza season during 2003--2004 was associated 
with deaths in children in multiple states, prompting CDC to request 
that all state, territorial, and local health departments report 
laboratory confirmed influenza-associated pediatric deaths in children 
aged <18 years (1,2). During the 2003--04 influenza season, 153 
pediatric influenza-associated deaths were reported to CDC by 40 state 
health departments (3). In June 2004, the Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists added influenza-associated pediatric 
mortality to the list of conditions reportable to the National 
Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) (4). Cumulative 
year-to-date incidence data are published each week in 
MMWR Table I for low-incidence nationally notifiable diseases.  During 2006, a total of
43 influenza-associated pediatric deaths were 
reported to CDC. The median age at death was 4 years (range: 28 days--17 
years): seven children (16%) were aged <6 months; 12 (28%) were aged 
6--23 months; five (12%) were aged 24--59 months; and 19 (44%) were aged 
>5 years. In 2006, approximately half of all influenza-associated 
pediatric deaths occurred in the inpatient setting; a slight increase 
occurred in the number of children who died in the emergency room or 
outside the hospital compared with 2005 (22 and 17, respectively). 
Twenty (47%) children had one or more underlying or chronic condition, 
and 21 (53%) were previously healthy. The more common chronic conditions 
reported included moderate to severe developmental delay (n = 8), 
neuromuscular disorders (n = 5), chronic pulmonary disease (n = 5), 
seizure disorder (n = 4), and asthma (n = 4). Bacterial coinfections 
were confirmed in seven children. Pathogens cultured were 
Staphylococcus aureus, sensitivity not done; Staphylococcus 
aureus, methicillin-sensitive; Streptococcus viridans; Group 
A Streptococcus; Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and one infection with 
an unidentified gram-negative bacteria. Of the six (14%) children who 
received 
>1 dose of influenza vaccine before the onset of illness during the 
2005--06 season, only three were fully vaccinated. The current 
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
highlight the importance of administering 2 doses of influenza vaccine 
for previously unvaccinated children aged 6 months--<9years (5). 
Continued surveillance of severe influenza-related mortality is 
important to monitor the impact of influenza and the possible effects of 
interventions in children.
 During 2005--2006, nationwide legionellosis case counts increased for 
the second year in a row. In 2005, in collaboration with CDC, the 
Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists adopted a position 
statement to improve reporting of travel-associated legionellosis (1); 
this might have resulted in an increase in case reporting. Nearly all 
regions of the United States, with the exception of the West North 
Central area, reported more cases in 2006 than in 2005. Other possible 
explanations for the increase include an actual increase in disease 
incidence or increased use of 
Legionella diagnostic tests.
 Listeriosis is a rare but severe infection caused by Listeria 
monocytogenes that has been a nationally notifiable disease since 
2000. Listeriosis is primarily foodborne and occurs most frequently 
among persons who are older, pregnant, or immunocompromised. During 
2005, the majority of reported cases occurred among persons aged >65 
years.  Molecular subtyping of L. monocytogenes isolates and sharing 
of that information through PulseNet has enhanced the ability of public 
health officials to detect and investigate outbreaks. Recent outbreaks 
have been linked to ready-to-eat deli meat (1) and unpasteurized 
cheese (2). During 2006, the incidence of listeriosis in FoodNet 
active surveillance sites was 0.3 cases per 100,000 population, 
representing a decrease of 34% compared with 1996--1998; however, 
incidence remained higher than at its lowest point in 2002 (3).
 All clinical isolates should be submitted to state public health 
laboratories for pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern 
determination, and all persons with listeriosis should be interviewed by 
a public health official or health-care provider using a standard 
Listeria case form (available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nationalsurveillance/ListeriaCaseReportFormOMB0920-0004.pdf).
Rapid analysis of surveillance data will allow identification of 
possible  food  sources  of  outbreaks.   In  2006,  the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial
Epidemiologists (CSTE) 
approved a modified case classification for measles, simultaneously with 
those for rubella and congenital rubella syndrome (1). Because 
measles is no longer endemic in the United States, its future 
epidemiology in the U.S. will reflect its global epidemiology. The 
modification of the case classification clearly identifies the origin of 
each case and will help define the impact of imported cases on the 
epidemiology of measles in the United States.
 As in recent years, 95% of confirmed measles cases reported during 
2006 were import-associated. Of these, 31 cases were internationally 
imported, 20 resulted from exposure to persons with imported infections, 
and in one case, virologic evidence indicated an imported source. The 
sources for the remaining three cases were classified as unknown because 
no link to importation was detected. Nearly half of all cases occurred 
among adults aged 20--39 years, and 20% occurred in adults aged >40 
years. Four outbreaks occurred during 2006 (size range: 3--18 cases), 
all from imported sources. Three imported cases occurred in each of two 
outbreaks, with no secondary transmission. In another outbreak; one 
imported case and two secondary cases occurred in an immigrant 
community. In the fourth outbreak, 18 cases occurred among persons aged 
25--46 years, most of whom had unknown vaccination histories. The 
primary exposure setting for this outbreak was a large office building 
and nearby businesses. Five case-patients were foreign born, including 
the index case-patient, who had arrived in the United States 9 days 
before  onset  of  symptoms.   Measles  can  be  prevented  by  adhering  to
recommendations for 
vaccination, including guidelines for travelers (2,3). Although 
the elimination of endemic measles in the United States has been 
achieved, and population immunity remains high (4), an outbreak 
can occur when measles is introduced into a susceptible group, often at 
significant cost to control (5).
 Neisseria meningitidis is a leading cause of bacterial 
meningitis and sepsis in the United States. Rates of meningococcal 
disease are highest among infants, with a second peak at age 18 years (1). 
The proportion of cases caused by each serogroup of N. meningitidis 
varies by age group. Among adolescents aged 11--19 years, 75% of cases 
are caused by serogroups contained in the tetravalent (A,C,Y,W-135) 
meningococcal conjugate vaccine ([MCV4] Menactra® (Sanofi 
Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania). The majority of cases in infants are 
caused by serogroup B, for which no vaccine is licensed in the United 
States.  MCV4 is licensed for persons aged 2--55 years. In 2007, CDC's 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices revised recommendations for 
routine use of MCV4 to include children aged 11--12 years at the 
preadolescent vaccination visit and adolescents aged 13--18 years at the 
earliest opportunity (2). MCV4 also is recommended for college 
freshmen living in dormitories and other populations aged 2--55 years at 
increased risk for meningococcal disease (1). Further reductions 
in meningococcal disease could be achieved with the development of an 
effective serogroup B vaccine.  Since vaccine licensure in 1967, the number of cases
of mumps in the 
United States has declined steadily. Since 2001, an average of 265 mumps 
cases (range: 231--293 cases) has been reported each year (1). 
However, in 2006, the largest mumps outbreak in >20 years occurred, with 
>5,000 cases reported (1--3). The outbreak began in Iowa in 
December 2005, peaked in April 2006, and declined to lower levels of 
reporting during summer 2006 (3). The majority of cases occurred 
during March--May, 2006 (3). The outbreak was primarily focal in 
geographic distribution; 84% of cases were reported by six contiguous 
midwestern states (Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota, and 
Wisconsin) (3). In contrast to the childhood age range 
traditionally associated with mumps disease, young adults aged 18--24 
years were the age group most highly affected (1--3). In 2006, a 
total of 63% of reported cases occurred in females; previously, no 
gender differences in case rates had been reported (3).
 In response to the outbreak, the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP) updated criteria for mumps immunity and mumps 
vaccination recommendations (4). Acceptable presumptive evidence 
of immunity to mumps includes one of the following: 1) documentation of 
adequate vaccination, 2) laboratory evidence of immunity, 3) birth 
before 1957, or 4) documentation of physician-diagnosed mumps. 
Documentation of adequate vaccination now requires 2 doses of a live 
mumps virus vaccine for school-aged children (grades K--12) and adults 
at high risk (i.e., persons who work in health-care facilities, 
international travelers, and students at post--high school educational 
institutions). Health-care workers born before 1957 without other 
evidence of immunity should now consider 1 dose of live mumps vaccine. 
During an outbreak, a second dose of live mumps vaccine should be 
considered for children aged 1--4 years and adults at low risk if 
affected by the outbreak; health-care workers born before 1957 without 
other evidence of immunity should strongly consider 2 doses of live 
mumps vaccine.
 In 2006, incidence of reported pertussis decreased to 5.35 cases per 
100,000 population after peaking during 2004--2005 at 8.9 per 100,000. 
Infants aged <6 months, who are too young to be fully vaccinated, had 
the highest reported rate of pertussis (84.21 per 100,000 population), 
but adolescents aged 10--19 years and adults aged >20 years contributed 
the greatest number of reported cases. Adolescents and adults might be a 
source of transmission of pertussis to young infants who are at higher 
risk for severe disease and death and are recommended to be vaccinated 
with tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis 
vaccine (Tdap) (1,2). In 2006, coverage with Tdap in adolescents 
aged 13--17 years was 10.8%, compared with 49.4% coverage with tetanus 
and diphtheria toxoids vaccine (Td) (3). The decrease in reported 
pertussis incidence in 2006 is unlikely to be related to use of Tdap and 
is more likely related to the cyclical nature of disease.  The number of human plague
cases reported in 2006 was the greatest 
number since 1994 and was fourfold higher than the average for the 
preceding 5 years. Six cases were classified as primary septicemic 
plague, approximately twice the usual frequency of this disease 
manifestation. Nearly half of the cases reported in 2006 were from New 
Mexico (n = 8); two of these cases were fatal. Although factors 
governing the occurrence of plague are incompletely understood, the 
disease appears to fluctuate naturally in response to climactic factors.
Poliomyelitis, Paralytic and Polio Virus 
Infections
 In 2006, the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) 
recommended revision of the surveillance case definition for paralytic 
poliomyelitis to include nonparalytic poliovirus infection and the 
addition of non-paralytic poliovirus infection to the list of nationally 
notifiable diseases reported through the National Notifiable Diseases 
Surveillance System (1). These changes resulted from the 
identification in 2005 of a type 1 vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV) 
infection among unvaccinated Minnesota Amish children who were not 
paralyzed (2). Public health officials should remain alert that 
paralytic poliomyelitis or poliovirus infections might occur in 
high-risk (i.e., unvaccinated or undervaccinated) populations and should 
report any detected poliovirus infections attributed to either wild or 
vaccine-derived polioviruses and any paralytic poliomyelitis cases.
 Psittacosis is an avian zoonosis with a spectrum of disease that 
ranges from a mild influenza-like illness to severe pneumonia with 
multiorgan involvement. Case reports of psittacosis in 2006 increased 
slightly compared with the previous four years. Further information 
regarding diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of psittacosis is 
available at 
http://www.avma.org/pubhlth/psittacosis.asp.
Rabies  During 2006, the majority (92%) of animal rabies cases were reported 
in wild animal species. Overall an 8.2% increase in rabies cases was 
reported in animals compared with 2005 (1). In the United States 
five animal species are recognized as reservoir species for various 
rabies virus variants over defined geographic regions: raccoons (eastern 
United States), bats (various species, all U.S. states except Hawaii), 
skunks (North Central United States, South Central United States, and 
California), foxes (Alaska, Arizona, and Texas), and mongoose (Puerto 
Rico). During 2006, bats became the second most reported species with 
rabies.
 Reported cases of rabies in domestic animals remain low in part 
because of high vaccination rates. Dog-to-dog transmission has not been 
reported in 2 years, making the United States free of the canine rabies 
virus variant in 2006. As in the past decade, cats were the most 
commonly reported domestic animal with rabies during 2006.
 Vaccination programs to control rabies in wild carnivores were 
ongoing through the distribution of baits containing an oral rabies 
vaccine in the Eastern United States and Texas. Oral rabies vaccination 
programs in Texas are being maintained as a barrier to prevent the 
reintroduction of canine rabies from Mexico. Oral rabies vaccination 
programs are also being conducted in the Eastern United States to 
attempt to stop the westward spread of the raccoon rabies virus variant. 
Active surveillance conducted by the U. S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) to monitor oral rabies vaccination programs were further enhanced 
by the deployment of the Direct Rapid Immunohistochemical Test (DRIT) 
which USDA began implementing in the last half of 2005 after receiving 
training on its use at CDC. This test is used for screening the large 
number of samples collected by USDA in the field, reducing the burden on 
state laboratories and allowing for faster processing of surveillance 
samples (2).
 Three cases of human rabies were identified during 2006: one in a 
male aged 16 years from Texas, one in a female aged 10 years from 
Indiana, and one in a male aged 11 years from California. The cases in 
Texas and Indiana were attributable to bat-associated rabies virus 
variants; free-tailed bat and sliver-haired bat respectively. The case 
in California was associated with a canine variant from the Philippines. 
The patient had recently immigrated from the Philippines where an 
exposure to a dog was noted approximately 2 years before onset of rabies 
(2).
 During 2006, as in previous years, the majority of reported cases 
occurred among persons aged <5 years. Since 1993, the most frequently 
reported isolates have been 
Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium and S. enterica serotype 
Enteritidis (1). The epidemiology of 
Salmonella has been changing over the past decade. 
Salmonella serotype Typhimurium has decreased in incidence, while 
incidence of serotypes Newport, Mississippi, and Javiana have increased. 
Specific control programs might have led to the reduction of serotype 
Enteritidis infections, which have been associated with the consumption 
of internally contaminated eggs. Rates of antibiotic resistance among 
several serotypes have been increasing; a substantial proportion of 
serotypes Typhimurium and Newport isolates are resistant to multiple 
drugs (2).
 The epidemiology of Salmonella infections is based on serotype 
characterization; in 2005, the Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists adopted a position statement for serotype-specific 
reporting of laboratory-confirmed salmonellosis cases (3). 
However, reporting through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance 
System (NNDSS) does not include serotype; serotypes for Salmonella 
isolates are reported through the Public Health Laboratory Information 
System (PHLIS). The National Electronic Disease Surveillance System 
(NEDSS) or compatible systems eventually will replace PHLIS; users of 
NEDSS or compatible systems should report serotype in NEDSS.
 Escherichia coli O157:H7 has been nationally notifiable since 
1994 (1). National surveillance for all Shiga toxin-producing 
E. coli (STEC), under the name enterohemorrhagic E. coli 
(EHEC), began in 2001. As of January 1, 2006, the nationally notifiable 
diseases case definition designation changed from EHEC to STEC, and 
serotype-specific reporting was implemented (2). Because 
diagnosis solely on the basis of detection of Shiga toxin does not 
sufficiently protect the public's health, characterizing STEC isolates 
by serotype and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) patterns is 
critical to detect, investigate, and control outbreaks. Screening of 
stool specimens by clinical diagnostic laboratories for Shiga toxin by 
enzyme immunoassay, subsequent bacterial culture using sorbitol 
MacConkey agar (SMAC), and forwarding enrichment broths from Shiga 
toxin-positive specimens that do not yield STEC O157 to state or local 
public health laboratories are important for public health surveillance 
of STEC infections (3).
 Healthy cattle, which harbor the organism as part of the bowel flora, 
are the main animal reservoir of STEC. The majority of reported 
outbreaks are caused by contaminated food or water. The substantial 
decline in cases reported during 2002--2003 coincided with industry and 
regulatory control activities and with a decrease in the contamination 
of ground beef (4). However, during 2005--2006, incidence of 
human STEC infections increased. Reasons for the increases are not 
known. Three large multistate outbreaks of E. coli O157 
infections during fall 2006 caused by contaminated spinach and lettuce 
suggest that produce that is consumed raw is an important source of STEC 
infection (5,6).
 During 1978--2003, the number of shigellosis cases reported to CDC 
consistently exceeded 17,000. The approximately 14,000 cases of 
shigellosis reported to CDC in 2004 represented an all-time low. This 
number increased to approximately 16,000 in 2005 and decreased slightly 
in 2006. 
Shigella sonnei infections continue to account for >75% of shigellosis in 
the United States (1). Certain cases of shigellosis are acquired 
during international travel (2,3). In addition to spread from one 
person to another, 
shigellae can be transmitted through contaminated foods, sexual contact, 
and water used for drinking or recreational purposes (1). 
Resistance to ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole among S. 
sonnei strains in the United States remains common (4).
 In 1994, the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) 
adopted a position statement making drug-resistant Streptococcus 
pneumoniae (DRSP) invasive disease a nationally notifiable disease (1). 
In 2000, in anticipation of the routine introduction of the 7-valent 
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) (2), CSTE made invasive 
pneumococcal disease (IPD) among children aged <5 years nationally 
notifiable (3). Consequently, the National Notifiable Diseases 
Surveillance System (NNDSS) had two event codes for reporting IPD that 
were not mutually exclusive: DRSP among persons of all ages and IPD 
among  children  aged  <5  years.   To  avoid  submissions  of  duplicate  reports,  CSTE
modified the case 
classification of DRSP and IPD in 2006. Under the modified case 
definition, which became effective in January 2007, cases with isolates 
causing IPD from children aged <5 years for whom antibacterial 
susceptibilities are available and determined to be DRSP should be 
reported only as DRSP, and cases with isolates causing IPD from children 
aged <5 years who are susceptible or for which susceptibilities are not 
available should be reported only as IPD in children aged <5 years (4). 
Only susceptible IPD episodes among children aged <5 years are reported 
in this Summary. In 2006, for the first time after several years 
of increasing case counts, the number of cases of pneumococcal disease 
in both reportable categories declined. The initial increases in 
reported cases likely represented improvements in surveillance and 
possibly duplicate reporting of DRSP and IPD cases during the first few 
years after the adoption of the 2000 position statement. Other data 
sources have demonstrated substantial declines in the incidence of IPD 
and DRSP among children and adults after introduction of PCV7 (5,6).
 Although PCV7 has been recommended for use in children since 2000, 
recommendations for use of the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide 
vaccine for adults aged >65 years and for older children and adults with 
underlying illnesses were updated in 1997 (7). Cases of 
susceptible IPD among persons aged >5 years are not nationally 
notifiable.  States are encouraged to evaluate their own pneumococcal disease 
surveillance programs (8). CSTE also has recommended that 
technology for pneumococcal serotyping using polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) (9) should be shared with state public health laboratories 
to improve surveillance for vaccine- and nonvaccine-preventable IPD 
among children aged <5 years (4). PCR is used by the majority of 
state public health laboratories to detect a variety of infectious 
diseases; therefore, this technology should allow most, if not all, 
state health departments to enhance surveillance for vaccine-preventable 
IPD. With better data, public health officials will be able to assess 
the burden of vaccine-preventable IPD and to evaluate current PCV7 
immunization  programs.   In  2006,  primary  and  secondary  (P&S)  syphilis  cases
reported to CDC 
increased for the sixth consecutive year (1). During 2005--2006, 
the number of P&S syphilis cases reported to CDC increased 11.8%. 
Overall increases in rates during 2001--2006 were observed primarily 
among men (2). However, after decreasing during 2001--2004, the 
rate of primary and secondary syphilis among women increased, from 0.8 
cases per 100,000 population in 2004 to 1.0 cases per 100,000 population 
in 2006. During 2005--2006, P&S syphilis increased among persons of all 
races and ethnicities.
 In 2005, CDC requested that all state health departments report the 
sex of partners of persons with syphilis. In 2006, of all P&S syphilis 
cases reported from the 30 areas (29 states and Washington, D.C.) for 
which complete data were available, 64% occurred among men who have sex 
with men (3).
 Although the majority of cases of syphilis in the United States occur 
among men who have sex with men, recent increases in the number of cases 
reported among women suggest that heterosexually transmitted syphilis 
might be an emerging problem. In collaboration with partners throughout 
the United States, CDC updated the Syphilis Elimination Plan for 
2005--2010 and is now working to implement it (4). Collaboration 
with multiple organizations, public health professionals, the private 
medical community, and other partners is essential for the successful 
elimination of syphilis in the United States.
 In 2006, incidence of reported tetanus and case fatality continued to 
be low. No neonatal cases were reported. The majority of cases occurred 
among persons aged 25--59 years and those aged >60 years. Mortality from 
tetanus was associated with diabetes, intravenous drug use, and advanced 
age, especially in the setting of unknown vaccination status.
Typhoid Fever  Despite recommendations that travelers to countries in which typhoid
fever is endemic should be vaccinated with either of two effective 
vaccines available in the United States, approximately three fourths of 
all cases occur among persons who reported international travel during 
the preceding month and were not immunized. Persons visiting South Asia 
appear to be at particular risk, even during short visits (1). 
Salmonella Typhi strains with decreased susceptibility to 
ciprofloxacin are increasingly frequent in that region and might require 
treatment with alternative antimicrobial agents (2,3). Although 
the number of 
S. Typhi infections is decreasing, the number of illnesses attributed to
S. Paratyphi A infection is increasing. In a cross-sectional 
laboratory-based surveillance study conducted by CDC, 80% of patients 
with paratyphoid fever acquired their infections in South Asia, and 75% 
were infected with nalidixic acid-resistant strains. A vaccine for 
paratyphoid fever is needed (4).
 Since implementation of the varicella vaccine program in 1995, 
varicella morbidity and mortality have declined substantially. During 
1995--2006, the number of cases declined 85%, the number of 
hospitalizations declined 85%, and the number of deaths declined 82% (1). 
In 2006, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) updated 
recommendations for varicella vaccination to include a second dose for 
children and catch-up vaccination for persons without evidence of 
immunity (2). With this new recommendation, case-based and 
outbreak surveillance for varicella will become increasingly important. 
In 2006, a total of 33 states and the District of Columbia reported 
varicella data through the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance 
System (NNDSS): 23 (70%) sites reported case-based data and 10 (30%) 
reported aggregate data. An additional 12 states conducted either 
statewide or sentinel case-based varicella surveillance but did not 
report these data through NNDSS. Although varicella was not a notifiable 
disease in Indiana in 2006, a total of 910 cases were reported.      
Selected  Reading   General   Adekoya  N.  Nationally  notifiable  disease  surveillance
(NNDSS) and the
Healthy People 2010 objectives. The eJournal of the South 
Carolina Medical Association 2005;101:e68--72. Available at 
http://www.scmanet.org/Downloads/e-Journal/2005/SCMA_eJournal_March05.pdf.
 Baker MG, Fidler DP. Global public health surveillance under new 
international  health  regulations.  Emerg  Infect  Dis  2006;12:1058--65.   Bayer  R,
Fairchild AL. Public health: surveillance and privacy. 
Science 2000;290:1898--9.
 CDC. Racial disparities in nationally notifiable diseases---United 
States, 2002. MMWR 2005;54:9--11. 
 CDC. Progress in improving state and local disease 
surveillance---United States, 2000--2005. MMWR 2005;54:822--5.
 CDC. Case definitions for infectious conditions under public health 
surveillance. MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-10). Additional information available 
at 
http://www.cdc.gov/epo/dphsi/casedef/index.htm.
 CDC. Demographic differences in notifiable infectious disease 
morbidity---United States, 1992--1994. MMWR 1997;46:637--41.
 CDC. Framework for evaluating public health surveillance systems for 
early detection of outbreaks; recommendations from the CDC working 
group. MMWR 2004;53(No. RR-5).  CDC. Framework for program evaluation in public
health. MMWR 
1999;48(No. RR-11).
 CDC. Historical perspectives: notifiable disease surveillance and 
notifiable disease statistics---United States, June 1946 and June 1996. 
MMWR  1996;45:530--6.   CDC.  Manual  of  procedures  for  the  reporting  of  nationally
notifiable 
diseases to CDC. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services,  Public  Health  Service,  CDC;  1995.   CDC.  Manual  for  the  surveillance  of
vaccine-preventable diseases. 3rd 
ed. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public 
Health Service, CDC; 2002. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nip/publications/surv-manual.
 CDC. National Electronic Disease Surveillance System (NEDSS): a 
standards-based approach to connect public health and clinical medicine. 
J  Public  Health  Management  and  Practice  2001;7:43--50.   CDC.  Public  Health
Information Network (PHIN): overview. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2006. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/phin/index.html.
 CDC. Reporting race and ethnicity data---National Electronic 
Telecommunications System for Surveillance, 1994--1997. MMWR 
1999;48:305--12.
 CDC. Sexually transmitted disease surveillance, 2006. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2007.
 CDC. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006. MMWR 
2006;55(No. RR-11).
 CDC. Ten leading nationally notifiable infectious diseases---United 
States, 1995. MMWR 1996;45:883--4.
 CDC. Updated guidelines for evaluating public health surveillance 
systems: recommendations from the Guidelines Working Group. MMWR 
2001;50(No.  RR-13).   CDC.  Use  of  race  and  ethnicity  in  public  health  surveillance:
summary 
of the CDC/ATSDR workshop. MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-10).
 Chang M-H, Glynn MK, Groseclose SL. Endemic, notifiable 
bioterrorism-related diseases, United States, 1992--1999. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2003;9:556--64.
 Chin JE, ed. Control of communicable diseases manual. 17th ed. 
Washington, DC: American Public Health Association; 2000.
 Doyle TJ, Glynn MK, Groseclose SL. Completeness of notifiable 
infectious disease reporting in the United States: an analytical 
literature review. Am J Epidemiol 2002;155:866--74.  Effler P, Ching-Lee M, Bogard A,
Ieong M-C, Nekomoto T, Jernigan D. 
Statewide system of electronic notifiable disease reporting from 
clinical laboratories: comparing automated reporting with conventional 
methods. JAMA 1999;282:1845--50.
 Freimuth V, Linnan HW, Potter P. Communicating the threat of emerging 
infections to the public. Emerg Infect Dis 2000;6:337--47.
 German R. Sensitivity and predictive value positive measurements for 
public health surveillance systems. Epidemiology 2000;11:720--7.
 Government Accountability Office. Emerging infectious diseases: 
review of state and federal disease surveillance efforts. Washington, 
DC: Government Accountability Office; 2004. GAO-04-877. Available at 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04877.pdf.
 Hopkins RS. Design and operation of state and local infectious 
disease surveillance systems. J Public Health Management Practice 
2005;11:184--90.
 Jajosky RA, Groseclose SL. Evaluation of reporting timeliness of 
public health surveillance systems for infectious diseases. BMC Public 
Health 2004;4:29.
 Klompas M, Lazarus R, Daniel J. Electronic medical record support for 
public health (ESP): automated detection and reporting of statutory 
notifiable diseases to public health authorities. Advances in Disease 
Surveillance 2007;3:1--5.
 Koo D, Caldwell B. The role of providers and health plans in 
infectious disease surveillance. Eff Clin Pract 1999;2:247--52. 
Available at 
http://www.acponline.org/journals/ecp/sepoct99/koo.htm.
 Koo D, Wetterhall S. History and current status of the National 
Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System. J Public Health Management 
Practice 1996;2:4--10.  Krause G, Brodhun B, Altmann D, Claus H, Benzler J. Reliability
of 
case definitions for public health surveillance assessed by round-robin 
test methodology. BMC Public Health 2006;6:129.  Lin SS, Kelsey JL. Use of race and
ethnicity in epidemiologic 
research: concepts, methodological issues, and suggestions for research. 
Epidemiol Rev 2000;22:187--202.  Martin SM, Bean NH. Data management issues for
emerging diseases and 
new tools for managing surveillance and laboratory data. Emerg Infect 
Dis 1995;1:124--8.  McNabb S, Chungong S, Ryan M, et al. Conceptual framework of
public 
health surveillance and action and its application in health sector 
reform. BMC Public Health 2002;2:2.  McNabb S, Surdo A, Redmond A, et al. Applying
a new conceptual 
framework to evaluate tuberculosis surveillance and action performance 
and measure the costs, Hillsborough County, Florida, 2002. Ann Epidemiol 
2004;14:640--5.
 McNabb SJN, Koo D, Pinner RW, Seligman JD. Informatics and public 
health at CDC. MMWR 2006;55(Suppl 2): 25--8.  Nolte KB, Lathrop SL, Nashelsky MB,
et al RE. "Med-X": a medical 
examiner surveillance model for bioterrorism and infectious disease 
mortality. Human Pathol 2007;38:718--25.  Niskar AS, Koo D. Differences in notifiable
infectious disease 
morbidity among adult women---United States, 1992--1994. J Womens Health 
1998;7:451--8.  Panackal AA, M'ikanatha NM, Tsui FC, et al. Automatic electronic 
laboratory-based reporting of notifiable infectious diseases at a large 
health system. Emerg Infect Dis 2002;8:685--91.  Pinner RW, Koo D, Berkelman RL.
Surveillance of infectious diseases. 
In: Lederberg J, Alexander M, Bloom RB, eds. Encyclopedia of 
microbiology. 2nd ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2000.  Pinner RW, Jernigan DB,
Sutliff SM. Electronic laboratory-based 
reporting for public health. Mil Med 2000;165(Suppl 2):20--4.
 Roush S, Birkhead G, Koo D, Cobb A, Fleming D. Mandatory reporting of 
diseases and conditions by health care professionals and laboratories. 
JAMA 1999;282:164--70.  Roush S, Murphy T. Historical comparisons of morbidity and
mortality 
for vaccine-preventable diseases in the United States. JAMA 
2007;298:2155--63.
 Silk, BJ, Berkelman RL. A review of strategies for enhancing the 
completeness of notifiable disease reporting. J Public Health Manag 
Prace  2005;11:191--200.   Teutsch  SM,  Churchill  RE,  eds.  Principles  and  practice  of
public 
health surveillance. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 
2000.  Thacker SB, Choi K, Brachman PS. The surveillance of infectious 
diseases.  JAMA  1983;249:1181--5.   Vogt  RL,  Spittle  R,  Cronquist  A,  Patnaik  JL.
Evaluation of the 
timeliness and completeness of a web-based notifiable disease reporting 
system by a local health department. J Public Health Manag Pract 
2006;12:540--4.   AIDS   CDC.  HIV/AIDS  surveillance  report,  2005.  Atlanta,  GA:  US
Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2006. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/stats/hasrlink.htm.
 CDC. Guidelines for national human immunodeficiency virus case 
surveillance, including monitoring for human immunodeficiency virus 
infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. MMWR 1999;48(No. 
RR-13).  Nakashima AK, Fleming PL. HIV/AIDS surveillance in the United States, 
1981--2001. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2003;32:68--85.
 Anthrax  Bales ME, Dannenberg AL, Brachman PS, Kaufmann AF, Klatsky PC, 
Ashford DA. Epidemiologic response to anthrax outbreaks: field 
investigations, 1950--2001. Emerg Infect Dis 2002;8:1163--74.
 Bravata DM, Holty JE, Wang E, et al. Inhalational, gastrointestinal, 
and cutaneous anthrax in children: a systematic review of cases: 1900 to 
2005. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2007;161:896--905.
 CDC. Use of anthrax vaccine in response to terrorism: supplemental 
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. 
MMWR  2002;51:1024--6.   Holty  JE,  Bravata  DM,  Liu  H,  Olshen  RA,  McDonald  KM,
Owens DK. 
Systematic review: a century of inhalational anthrax cases from 1900 to 
2005.  Ann  Intern  Med  2006;144:270--80.   Hugh-Jones  M.  1996--97  Global  anthrax
report. J Appl Microbiol 
1999;87:189--91.
 Botulism  Angulo FJ, St. Louis ME. Botulism. In: Evans AS, Brachman PS, eds. 
Bacterial infections of humans. New York, NY: Plenum; 1998:131--53.
 CDC. Infant botulism---New York City, 2001--2002. MMWR 2003;52:21--4.
 Shapiro RL, Hatheway C, Becher J, Swerdlow DL. Botulism surveillance 
and emergency response: a public health strategy for a global challenge. 
JAMA 1997;278:433--5.  Shapiro RL, Hatheway C, Swerdlow DL. Botulism in the United
States: a 
clinical and epidemiologic review. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:221--8.
 Sobel J, Tucker N, McLaughlin J, Maslanka S. Foodborne botulism in 
the United States, 1999--2000. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:1606--12.  Sobel J. Botulism.
Clin  Infect  Dis  2005;41;1167--73.   Brucellosis   CDC.  Brucellosis  (Brucella  melitensis,
abortus, suis, and 
canis). Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2005. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/brucellosis_g.htm.
 CDC. Brucellosis case definition. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2001. Available at 
http://www.bt.cdc.gov/Agent/Brucellosis/CaseDef.asp.
 CDC. Human exposure to Brucella abortus strain RB51---Kansas, 
1997. MMWR 1998;47:172--5. 
 Stevens, MG, Olsen SC, Palmer MV, Cheville NF. US Department of 
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service National Animal Disease 
Center, Iowa State University. Brucella abortus strain RB51: a 
new brucellosis vaccine for cattle. Compendium 1997;19:766--74. 
 Yagupsky P, Baron EJ. Laboratory exposures to 
Brucellae and implications for bioterrorism. Emerg Infect Dis 
2005;11:1180--5.
 Chomel BB, DeBess EE, Mangiamele DM, et al. Changing trends in the 
epidemiology of human brucellosis in California from 1973 to 1992: a 
shift toward foodborne transmission. J Infect Dis 1994;170:1216--23.
 Chancroid  DiCarlo RP, Armentor BS, Martin DH. Chancroid epidemiology in New 
Orleans men. J Infect Dis 1995;172:446--52.
 Mertz KJ, Weiss JB, Webb RM, et al. An investigation of genital 
ulcers in Jackson, Mississippi, with use of a multiplex polymerase chain 
reaction assay: high prevalence of chancroid and human immunodeficiency 
virus infection. J Infect Dis 1998;178:1060--6.
 Mertz KJ, Trees D, Levine WC, et al. Etiology of genital ulcers and 
prevalence of human immunodeficiency virus coinfection in 10 US cities. 
The Genital Ulcer Disease Surveillance Group. J Infect Dis 
1998;178:1795--8.   Chlamydia  trachomatis,  Genital  Infection   CDC.  Sexually
transmitted disease surveillance 2006 supplement: 
Chlamydia Prevalence Monitoring Project, annual report 2006. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC. In press.
 Gaydos CA, Howell MR, Pare B, et al. Chlamydia trachomatis 
infections in female military recruits. N Engl J Med 1998;339:739--44.
 Datta SP, Sternberg M, Johnson RE, et al. Gonnorhea and chlamydia in 
the United States among persons 14 to 39 years of age, 1999 to 2002. Ann 
Intern Med 2007;147:89--96.  Miller WC, Ford CA, Handcock MS, et al. Prevalence of
chlamydial and 
gonococcal infections among young adults in the United States. JAMA 
2004;291:2229--36.  Cholera  Steinberg EB, Greene KD, Bopp CA, Cameron DN, Wells
JG, Mintz ED. 
Cholera in the United States, 1995--2000: trends at the end of the 
twentieth century. J Infect Dis 2001;184:799--802.  Brunkard JM, et al. Cholera, crabs,
and Katrina: is cholera 
increasing in southern Louisiana [Abstract]. Presented at the meeting of 
the Infectious Disease Society of America; October 4--7, 2007; San 
Diego, California.  World Health Organization. Cholera, 2006. Wkly Epi Rec 
2007;82:273--84.
 Gaffga NH, Tauxe RV, Mintz ED. Cholera: a new homeland in Africa. Am 
J Trop Med Hyg 2007;77:705--13.
 Coccidioidomycosis  Park BJ, Sigel K, Vaz V, et al. An epidemic of coccidioidomycosis
in 
Arizona associated with climatic changes, 1998--2001. J Infect Dis 
2005;191:1981--7.
 Cryptosporidiosis  Yoder JS, Beach MJ. Cryptosporidiosis surveillance---United States, 
2003--2005. In: Surveillance Summaries, September 7, 2007. MMWR 
2007;56(No.  SS-7):1--10.   Dziuban  EJ,  Liang  JL,  Craun  GF,  et  al.  Surveillance  for
waterborne 
disease and outbreaks associated with recreational water---United 
States, 2003--2004. In: Surveillance Summaries, December 22, 2006. MMWR 
2006;55(No. SS-12):1--30.
 Roy SL, DeLong SM, Stenzel S, et al. Risk factors for sporadic 
cryptosporidiosis among immunocompetent persons in the United States 
from 1999 to 2001. J Clin Microbiol 2004;42:2944--51.  CDC. Diagnostic procedures
for stool specimens. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2007. Available at 
http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx/HTML/DiagnosticProcedures.htm.
 Cyclosporiasis  Herwaldt BL. The ongoing saga of U.S. outbreaks of cyclosporiasis 
associated with imported fresh produce: what
Cyclospora cayetanensis has taught us and what we have yet to 
learn. In: Institute of Medicine. Addressing foodborne threats to 
health: policies, practices, and global coordination. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press; 2006:85--115, 133--40. Available at 
http://newton.nap.edu/catalog/11745.html#toc.
 Herwaldt BL. Cyclospora cayetanensis: a review, focusing on 
the outbreaks of cyclosporiasis in the 1990s. Clin Infect Dis 
2000;31:1040--57.
 Diphtheria  Dewinter LM, Bernard KA, Romney MG. Human clinical isolates of 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
and Corynebacterium ulcerans collected in Canada from 1999 to 
2003 but not fitting reporting criteria for cases of diphtheria. Clin 
Microbiol 2005;43:3447--9.
 Domestic Arboviral Diseases, Neuroinvasive and Nonneuroinvasive
 CDC. Revision of guidelines for surveillance, prevention, and control 
of West Nile virus infection. MMWR 2003;52:797.
 CDC. West Nile virus activity---United States, January 1--December 1, 
2005. MMWR 2005;54:1253--6. 
 Hayes EB, Komar N, Nasci RS, et al. Epidemiology and transmission 
dynamics of West Nile virus disease. Emerg Infect Dis 2005;11:1167--73.
 CDC. Eastern equine encephalitis---New Hampshire and Massachusetts, 
August--September 2005. MMWR 2006;55:697--700.
 Ehrlichiosis  (Human  Granulocytic  and  Human  Monocytic)   Dumler  JS,  Madigan  JE,
Pusterla N, and Bakken JS. Ehrlichioses in 
humans: epidemiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment. 
Clin  Iinfect  Dis  2007;45:45--51.   CDC.  Diagnosis  and  management  of  tickborne
rickettsial diseases: 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis---United 
States. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-4).  Demma LJ, Holman RC, McQuiston JH, Krebs JW,
Swerdlow DL. 
Epidemiology of human ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis in the United 
States,  2001--2002.  Am  J  Trop  Med  Hyg  2005;73:400--09.   Paddock  CD,  Childs  JE.
Ehrlichia chaffeensis: a prototypical 
emerging pathogen [Review]. J Clin Microbiol 2003;16:37--64.
 Giardiasis  Yoder JS, Beach MJ. Giardiasis surveillance---United States, 
2003--2005. In: Surveillance Summaries, September 7, 2007. MMWR 
2007;56(No.  SS-7):11--8.   Liang  JL,  Dziuban  EJ,  Craun  GF,  et  al.  Surveillance  for
waterborne 
disease and outbreaks associated with drinking water and water not 
intended for drinking---United States, 2003--2004. In: Surveillance 
Summaries, December 22, 2006. MMWR 2006;55(No. SS-12):31--65.
 Stuart JM, Orr HJ, Warburton FG, et al. Risk factors for sporadic 
giardiasis: a case-control study in southwestern England. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2003;9:229--33.  CDC. Diagnostic procedures for stool specimens. Atlanta, GA: US
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2007. Available at 
http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx/HTML/DiagnosticProcedures.htm.
 Gonorrhea  CDC. Update to CDC's sexually transmitted diseases guidelines, 2006: 
fleuroquinolones no longer recommended for treatment of gonococcal 
infections.. MMWR 2007;56:332--6.
 CDC. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006. MMWR 
2006;55(No. RR-11).
 CDC. Sexually transmitted diseases surveillance 2006 supplement: 
Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project (GISP) annual report 2006. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC. In press.
 Haemophilus  influenzae,  Invasive  Disease   CDC.  Progress  toward  elimination  of
Haemophilus influenzae 
type b disease among infants and children---United States, 1998--2000. 
MMWR 2002;51:234--7.
 Fry AM, Lurie P, Gidley M, Schmink S, Lingappa J, Rosenstein NE. 
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) disease among Amish children in 
Pennsylvania: reasons for persistent disease. Pediatrics 2001;108:1--6.
 Dworkin MS, Park L, Borchardt SM. The changing epidemiology of 
invasive 
Haemophilus influenzae disease, especially in persons >65 years 
old. Clin Infect Dis 2007;44:810--6.
 McVernon J, Trotter CL, Slack MPE, et al. Trends in type b infections 
in adults in England and Wales: surveillance study. BMJ 2004;329:655--8.
 Flannery B, Heffernan RT, Harrison LH, et al. Changes in invasive 
pneumococcal disease among HIV-infected adults living in the era of 
childhood pneumococcal immunization. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:1--9.
 Hansen
 Disease
 (Leprosy)
 
 Britton
 WJ,
 Lockwood
 NJ.
 Leprosy.
 Lancet
2004;363:1209--19.
 Hartzell JD, Zapor M, Peng S, Straight T. Leprosy: a case series and 
review. South Med J 2004;97:1252--6.
 Hastings R, ed. Leprosy. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 
1994.
 Joyce MP, Scollard DM. Leprosy (Hansen's disease). In: Rakel RE, Bope 
ET, eds. Conn's current therapy 2004: latest approved methods of 
treatment for the practicing physician. 56th ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
Saunders; 2004:100--5.
 Ooi WW, Moschella SL. Update on leprosy in immigrants in the United 
States: status in the year 2000. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:930--7.
 Bruce S, Schroeder TL, Ellner K, Rubin H, Williams T, Wolf JE Jr. 
Armadillo exposure and Hansen's disease: an epidemiologic survey in 
southern Texas. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000;43(2 Pt1):223--8.
 Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome  CDC. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome---five states,
2006. MMWR 
2006;55:627--9.
 Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome, Postdiarrheal  Banatvala N, Griffin PM, Greene KED, et al.
The United States 
Prospective Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome Study; microbiologic, serologic, 
clinical, and epidemiologic findings. J Infect Dis 2001;183:1063--70.
 Mahon BE, Griffin PM, Mead PS, Tauxe RV. Hemolytic uremic syndrome 
surveillance to monitor trends in infection with Escherichia coli 
O157:H7 and other Shiga toxin-producing 
E. coli [Letter]. Emerg Infect Dis 1997;3:409--12.
 Hepatitis A  Armstrong GL, Bell BP. Hepatitis A virus infections in the United 
States: model-based estimates and implications for childhood 
immunization. Pediatrics 2002;109:839--45.
 Bell BP, Kruszon-Moran D, Shapiro CN, Lambert SB, McQuillan GM, 
Margolis HS. Hepatitis A virus infection in the United States: serologic 
results from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. 
Vaccine 2005;23:5798--806.
 CDC. Prevention of hepatitis A through active or passive 
immunization: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-7). 
 Wasley A, Samandari T, Bell BP. Incidence of hepatitis A in the 
United States in the era of vaccination. JAMA 2005;294:194--201.
 Wasley A, Fiore A, Bell BP. Hepatitis A in the era of vaccination. 
Epidemiol Rev 2006;28:101--11.
 CDC. Update: prevention of hepatitis after exposure to hepatitis a 
virus and in international travelers: updated recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 
2007;56;1080--4.
 Hepatitis B  Armstrong GL, Mast EE, Wojczynski M, Margolis HS. Childhood hepatitis 
B virus infections in the United States before hepatitis B immunization. 
Pediatrics  2001;108:1123--8.   CDC.  Hepatitis  B  virus:  a  comprehensive  strategy  for
eliminating 
transmission in the United States through universal childhood 
vaccination: recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory 
Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
 CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate transmission 
of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recommendations of 
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Part 1: 
immunization of infants, children, and adolescents. MMWR 2005;54(No. 
RR-16).  CDC. A comprehensive strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis 
B virus infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Part II: immunization of 
adults. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-16).
 Shepard CW, Simard EP, Finelli L, Fiore A, Bell BP. Hepatitis B virus 
infection: epidemiology and vaccination. Epidemiol Rev 2006;28:112--25.
 Goldstein ST, Alter MJ, Williams IT, et al. Incidence and risk 
factors for acute hepatitis B in the United States, 1982--1998: 
implications for vaccination programs. J Infect Dis 2002;185:713--9.  McQuillan GM,
Coleman PJ, Kruszon-Moran D, Moyer LA, Lambert SB, 
Margolis HS. Prevalence of hepatitis B virus infection in the United 
States: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys, 1976 
through 1994. Am J Public Health 1999;89:14--8.
 Hepatitis C  Armstrong GL, Wasley A, Simard EP, McQuillan GM, Kuhnert WL, Alter 
MJ. The prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection in the United States, 
1999  through  2002.  Ann  Intern  Med  2006;144:705--14.   Armstrong  GA,  Alter  MJ,
McQuillan GM, Margolis HS. The past incidence 
of hepatitis C virus infection: implications for the future burden of 
chronic  liver  disease  in  the  United  States.  Hepatology  2000;31:777--82.   CDC.
Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C virus 
(HCV) infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. 
RR-19).  Shepard CW, Finelli L, Alter MJ. The global epidemiology of hepatitis 
C. Lancet Infect Dis 2005;5:558--67.
 Influenza-Associated  Pediatric  Mortality   Bhat  N,  Wright  JG,  Broder  KR,  et  al.
Influenza-associated deaths 
among children in the United States, 2003--2004. N Engl J Med 
2005;352:2559--67.
 CDC. Update: Influenza-associated deaths reported among children aged 
<18 years---United States, 2003--04 influenza season. MMWR 
2004;52:1254--5.   CDC.  Update:  influenza-associated  deaths  reported  among
children aged 
<18 years---United States, 2003--04 influenza Season. MMWR 
2004;52:1286--8.  CDC. Mid-year addition of influenza-associated pediatric mortality
to 
the list of nationally notifiable diseases, 2004. MMWR 2004;53:951--2.
 CDC. Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2006;55(No. 
RR-10).  Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists. 
Influenza-associated pediatric mortality 2004. Position statement 
04-ID-04. Available at 
http://www.cste.org/position%20statements/searchbyyear2004.asp.
 Guarner J, Paddock CD, Shieh WJ, et al. Histopathologic and 
immunohistochemical features of fatal influenza virus infection in 
children during the 2003--2004 season. Clin Infect Dis 2006:43;132--40.  Legionellosis
 Cowgill KD, Lucas CE, Benson RF, et al. Recurrence of legionnaires 
disease at a hotel in the United States Virgin Islands over a 20-year 
period. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:1205--7.  Fields BS, Benson RF, Besser RE. Legionella
and kegionnaires' 
disease: 25 years of investigation. Clin Microbiol Rev 2002;15:506--26.
 European Working Group on Legionella Infections. European 
guidelines for control and prevention of travel associated legionnaires' 
disease. London, UK: United Kingdom Health Protection Agency; 2005.
 Joseph CA. Legionnaires' disease in Europe 2000--2002. Epidemiol 
Infect 2004;132:417--24.
 Marston BJ, Lipman HB, Breiman RF. Surveillance for legionnaires' 
disease: risk factors for morbidity and mortality. Arch Intern Med 
1994;154:2417--22.  Listeriosis  Gottlieb SL, Newbern EC, Griffin PM, et al. Multistate
outbreak of 
listeriosis linked to turkey deli meat and subsequent changes in US 
regulatory policy. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:29--36.  Mead PS, Dunne EF, Graves L, et al.
Nationwide outbreak of 
listeriosis due to contaminated meat. Epidemiol Infect 2006;134:744--51.
 Mead PS, Slutsker L, Dietz V, et al. Food-related illness and death 
in the United States. Emerg Infect Dis 1998;5:607--25.
 Slutsker L, Schuchat A. Listeriosis in humans. In: Ryser ET Marth EH, 
eds.
Listeria, listeriosis, and food safety. 2nd ed. New York, NY: 
Marcel Dekker, Inc.; Little, Brown and Company; 1999:75--95.  Tappero J, Schuchat A,
Deaver K, Mascola L, Wenger J, for the 
Listeriosis Study Group. Reduction in the incidence of human listeriosis 
in the United States: effectiveness of prevention efforts. JAMA 
1995;273:1118--22.  Lyme Disease  Stafford KC III. Tick management handbook: an
integrated guide for 
homeowners, pest control operators, and public health officials for the 
prevention of tick-associated disease. New Haven, CT: Connecticut 
Agricultural Experiment Station; 2004. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/lyme/resources/handbook.pdf.
 Hayes EB, Piesman J. How can we prevent Lyme disease? N Engl J Med 
2003;348:2424--30.
 Aguero-Rosenfeld ME, Wang G, Schwartz I, Wormser GP. Diagnosis of 
Lyme borreliosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2005;18:484--509.
 Medical Letter. Treatment of Lyme disease. Med Lett Drugs Ther 
2005;47:41--3.
 CDC. Caution regarding testing for Lyme disease. MMWR 2005;54:125.
 Malaria  Baird JK. Effectiveness of antimalarial drugs. N Engl J Med 
2005;352:1565--77.
 Chen LH, Keystone JS. New strategies for the prevention of malaria in 
travelers. Infect Dis Clin N Amer 2005;19:185--210.
 Guinovart C, Navia MM, Tanner M, et al. Malaria: burden of disease. 
Curr Mol Med 2006;6:137--40.
 Leder K, Black J, O'Brien D, et al. Malaria in travelers: a review of 
the GeoSentinel Surveillance Network. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:1104--12.
 Skarbinski J, Eliades MJ, Causer LM, et al. Malaria 
surveillance---United States, 2004. In: Surveillance Summaries, May 26, 
2006. MMWR 2006;55(No. SS-4):23--37.
 Measles  Papania M, Hinman A, Katz S, Orenstein W, McCauley M, eds. Progress 
toward measles elimination---absence of measles as an endemic disease in 
the United States. J Infect Dis 2004;189(Suppl 1):S1--257.
 CDC. National, state, and local area vaccination coverage among 
children aged 19--35 months---United States, 2006. MMWR 2007;56:880--5.
 Rota PA, Liffick SL, Rota JS, et al. Molecular epidemiology of 
measles viruses in the United States, 1997--2001. Emerg Infect Dis 
2002;8:902--8.
 De Serres G, Gay NJ, Farrington CP. Epidemiology of transmissible 
diseases after elimination. Am J Epidemiol 2000;151:1039--48.
 Meningococcal  Disease   CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  meningococcal  disease:
recommendations 
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 
2005;54(No. RR-7).
 Rosenstein NE, Perkins BA, Stephens DS, et al. Meningococcal disease. 
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1378--88.
 Rosenstein NE, Perkins BA, Stephens DS, et al. The changing 
epidemiology of meningococcal disease in the United States, 1992--1996. 
J Infect Dis 1999;180:1894--901.
 Mumps  CDC. Mumps epidemic---Iowa, 2006. MMWR 2006;55:366--8.
 CDC. Update: multistate outbreak of mumps---United States, January 
1--May 2, 2006. MMWR 2006;55:559--63.
 CDC. Update: mumps activity---United States, January 1--October 7, 
2006. MMWR 2006;55:1152--3.
 CDC. Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP) for the control and elimination of mumps. 
MMWR 2006;55:629--30.
 Harling R, White JM, Ramsay ME, et al. The effectiveness of the mumps 
component of the MMR vaccine: a case control study. Vaccine 
2005;23:4070--4.
 Schaffzin JK, Pollock L, Schulte C, et al. Effectiveness of previous 
mumps vaccination during a summer camp outbreak. Pediatrics 
2007;120:e862--8.
 Pertussis  Bisgard KM, Rhodes P, Connelly BL, et al. Pertussis vaccine 
effectiveness among children 6 to 59 months of age in the United States, 
1998--2001. Pediatrics 2005;116:e285--94.
 Bisgard KM, Pascual FB, Ehresmann KR, et al. Infant pertussis: who 
was the source? Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004;23:985--9.
 CDC. Preventing tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis among adolescents; 
use of tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis 
vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-3).
 CDC. Recommended antimicrobial agents for the treatment and 
postexposure prophylaxis of pertussis: 2005 CDC guidelines. MMWR 
2005;54(No. RR-14).
 CDC. Pertussis---United States, 2001--2003. MMWR 2005;54:1283--6.
 Lee GM, Lebaron C, Murphy TV, Lett S, Schauer S, Lieu TA. Pertussis 
in adolescents and adults: should we vaccinate? Pediatrics 
2005;115:1675--84.
 CDC. Preventing tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis among adults: use 
of tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis 
vaccine (Tdap): recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP) and recommendation of ACIP, supported by 
the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC), 
for use of Tdap among health-care personnel. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-17).
 Plague  CDC. Imported plague---New York City, 2002. MMWR 2003;53:725--8.
 Enscore RE, Biggerstaff BJ, Brown TL, et al. Modeling relationships 
between climate and the frequency of human plague cases in the 
southwestern United States, 1960--1997. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
2002;66:186--96.
 Inglesby TV, Dennis DT, Henderson DA, et al. Plague as a biological 
weapon: medical and public health management. Working Group on Civilian 
Biodefense [Review]. JAMA 2000;283:2281--90.
 Dennis DT, Gage KL, Gratz N, Poland JD, Tikhomirov E. Plague manual: 
epidemiology, distribution, surveillance and control. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 1999.
 Poliomyelitis  CDC. Poliovirus infections in four unvaccinated children---Minnesota, 
August--October 2005. MMWR 2005; 54:1053--5.
 Alexander LN, Seward JF, Santibanez TA, et al. Vaccine policy changes 
and epidemiology of polio in the United States. JAMA 2004;292:1696--702.
 CDC. Progress toward interruption of wild poliovirus 
transmission---worldwide, January 2006--May 2007. MMWR 2007;56:682--5.
 CDC. Laboratory surveillance for wild and vaccine-derived 
polioviruses---worldwide, January 2006--June 2007. MMWR 2007;56:965--9.
 CDC. Update on vaccine-derived polioviruses---worldwide, January 
2006--August 2007. MMWR 2007;56:996--1001.
 Q Fever  McQuiston JH, Holman RC, McCall CL, Childs JE, Swerdlow DL, Thompson 
HA. National surveillance and the epidemiology of Q fever in the United 
States, 1978--2004. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2006;75:36--40.
 Mcquiston JH, Nargund VN, Miller JD, Priestly R, Shaw EI, Thompson 
HA. Prevalence of antibodies to 
Coxiella burnetii among veterinary school dairy herds in the 
United States, 2003. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2005;5:90--1.
 Raoult D, Tissot-Dupont H, Foucault C, et al. Q fever 1985--1998. 
Clinical and epidemiologic features of 1,383 infections [Review]. 
Medicine 2000;79:109--25.
 Bernard KW, Parham GL, Winkler WG, Helmick CG. Q fever control 
measures: recommendations for research facilities using sheep. Infect 
Control 1982;3:461--5.
 Rabies,  Animal  and  Human   CDC.  Compendium  of  animal  rabies  prevention  and
control, 2005: 
National Association of State and Territorial Public Health 
Veterinarians, Inc. MMWR 2005;54 (No. RR-3).
 CDC. Human rabies prevention---United States, 1999: recommendations 
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 
1999;48(No. RR-1).
 Blanton JD, Hanlon CA, Ruprrecht CE. Rabies surveillance in the 
United States during 2006. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;231:540--56.
 Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever   CDC.  Diagnosis  and  management  of  tickborne
rickettsial diseases: 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichioses, and anaplasmosis---United 
States. MMWR 2006;55 (No. RR-4). 
 Chapman AS, Murphy SM, Demma LJ, et al. Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
in the United States, 1997--2002. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 
2006;6:170--8.
 Demma LJ, Traeger MS, Nicholson WL, et al. Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever from an unexpected tick reservoir in Arizona. N Engl J Med 
2005;353:587--94.
 CDC. Fatal cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever in family 
clusters---three states, 2003. MMWR 2004;53:407--10.
 Thorner AR, Walker DH, Petri WA. Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
[Review]. Clin Infect Dis 1998;27:1353--60.
 Rubella  CDC. Control and prevention of rubella: evaluation and management of 
suspected outbreaks, rubella in pregnant women, and surveillance for 
congenital rubella syndrome. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-12).
 Reef S, Cochi S, eds. The evidence for the elimination of rubella and 
congenital rubella syndrome in the United States: a public health 
achievement. Clin Infect Dis 2006;43(Suppl 3):S123--68.
 CDC. Achievements in public health: elimination of rubella and 
congenital rubella syndrome---United States, 1969--2004. MMWR 
2005;54:279--82. 
 Salmonellosis  Braden CR. Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis and eggs: 
a national epidemic in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 
2006;43:512--7.  Olsen SJ, Bishop R, Brenner FW, et al. The changing epidemiology of
Salmonella: trends in serotypes isolated from humans in the 
United States, 1987--1997. J Infect Dis 2001;183:756--61.  Voetsch AC, Van Gilder TJ,
Angulo FJ, et al. FoodNet estimate of 
burden of illness caused by nontyphoidal
Salmonella infections in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 
2004;38(Suppl 3):S127--34.
 Shiga Toxin-Producing Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
 Bender JB, Hedberg CW, Besser JM, et al. Surveillance for 
Escherichia coli O157:H7 infections in Minnesota by molecular 
subtyping.  N  Engl  J  Med  1997;337:388--94.   Brooks  JT,  Sowers  EG,  Wells  JB,  et  al.
Non-O157 Shiga toxin-producing
Escherichia coli infections in the United States, 1983--2002. J 
Infect  Dis  2005;192:1422--9.   Crump  JA,  Sulka  AC,  Langer  AJ,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of
Escherichia 
coli O157:H7 among visitors to a dairy farm. N Engl J Med 
2002;347:555--60.
 Griffin PM, Mead PS, Sivapalasingam S. Escherichia coli 
O157:H7 and other enterohemorrhagic E. coli. In: Blaser MJ, Smith 
PD, Ravdin JI, Greenberg HB, Guerrant RL, eds. Infections of the 
gastrointestinal tract. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
2002:627--42.
 Mead PS, Griffin PM. Escherichia coli O157:H7. Lancet 
1998;352:1207--12.
 Shigellosis  Shane A, Crump J, Tucker N, Painter J, Mintz E. Sharing Shigella: 
risk factors and costs of a multi-community outbreak of shigellosis. 
Arch  Pediatr  Adolesc  Med  2003;157:601--3.   CDC.  Outbreaks  of  multidrug-resistant
Shigella sonnei 
gastroenteritis associated with day care centers---Kansas, Kentucky, and 
Missouri, 2005. MMWR 2006;55: 1068--71.  Gupta A, Polyak CS, Bishop RD, Sobel J,
Mintz ED. 
Laboratory-confirmed shigellosis in the United States, 1989--2002: 
epidemiologic trends and patterns. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:1372--7.  Sivapalasingam
S, Nelson JM, Joyce K, Hoekstra M, Angulo FJ, Mintz 
ED. A high prevalence of antimicrobial resistance among
Shigella isolates in the United States, 1999--2002. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother 2006;50:49--54.
 Streptococcal Disease, Invasive, Group A  O'Loughlin RE, Roberson A, Cieslak PR, et
al. The epidemiology of 
invasive group A streptococcal infections and potential vaccine 
implications, United States, 2000--2004. Clin Infect Dis 
2007;45:853--62.  CDC. Active Bacterial Core Surveillance report. Emerging Infections
Program Network. Group A Streptococcus, 2005. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2007. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/abcs/survreports/gas05.pdf.
 Jordan HT, Richards CL, Burton DC, Thigpen MC, Van Beneden CA. Group 
A streptococcal disease in long-term care facilities: descriptive 
epidemiology and potential control measures. Clin Infect Dis 
2007;45:742--52.
 CDC. Investigating clusters of group A streptococcal disease. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2005. 
Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/strepAcalculator.
 The Prevention of Invasive Group A Streptococcal Infections Workshop 
participants. Prevention of invasive group A streptococcal disease among 
household contacts of case patients and among postpartum and 
postsurgical patients: recommendations from the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:950--9.
 Streptococcal Toxic-Shock Syndrome  Bisno AL. Brito MO. Collins CM. Molecular basis of
group A 
streptococcal virulence. Lancet Infect Dis 2003;3: 191--200.
 O'Loughlin RE, Roberson A, Cieslak PR, et al. The epidemiology of 
invasive group a streptococcal infections and potential vaccine 
implications, United States, 2000--2004. Clin Infect Dis 
2007;45:853--62.
 Stevens DL. Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome associated with 
necrotizing fasciitis. Annu Rev Med 2000;51: 271--88.
 The Prevention of Invasive Group A Streptococcal Infections Workshop 
participants. Prevention of invasive group A streptococcal disease among 
household contacts of case patients and among postpartum and 
postsurgical patients: recommendations from the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:950--9.
 Streptococcus pneumoniae, Invasive, Drug-Resistant  CDC. Preventing pneumococcal
disease among infants and young 
children: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000;49(No. RR-9).
 Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Performance standards 
for antimicrobial susceptibility testing: 15th informational supplement 
[No. M100-S15]. Wayne, PA: National Committee for Clinical Laboratory 
Standards; 2005.
 Flannery B, Schrag S, Bennett NM, et al. Impact of childhood 
vaccination on racial disparities in invasive 
Streptococcus pneumoniae infections. JAMA 2004;291:2197--203.
 Kyaw MH, Lynfield R, Schaffner W, et al. Effect of introduction of 
the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine on drug-resistant 
Streptococcus pneumoniae. N Engl J Med 2006;354:1455--63.
 Poehling KA, Talbot TR, Griffin MR, et al. Invasive pneumococcal 
disease among infants before and after introduction of pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine. JAMA 2006;295:1668--74.
 Ray GT, Whitney CG, Fireman BH, Ciuryla V, Black SB. 
Cost-effectiveness of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine: evidence from the 
first 5 years of use in the United States incorporating herd effects. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J 2006;25:494--501.
 Syphilis,  Congenital   CDC.  Congenital  syphilis---United  States,  2002.  MMWR
2004;53:716--9.
 Syphilis, Primary and Secondary  CDC. The national plan to eliminate syphilis from the
United States. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 1999.
 CDC. The national plan to eliminate syphilis from the United States. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2006.
 CDC Sexually transmitted disease surveillance supplement 2006; 
syphilis surveillance report. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, CDC. In press.
 Tetanus  Pascual FB, McGinley EL, Zanardi LR, Cortese MM, Murphy TV. Tetanus 
surveillance---United States, 1998--2000. In: Surveillance Summaries, 
June 20, 2003. MMWR 2003;52(No. SS-3).  CDC. Tetanus---Puerto Rico, 2002. MMWR
2002;51:613--5.  McQuillan GM, Kruszon-Moran D, Deforest A, Chu SY, Wharton M. 
Serologic immunity to diphtheria and tetanus in the United States. Ann 
Intern  Med  2002;136:660--6.   CDC.  Preventing  tetanus,  diphtheria,  and  pertussis
among adults: use 
of tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis 
vaccine: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP) and Recommendation of ACIP, supported by the Healthcare 
Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC), for use of Tdap 
among health-care personnel. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-17).  Pascual FB, McGinley EL,
Zanardi LR, Cortese MM, Murphy TV. Tetanus 
surveillance---United States, 1998--2000. In: Surveillance Summaries, 
June 20, 2003. MMWR 2003;52(No. SS-3).  McQuillan GM, Kruszon-Moran D, Deforest
A, Chu SY, Wharton M. 
Serologic immunity to diphtheria and tetanus in the United States. Ann 
Intern Med 2002;136:660--6.  Trichinellosis  CDC. Trichinellosis associated with bear
meat---New York and 
Tennessee, 2003. MMWR 2004;53:606--10.
 Roy SL, Lopez AS, Schantz PM. Trichinellosis surveillance---United 
States, 1997--2001. In: Surveillance Summaries, July 25, 2003. MMWR 
2003;52(No. SS-6).  Moorhead A, Grunenwald PE, Dietz VJ, Schantz PM. Trichinellosis
in 
the United States, 1991--1996: declining but not gone. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
1999;60:66--9.  CDC. Outbreak of trichinellosis associated with eating cougar 
jerky---Idaho, 1995. MMWR 1996;45:205--6.
 Tuberculosis  CDC. Reported tuberculosis in the United States, 2003. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2004. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/tb/default.htm.
 CDC. Trends in tuberculosis---United States, 2004. MMWR 
2005;54:245--9.
 Saraiya M, Cookson ST, Tribble P, et al. Tuberculosis screening among 
foreign-born persons applying for permanent US residence. Am J Public 
Health 2002;92:826--9.
 Talbot EA, Moore M, McCray E, Binkin NJ. Tuberculosis among 
foreign-born persons in the United States, 1993--1998. JAMA 
2000;284:2894--900.
 Tularemia  CDC. Outbreak of tularemia among commercially distributed prairie 
dogs, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:688, 699.
 CDC. Tularemia---United States, 1990--2000. MMWR 2002;51:182--4.
 Dennis DT, Inglesby TV, Henderson DA, et al. Tularemia as a 
biological weapon: medical and public health management. JAMA 
2001;285:2763--73.
 Feldman KA, Enscore RE, Lathrop SL, et al. Outbreak of primary 
pneumonic tularemia on Martha's Vineyard. N Engl J Med 
2001;345:1219--26.
 Petersen JM, Schriefer ME. Tularemia: emergence/ re-emergence. Vet 
Res 2005;36:455--67.
 Typhoid Fever  Crump J, Barrett TJ, Nelson JT, Angulo FJ. Reevaluating 
fluoroquinolone breakpoints for 
Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi and for non-Typhi 
Salmonellae. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:75--81.
 Kubota K, Barrett TJ, Hunter S et al. Analysis of 
Salmonella serotype Typhi pulsed-field gel electrophoresis patterns 
associated with international travel. J Clin Micro 2005;43:1205--9.
 Olsen SJ, Bleasdale SC, Magnano AR, et al. Outbreaks of typhoid fever 
in the United States, 1960--1999. Epidemiol Infect 2003;130:13--21.
 Reller M, Olsen S, Kressel A. Sexual transmission of typhoid fever: a 
multi-state outbreak among men who have sex with men. Clin Infect Dis 
2003;37:141--4.
 Steinberg EB, Bishop RB, Dempsey AF, et al. Typhoid fever in 
travelers: who should be targeted for prevention? Clin Infect Dis 
2004;39:186--91.
 Varicella  CDC. Prevention of varicella: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2007;56(No. RR-4).
 Seward JF, Zhang JX, Maupin TJ, Mascola L, Jumaan AO. Contagiousness 
of varicella in vaccinated cases: a household contact study. JAMA 
2004;292:704-8.
 CDC. Public health response to varicella outbreaks---United States, 
2003--2004. MMWR 2006;55:993--5.
 CDC. Varicella surveillance practices, United States, 2004. MMWR 
2006;55:1126--9.
 Vancomycin-Intermediate Staphylococcus aureus Infection 
(VISA)/Vancomycin-Resistant 
Staphylococcus  aureus  Infection  (VRSA)   Fridkin  SK,  Hageman  J,  McDougal  LK,  et  al.
Vancomycin-Intermediate 
Staphylococcus aureus Epidemiology Study Group. Epidemiological and 
microbiological characterization of infections caused by 
Staphylococcus aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin, United 
States, 1997--2001. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:429--39.
 Chang S, Sievert DM, Hageman JC, et al. Vancomycin-Resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus Investigative Team. Infection with 
vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus containing the vanA 
resistance gene. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1342--7.
 Whitener CJ, Park SY, Browne FA, et al. Vancomycin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus in the absence of vancomycin exposure. Clin 
Infect Dis 2004;38:1049--55.
 Weigel LM, Clewell DB, Gill SR, et al. Genetic analysis of a 
high-level vancomycin-resistant isolate of 
Staphylococcus aureus. Science 2003;302:1569--71.
 McDonald LC, Hageman JC. Vancomycin intermediate and resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus: what the nephrologist needs to know. Nephrol News 
Issues 2004;8:63--4, 66--7, 71--2. 
 
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for 
identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a 
service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not 
responsible for the content of pages found at these sites. URL 
addresses listed in MMWR were current as of the date of 
publication.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic 
conversions from ASCII text into HTML. This conversion may have resulted 
in character translation or format errors in the HTML version. Users 
should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the 
electronic PDF version and/or the original MMWR paper copy for 
the official text, figures, and tables. An original paper copy of this 
issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: 
(202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions 
or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for 
identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a 
service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not 
responsible for the content of pages found at these sites. URL 
addresses listed in MMWR were current as of the date of 
publication. Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic 
conversions from ASCII text into HTML. This conversion may have resulted 
in character translation or format errors in the HTML version. Users 
should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the 
electronic PDF version and/or the original MMWR paper copy for 
the official text, figures, and tables. An original paper copy of this 
issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: 
(202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Date 
last reviewed: 2/6/2008
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5553a1.htm
