A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 CDC  announced  available  funds  for  a  cooperative  agreement  for  state  and  local
tuberculosis  (TB)  prevention  and  control  activities  and  laboratory  services.  This  page
contains  questions  and  answers  related  to  the  cooperative  agreement  (CDC-RFA-PS
25-0003).  Questions  and  answers  are  grouped  by  categories.   Yes,  applicants  are
required to apply for all three funding categories.  Yes.  Yes, the state is responsible for
including a local jurisdiction that may have previously been funded separately in their
Project  Narrative.  The  state  should  consider  the  local  jurisdiction's  objectives,
strategies, etc. when developing the Budget Narrative. It is most imperative to include
the  datasets  for  the  local  jurisdiction  in  the  Funding  Estimator  calculations.
Collaboration  is  strongly  encouraged.  An  overall  plan  and  approach  are  acceptable.  
Yes. No.  These items should be addressed in the Work Plan, and also summarized in
the  Applicant  Evaluation  and  Performance  Measurement  Plan.  There  is  one  overall
EPMP. The EPMP has two components - a programmatic focus and a laboratory focus. 
Both should be addressed. Yes, see pages 10-12, Strategy 1, Diagnosis and treatment
of persons with TB disease states: “Develop a TB elimination plan for the new period of
performance  (2025-2029).  A  summary  of  the  plan  should  be  submitted  with  this
application. If funded, a complete plan should be submitted by the end of year one. This
plan  should  be  developed  and  implemented  with  ongoing  collaboration  with  a  TB
elimination advisory committee." As noted on page 36, the applicant’s plan is required
to  be  submitted  as  Attachment  A.  The  TB  Elimination  Plan  that  is  due  with  the
application should be a summary of the approach to prevention, control and elimination
in  the  geographic  area.  The  TB  Elimination  Plan  that  is  due  at  the  end  of  year  one
should  be  more  extensive  with  details  regarding  prevention,  control  and  laboratory
activities  in  the  geographic  area.  In  addition,  the  plan  should  be  developed  and
implemented with ongoing collaboration with a TB elimination advisory committee. The
content in the TB Prevention, Control, and Elimination plan (attachment) is worth three
points.  Many of the components are the same. Page 53 outlines the specifics for the
Organizational  Capacity  section.  No,  the  COEs  cannot  be  designated  as  an  applicant
jurisdiction’s medical consultant. Page 54 states, “Specify the name and responsibilities
of the clinician serving as the state or local TB medical consultant for the jurisdiction. In
circumstances  where  the  number  of  cases  of  TB  is  very  low  and  a  state  or  local  TB
medical consultant is not available, describe how the program plans to liaison licensed
outpatient clinicians caring for TB patients as the provider of record within the recipient
jurisdiction  responsible  for  case  management  and  treatment,  and  contacts  to  their
regional TB COE, and how program will support this partnership.” Page 11 states: “For
each  patient  for  whom  COE  services  are  sought,  TB  programs  will  identify  a  licensed
physician  or  other  licensed  health  care  provider  with  prescriptive  authority  who
assumes responsibility for providing appropriate care for the patient as the healthcare
provider  of  record  within  the  recipient  jurisdiction  responsible  for  case  management
and treatment.” Yes, regional (i.e., local region within a given jurisdiction) TB clinicians
can be named as local medical consultants for their jurisdictions. Please specify if there
is  a  primary  or  lead  consultant  for  the  jurisdiction.   Yes,  the  20-page  limit  includes
Laboratory Strengthening and the Data Management Plan. The Elimination Plan must be
a separate attachment.  Yes. Yes, the laboratory narrative is separate from the project
narrative. However, narratives are included in the 20-page limit.  Yes. See page 40 of
the NOFO: "The Project Narrative must include all of the following headings (including
subheadings):
 Background,
 Approach,
 Applicant
 Evaluation
 and
 Performance
Measurement Plan, Organizational Capacity of Applicants to Implement the Approach,
and Work Plan. It must address outcomes and activities to be conducted over the entire
period of performance as identified in the CDC Project Description section.” The Data
Management  Plan  is  part  of  the  project  narrative  and  should  not  be  submitted  as  an
attachment.  As  described  on  page  47,  “applications  involving  data  collection  or
generation must include a Data Management Plan (DMP) as part of their evaluation and
performance  measurement  plan.”  See  page  40:  “There  is  no  page  limit.  The  table  of
contents  is  not  included  in  the  project  narrative  page  limit.):  The  applicant  must
provide,  as  a  separate  attachment,  the  'Table  of  Contents‘  for  the  entire  submission
package.”  No.  However,  page  40  of  the  NOFO  indicates  that  is  should  be  “brief.”  No
increased page limit is allowable; therefore, be judicious in your summary.  An overall
plan and approach are acceptable. The 45 pages limit listed is template NOFO language
that could not be removed from the document. The 65 pages limit is allowable as stated
on page 58, “Within the 65-page limit of the APR, recipients should use a maximum of:
to  cover  performance  reporting  and  the  funding  application.  Applicants  are  allowed
more than the 45 pages outlined in the instructions.” APRs are due 120 days prior to
the  end  of  the  first  budget  period  for  funded  period  See  page  36:  These  should  be
separate attachments, one titled Attachment A- “TB Prevention and Control Elimination
Plan”  and  one  titled  Attachment  B-  “Evidence  of  Jurisdiction  Infrastructure.”  Required
documents must be uploaded as Attachment A and Attachment B under Appendix A. 
No. Yes.  All attachments will be reviewed. No.  No.  Yes.  Yes.   On page 35 (Additional
Information on Eligibility), the NOFO states that applicants should provide evidence that
they  have  the  necessary  public  health  infrastructure  and  authority  to  conduct  TB
disease surveillance and report TB surveillance data to CDC. Yes, page 16 of the NOFO
indicates that grantees are responsible for “Reviewing genotype clusters within 1 week
of  receiving  notification”  and  “Collaborating  with  CDC  to  investigate  TB  genotype
cluster  alerts  generated  by  the  TB  Genotyping  Information  Management  System  (TB
GIMS) to determine whether a TB outbreak is occurring.”  After review of genotyping
clusters,  grantees  are  responsible  for  “Providing  reports  at  initial  detection,  and
quarterly  thereafter,  of  outbreak  investigation  and  response  activities,  including
epidemiologic  data  and  ongoing  or  planned  interventions  to  control  transmission.”
Specific information to report if the outbreak meets criteria for a large outbreak (≥10
cases diagnosed in a 3-year period that are related by recent transmission) is listed on
page  17.  Yes.   Page  9  of  the  NOFO  states:  “By  the  end  of  this  5-year  period  of
performance, NOFO recipients must address all short-term, intermediate, and long-term
outcomes in the logic model, and achieve all the outcomes highlighted in bold-type in
the  logic  model.”  The  baseline  values  for  comparison  with  the  5-year  period  of
performance should be based on an applicant’s 2022-2023 data. Page 13 of the NOFO
states:  “Establish  a  baseline  for  testing  individuals  identified  at  higher  risk  of  having
latent TB infection and/or progressing to TB disease and identify a goal and strategy for
scaling-up targeted testing for latent TB infection.” Recipients should analyze their own
targeted testing data to determine their own baselines and develop own measures for
achieving the NOFO outcomes. The baseline for targeted testing of individuals at higher
risk  would  be  number  of  people  at  higher  risk  reached  by  targeted  testing  in
2022-2023.    Information  may  be  available  through  National  Tuberculosis  Indicators
Project  data  (NTIP),  program  reports  such  as  laboratory  reports  or  annual  reports,  or
routine data collection conducted by applicants. Page 13 of the NOFO states: “Establish
a baseline for testing individuals identified at higher risk of having latent TB infection
and/or  progressing  to  TB  disease  and  identify  a  goal  and  strategy  for  scaling-up
targeted testing for latent TB infection.” Recipients should analyze their own targeted
testing data to determine their own baselines and develop measures for achieving the
NOFO outcomes. The baseline for targeted testing of individuals at higher risk would be
the  number  of  people  at  higher  risk  reached  by  targeted  testing  in  2022-2023.
Information  may  be  available  through  National  Tuberculosis  Indicators  Project  data
(NTIP),  program  reports  such  as  laboratory  reports  or  annual  reports,  or  routine  data
collection  conducted  by  applicants.  No,  CDC  does  not  have  a  national  indicator  for
partnerships.  Applicants  could  describe  current  access  to  medical  and  social  services
and current partnerships to address disparities as well as how access and partnerships
to  address  disparities  will  be  measured  and  improved  over  the  project  period.  NAAT
testing on at least one specimen is recommended by CDC- to diagnose pulmonary TB
disease.  Direct  detection  of  MTBC  by  NAAT  offers  earlier  and  more  precise  diagnosis
than  growth-based  methods.  For  these  reasons,  increased  use  of  NAAT  testing  is
encouraged. GeneXpert is an FDA-approved NAAT test. Yes. The APR will be due 120
days prior to the end of the budget year (Aug 31). Since 2020, all years have included
viral  hepatitis  B  or  C  in  the  count  toward  the  funding  formula  as  a  risk  factor.   Viral
hepatitis  is  a  risk  factor  that  can  be  included  in  the  RVCT  report  for  each  and  any
patient  with  TB.   Hepatitis  will  show  as  a  medical  risk  factor  in  the  funding  formula
report  in  NTIP  starting  in  calendar  year  2025.   No.  On  page  17  the  NOFO  indicates:
“Promote  standardized  collection  and  reporting  of  case-level  latent  TB  infection
surveillance  data...”  and  “If  feasible,  provide  case-based  surveillance  for  latent  TB
infection...” On page 8 of the NOFO guidance, the Surveillance strategy indicates the
applicant  will  “Promote  standardized  collection  and  reporting  of  case-level  latent  TB
infection surveillance data,” with a short-term outcome being “Increased capacity and
readiness to report core case-level latent TB infection surveillance data to CDC.” Page
13 of the NOFO states: “Establish a baseline for testing individuals identified at higher
risk of having latent TB infection and/or progressing to TB disease and identify a goal
and  strategy  for  scaling-up  targeted  testing  for  latent  TB.”  Recipients  should  analyze
their own targeted testing data to determine their own baselines and develop measures
for  achieving  the  NOFO  outcomes.  The  baseline  for  targeted  testing  of  individuals  at
higher risk would be the number of people at higher risk reached by targeted testing in
2022-2023.  Information  may  be  available  through  National  Tuberculosis  Indicators
Project  data  (NTIP),  program  reports  such  as  laboratory  reports  or  annual  reports,  or
routine  data  collection  conducted  by  applicants.       All  latent  TB  infection  screening
results  to  use  for  the  denominator  should  be  collected.   Yes,  the  TBLISS  is  the  only
option  for  reporting  newly  diagnosed  cases  of  latent  TB  infection  to  CDC.  TBLISS  is
intended to capture data on latent TB infection epidemiology and allow monitoring of
national  latent  TB  infection  prevalence  trends.  Currently,  national-level  latent  TB
infection  case  reporting  is  optional/voluntary  for  jurisdictions.  Similar  to  the  way  TB
disease  case  reports  are  electronically  transmitted  to  the  National  TB  Surveillance
System (NTSS), latent TB infection case reports can also be transmitted electronically to
TBLISS. For more information, please see the TBLISS Data Collection Form and the TB
and  Latent  TB  Infection  Message  Mapping  Guide.  No.  There  are  no  specific
requirements or format that must be included as part of the needs assessment and gap
analysis, as each applicant’s situation will likely be different. Applicants could conduct a
comprehensive  review  of  necessary  steps  to  implement  reporting  of  case-level  latent
TB infection surveillance through the Tuberculosis Latent Infection Surveillance System
(TBLISS).  This  may  include  examining  available  and  needed  resources  (human  and
capital),  policies  around  latent  TB  infection  reporting,  flow  of  information  related  to
latent  TB  infection  IT  system  capabilities  and  needs,  message  mapping  guides,  and
data elements.  Needs assessment and gap analysis are methods proposed to assess
the status of latent TB infection reporting in the jurisdiction and what actions might be
taken  to  promote  latent  TB  infection  reporting.  CDC  project  and  program  evaluation
consultants  as  well  as  the  TB  Program  Evaluation  Network  can  provide  additional
guidance  to  grantees  if  needed  during  the  funded  project  period  (see  page  32  under
CDC Program Support to Recipients). Yes, this is referencing the Contact Investigation
Report in ARPE. Yes, all programs are required to conduct targeted testing and submit
targeted  testing  Aggregate  Reports  for  Tuberculosis  Program  Evaluation  (ARPE)
information. See pages 12-14, Strategy 3, Test and treat populations at higher risk for
TB  and  latent  TB  infection.  There  are  two  (ARPE)  reports,  Contact  Investigation  and
Targeted  Testing.   They  are  both  due  March  31st.  Yes,  targeted  testing  numbers  are
entered  through  the  Targeted  Testing  report  within  ARPE.   National  TB  Performance
targets are listed in National Tuberculosis Indicators Project (NTIP) for TB Indicators. The
targets are aspirational, and recipients are not expected to achieve every target every
year but should continually strive to reach the targets.  Recipients should choose one
focus area per year where they are not reaching a performance target for evaluation to
determine why they are not meeting the target and then to develop a remediation plan
to  improve  their  performance  in  this  area.    Yes.  Recipients  should  choose  one  focus
area  per  year  where  they  are  not  reaching  a  performance  target  for  evaluation  to
determine why they are not meeting the target and then to develop a remediation plan
to improve their performance in this area.  Yes. Recipients may identify areas outside of
NTIP  objectives  for  program  evaluation.  If  an  awarded  recipient  believes  program
evaluation  and  subsequent  program  improvement  efforts  are  needed  outside  of  the
areas addressed by TB objectives and performance targets, the recipient should discuss
the rationale for this effort with their DTBE program evaluation consultant and project
officer.    The evaluation focus area can be any National Tuberculosis Indicators Project
(NTIP) measure needing improvement or focus area outside of program objectives as
justified by the program. The program evaluation plan is due with the application (see
Strategy  4  on  page  14).  “An  outline  of  an  evaluation  and  performance  measurement
plan  must  be  submitted  with  this  application.  Recipients  will  be  required  to  submit  a
more  detailed  Evaluation  and  Performance  Measurement  plan,  including  a  DMP,  if
applicable, within the first 6 months of award, as described in the Reporting Section of
this NOFO" (see page 26).  Yes. Yes. Any state that has a subdivision funded now are
advised  to  come  in  with  an  application  as  if  none  of  the  currently  funded  cities  and
counties  will  be  funded.  HRD  amounts  are  determined  by  morbidity.  Laboratory
amounts are determined by workload. There is no flexibility at this time to extend the
deadline  for  the  application.   Please  refer  to  the  Budget,  Grants,  &  Funding:  Direct
Assistance webpage for information on applying for direct assistance. No. On page 3,
under Cost Sharing and/or Matching Requirements, the NOFO indicates: “Cost sharing
or matching funds are not required for this program. Although no statutory matching
requirement  for  this  Notice  of  Funding  Opportunity  (NOFO)  exists,  leveraging  other
resources and related ongoing efforts to promote sustainability is strongly encouraged.”
No,  a  true  needs  budget  is  not  required.  Page  36  indicates,  “The  applicant  cannot
request an award greater than the anticipated budget formula for the project area.” 
All  seven  strategies  are  priorities.  Recipients  should  determine  their  priorities,  given
their
 available
 resources.
 
 Yes.
 
 Applicants
 should
 contact
 DTBE
 Support
(2025nofo@cdc.gov)  if  they  need  counts.  No.   Page  47  of  the  NOFO  under  Other
restrictions  states:  “The  use  of  Cooperative  Agreement  funds  for  hospitalization,
construction,  and  the  purchase  of  medications  is  prohibited.”  Correct.  See  page  48:
“The  use  of  Cooperative  Agreement  funds  for  hospitalization,  construction,  and  the
purchase of medications is prohibited.”  No. On page 10, under Strategy 1, Diagnosis
and treatment of persons with TB disease, the NOFO instructs applicants to provide a
drug  shortage  contingency  plan.  It  does  not  require  applicants  to  describe  how  they
obtain anti-TB medications in non-drug shortage scenarios. No.  The NOFO asks for a
plan.  The applicant must determine what their plan is for drug contingency and outline
a plan for their jurisdiction.  The guidance is limited to allow for maximum flexibility in
the development of a plan that can be tailored. Yes, an outline of a plan is acceptable.
Page 19 indicates “To develop a drug shortage contingency plan, programs will need to
engage  the  highest  levels  of  leadership  at  the  department  level...”  Yes,  this  is  a
competitive  NOFO.   Eligibility  information  can  be  found  in  section  C1-Eligibility
Information under Eligible Applicants and Additional Information on Eligibility, starting
on  page  34.  The  change  in  funding  approach  is  based  on  guidance  from  HHS.    
CDC-RFA-PS-25-0003  is  competitive  for  eligible  applicants.  The  number  of  proposed
awards  will ensure complete national geographic coverage and that jurisdictions with
the highest number of TB disease cases are funded. No. All program subunits should be
included in state applications.  Once funding decisions are made, a revised budget may
be  requested.  Yes.  States  should  include  all  programs  within  their  subunits.  No,  the
application will not be considered non-responsive. States should include all subunits in
their  applications.  The  application  for  City  X  is  treated  as  separate  and  equal  in  this
competitive  review.   No,  each  application  is  treated  as  separate  and  equal  in  this
competitive review. No. As outlined in the Purpose section on page 5: “This NOFO will
aid  current  state,  local,  and  territorial  TB  program  efforts  to  prevent,  control,  and
eliminate  TB  in  the  United  States  by  ensuring  national  geographic  coverage  and
prioritizing jurisdictions with the highest TB disease burden.” Additionally, there is no
mechanism  to  fund  multiple  jurisdictions  with  the  same  award.  It  is  conceivable  that
one recipient could contract with its subunits. No, this has not changed. Funds may be
used for outpatient clinical personnel, supplies, and services, as described on page 45.
On  page  47,  Other  restrictions  state:  “The  use  of  Cooperative  Agreement  funds  for
hospitalization,  construction,  and  the  purchase  of  medications  is  prohibited.”  and
“Recipients  may  not  use  funds  for  inpatient  clinical  care.”   Yes.  On  page  29,  under
Organizational  Capacity  of  Recipients  to  Implement  the  Approach,  applicants  are
instructed to “confirm their ability to provide or refer TB patients for inpatient care and
confinement  if  required.”  No.  On  page  35,  Under  Additional  Information  on  Eligibility,
the NOFO states: “The applicant must provide evidence that they have the necessary
public health infrastructure and authority to conduct TB disease surveillance; report TB
surveillance  data  to  CDC;  respond  to  TB  outbreaks;  contain  emerging  TB  disease
threats; conduct TB disease investigation, intervention, and follow-up and perform TB
laboratory testing for the eligible project area for which funding is sought.” This could
include  a  description  of  how  the  applicant  provides  outpatient  clinical  care.  Yes.  On
page  10,  under  Strategy  1:   Diagnosis  and  treatment  of  persons  with  TB  disease,
applicants are instructed to “ensure case management and treatment of persons with
active  TB  using  adherence-promoting  measures  such  as  case  review/cohort  analysis,
outreach staff who are culturally competent, extensive application of conventional and
electronic  directly  observed  therapy  (DOT,  and  electronic  DOT),  incentives,  and
enablers.”  Yes,  examples  could  include  Interferon  Gamma  Release  Assays,  rapid
molecular methodologies, and video directly observed therapy. The intent is to make as
many positions available as possible for staff to attend the COE contact investigations
and interviewing skills course, depending upon availability of funds.  Competency-based
in-service TB training and education strengthens the capacity of TB programs and other
partners  to  prevent  and  control  TB.  Essential  Components  of  a  Public  Health
Tuberculosis  Prevention,  Control,  and  Elimination  Program:  Recommendations  of  the
Advisory  Council  for  the  Elimination  of  Tuberculosis  and  the  National  Tuberculosis
Controllers  Association  outlines  aspects  that  TB  programs  should  include  in  TB
education  and  training.  Resources  are  available  to  assist  TB  programs  with  fulfilling
training and education responsibilities. The resources below may also be helpful: Yes, if
specimens  are  referred  to  another  laboratory  through  a  contract,  Memorandum  of
Agreement (MOA)/Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), etc., laboratory funding may
be applied for. No, probe-based methods such as Xpert® MTF/RIF and line probe assays
should  not  be  included  for  molecular  sequencing  DST  data.  This  information  can  be
found on page 62 and 63 and within the Workload Volume (number 6) and Performance
TAT PDF data (number 6) forms. Yes, if the laboratory is currently meeting the national
target for an indicator, “maintaining the current TAT” or a new measurable goal should
be listed (see page 28 of the NOFO).  Yes, all indicators should be measured in calendar
days, not working days, and should include weekends and holidays (e.g., a specimen
that arrives at the laboratory on a Friday afternoon and is processed with the acid-fast
bacilli (AFB) smear read and the result reported on the following Monday would have a
TAT of three days). See page 62 of the NOFO.  Yes, full year 2023 data should be used
to  calculate  the  estimated  laboratory  funding  budget.  See  Funding  by  Category  for
more information.  Yes, for the application due September 9, 2024, workload volume
data is required for 2021, 2022, and 2023.  TAT performance data is also required for
the application, however, only 2023 data is required. See the workload volume and TAT
performance PDF data forms. No, the laboratory narrative is to be included as part of
the  overall  project  narrative.  To  determine  laboratory  funding,  a  laboratory  funding
formula  is  used.  The  formula  uses  an  average  of  three  years  of  laboratory  data  for
specific  workload  volume  laboratory  indicators.  The  laboratory  has  a  total  amount  of
funding; a percentage of the total funding (as seen in the formula) is available for each
indicator.   This  amount  for  each  indicator  is  proportionately  calculated  for  each
laboratory awardee based on awardee’s averaged data for that indicator. Visit the DTBE
NOFO  Webpage  for  more  information.   Yes.  For  example,  if  the  Serology  section
performs  IGRA  testing,  not  the  TB  Laboratory,  data  forms  and  laboratory  work  plan
should  be  completed  in  collaboration  with  the  laboratory  that  performs  IGRA  testing.
CDC  has  resources,  information,  and  guidance  to  support  U.S.  tuberculosis  (TB)
programs. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/tb-programs/php/funding-ps-25-0003-faq/index.html
