Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Oral tecovirimat for treatment of mpox is primarily available
through  the  National  Institutes  of  Health’s  Study  of  Tecovirimat  for  Mpox  (STOMP).
Healthcare providers should either contact the STOMP call center (1-855-876-9997) or
their state/territorial health department to inquire about any remaining, prepositioned
supply of oral tecovirimat available within their jurisdiction. Any remaining supply can
be  used  for  EA-IND  eligible  patients.  State/local/territorial  health  departments  should
request TPOXX on behalf of providers caring for patients with mpox by calling the CDC
Emergency  Operations  Center  (770-488-7100)  or  poxvirus@cdc.gov  (during  regular
business hours).  The expanded access IND (EA-IND) eligibility criteria for tecovirimat
treatment for patients with mpox has been revised. The current version of the EA-IND
protocol [494 KB, 28 pages] is version 6.4 dated June 5, 2024. Refer to Section 2.0 of
the  protocol  for  the  full  list  of  eligibility  criteria.  The  CDC  Institutional  Review  Board
(IRB) approved the protocol amendment on June 5, 2024 (see the approval letter [372
KB,  2  pages]).  Protocol  continuation  was  approved  on  June  20  [93  KB,  1  page].  Oral
tecovirimat for treatment of mpox is primarily available through enrollment in the Study
of  Tecovirimat  for  Mpox  (STOMP).  Researchers  and  clinicians  do  not  know  whether
tecovirimat is effective or how safe it is in treating mpox. The STOMP trial is designed to
collect data to help answer these scientific questions. Providers with patients who are
ineligible for STOMP’s open-label  arm (e.g., illness ≥ 14 days or prior TPOXX receipt)
but  meet  EA-IND  eligibility  for  tecovirimat  treatment  for  mpox  should  contact  their
state, local, or territorial health departments to see if any oral TPOXX remains available
within  their  jurisdiction  from  prior  prepositioned  supply.  While  the  large-scale
prepositioning  of  stockpiled  oral  tecovirimat  stopped  on  February  27,  2023,  by  ASPR,
some of the deployed supply still remains within expiry.  Any remaining supply can be
used  for  EA-IND  eligible  patients.  If  there  is  no  local  supply,  state,  local,  or  territorial
health departments should request oral TPOXX on providers’ behalf by calling the CDC
Emergency  Operations  Center  (EOC)  at  (770)  488-7100  (24×7)  or  poxvirus@cdc.gov.
(This  email  box  is  monitored  from  9  a.m.  to  4  p.m.  U.S.  Eastern  time  on  non-holiday
weekdays). For patients who require intravenous TPOXX treatment and meet treatment
eligibility under the EA-IND protocol, providers, in conjunction with jurisdictional health
departments,  can  contact  the  CDC  EOC  or  e-mail  poxvirus@cdc.gov  to  make  the
request; a clinical consultation with a CDC clinical duty officer regarding management
of hospitalized patients can also be requested.  To facilitate access to tecovirimat, CDC
holds  an  expanded  access  IND  (EA-IND)  protocol  for  the  treatment  of  non-variola
orthopoxvirus  infections,  including  mpox,  in  adults  and  children.  Use  of  tecovirimat
under this EA-IND protocol is for patients with laboratory-confirmed or suspected mpox
who meet the eligibility criteria as outlined in Section 2.0 of the protocol [494 KB, 28
pages].  This  includes:  Patients  with  mpox  who  meet  the  above-mentioned  EA-IND
eligibility for tecovirimat treatment may also be eligible for oral tecovirimat through the
open-label  tecovirimat  arm  of  NIH’s  STOMP  study.  The  EA-IND  eligibility  criteria  are
closely aligned with the STOMP open-label arm’s eligibility criteria regarding those with
severe  immunocompromise,  people  who  are  pregnant  or  lactating,  and  children.
However, the definition of protracted or life-threatening manifestations of mpox listed
above for tecovirimat treatment under the EA-IND protocol are narrower than STOMP’s
definition  of  severe  disease.  CDC’s  EA-IND  provides  umbrella  regulatory  coverage  so
that clinicians and facilities do not need to request and obtain their own INDs. To be
covered under the EA-IND, the providers and affiliated facilities must register online as
participating  providers/sites.  Tecovirimat  use  under  the  EA-IND  is  also  covered  under
the Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness (PREP) Act, which provides liability
immunity  to  qualified  providers  and  compensation  to  eligible  patients  via  the
Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program (CICP). Providers and affiliated facilities
must be registered online as participating providers/sites under the CDC-held expanded
access IND (EA-IND) protocol for tecovirimat. The tecovirimat IND Online Registry allows
for  convenient,  time-efficient,  and  secure  completion  and  return  of  required  EA-IND
forms  to  CDC.  View  this  Fact  Sheet  [521  KB,  8.5″  x  11″]  for  an  overview  of  the
tecovirimat IND online registry process.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/clinicians/tecovirimat-ea-ind.html
