Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / April 17, 2020 / 69(15);451–457 On April 13, 2020,
this  report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Arielle  Lasry,  PhD1;  Daniel
Kidder, PhD1; Marisa Hast, PhD1,2; Jason Poovey, MS3; Gregory Sunshine, JD4; Kathryn
Winglee,  PhD1;  Nicole  Zviedrite,  MPH1;  Faruque  Ahmed,  PhD1;  Kathleen  A.  Ethier,
PhD1; CDC Public Health Law Program; New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene; Louisiana Department of Health; Public Health – Seattle & King County; San
Francisco  COVID-19  Response  Team;  Alameda  County  Public  Health  Department;  San
Mateo County Health Department; Marin County Division of Public Health (View author
affiliations) What is already known on this topic? Implementing community mitigation
strategies, including personal protective measures persons should adopt in community
settings, social distancing, and environmental cleaning in community settings, during a
pandemic  can  slow  the  spread  of  infections.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  During
February 26–April 1, 2020, community mobility (a proxy measure for social distancing)
in  the  metropolitan  areas  of  Seattle,  San  Francisco,  New  York  City,  and  New  Orleans
declined, decreasing with each community mitigation policy issued and as case counts
increased.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?  Public  policies  to
increase  compliance  with  community  mitigation  strategies  might  be  effective  in
decreasing community mobility; however, more information is needed to assess impact
on  disease  transmission.  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads  Community
mitigation  activities  (also  referred  to  as  nonpharmaceutical  interventions)  are  actions
that  persons  and  communities  can  take  to  slow  the  spread  of  infectious  diseases.
Mitigation  strategies  include  personal  protective  measures  (e.g.,  handwashing,  cough
etiquette,  and  face  coverings)  that  persons  can  use  at  home  or  while  in  community
settings;  social  distancing  (e.g.,  maintaining  physical  distance  between  persons  in
community settings and staying at home); and environmental surface cleaning at home
and  in  community  settings,  such  as  schools  or  workplaces.  Actions  such  as  social
distancing  are  especially  critical  when  medical  countermeasures  such  as  vaccines  or
therapeutics are not available. Although voluntary adoption of social distancing by the
public  and  community  organizations  is  possible,  public  policy  can  enhance
implementation. The CDC Community Mitigation Framework (1) recommends a phased
approach to implementation at the community level, as evidence of community spread
of  disease  increases  or  begins  to  decrease  and  according  to  severity.  This  report
presents initial data from the metropolitan areas of San Francisco, California; Seattle,
Washington;  New  Orleans,  Louisiana;  and  New  York  City,  New  York*  to  describe  the
relationship  between  timing  of  public  policy  measures,  community  mobility  (a  proxy
measure  for  social  distancing),  and  temporal  trends  in  reported  coronavirus  disease
2019 (COVID-19) cases. Community mobility in all four locations declined from February
26,  2020  to  April  1,  2020,  decreasing  with  each  policy  issued  and  as  case  counts
increased.  This  report  suggests  that  public  policy  measures  are  an  important  tool  to
support social distancing and provides some very early indications that these measures
might help slow the spread of COVID-19. When a novel virus with pandemic potential
emerges,  community  mitigation  strategies  often  are  the  most  readily  available
interventions
 to
 slow
 transmission.
 CDC-recommended
 community
 mitigation
interventions for COVID-19, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, are based on evidence for
other  viral  respiratory  illnesses  and  emerging  data  on  SARS-CoV-2  transmission  and
epidemiology,  including  groups  at  highest  risk  for  hospitalization  and  death  from
COVID-19  (1,2).  Public  policies  to  implement  social  distancing  include  emergency
declarations,  bans  on  gatherings  of  certain  sizes,  school  closures,  restrictions  on
businesses, and stay-at-home or shelter-in-place of residence orders. These strategies
can  substantially  disrupt  daily  life;  therefore,  the  intensity  of  their  implementation
should align with progression and severity of disease (1). Understanding the timing and
potential impact of policies designed to increase compliance with mitigation strategies
will  assist  in  guiding  modification  of  those  policies  over  the  course  of  the  COVID-19
pandemic as well as increasing the understanding of when and how to fully implement
these strategies in future outbreaks where community mitigation is required. Data from
February 26–April 1, 2020 were examined from the core metropolitan statistical areas
(MSAs) of Seattle, San Francisco, and New Orleans, and from the five boroughs of New
York  City  (3).  These  areas  were  selected  because  each  had  substantial  numbers  of
reported  COVID-19  cases  during  the  early  stages  of  the  U.S.  epidemic  (4).  For  each
locality, the following data were analyzed: 1) types and timing of public policies issued
to  promote  community  mitigation  interventions  at  the  national,  state,  and  local
government  levels;  2)  cumulative  number  of  reported  COVID-19  cases;  3)  average
3-day percentage change in reported cases; and 4) community mobility. The types and
timing  of  public  policies  issued  were  collected  by  using  Google  Alerts  and  targeted
Google  searches  for  news  media  coverage  of  state  and  local  COVID-19  orders  and
proclamations,  followed  by  searching  state,  county,  parish,  and  city  government
websites to locate official copies of each order. Confirmed cumulative COVID-19 case
count data were collected from USAFacts (4), which aggregates data on cases by date
of report from CDC and state- and local-level public health agencies. The 3-day average
percentage change in cumulative case count was calculated after the cumulative case
count was >20 and is presented to describe more completely the trend in the epidemic
growth  rate.  Community  mobility  was  defined  as  the  percentage  of  personal  mobile
devices  (e.g.,  mobile  phones,  tablets,  and  watches)  leaving  home,  using  publicly
accessible data from SafeGraph, a data company that aggregates anonymized location
data from mobile devices (5). The percentage leaving home measure is the inverse of
the  SafeGraph  “completely  home”  metric,  an  indicator  that  a  device  has  not  moved
throughout  the  day  beyond  approximately  150  m  (492  ft)  of  its  common  nighttime
location. The average number of devices included in daily reporting was 80,095 in New
Orleans (6.4% of population); 336,783 devices in New York City (4.0% of population);
163,981 devices in San Francisco (3.6% of population); and 177,027 devices in Seattle
(4.8%  of  population).  In  each  of  the  four  locations,  a  combination  of  state  and  local
community mitigation policies was issued (Table). All four metropolitan areas were in
states  that  declared  a  state  of  emergency  and  put  local  limits  on  mass  gatherings,
although these varied by numbers of people allowed and, in some cases, changed over
time. All four issued school closure and stay-at-home orders at state or local levels, and
three parishes in the New Orleans MSA were the only areas in this study to implement a
curfew.  In  addition  to  state  and  local  policies,  which  were  implemented  beginning  in
March, on March 16, 2020, the White House announced the 15 Days to Slow the Spread
guidelines for persons to take action to reduce the spread of COVID-19. This national
action  was  extended  for  an  additional  30  days  on  March  30,  2020.†  Timing  of
community  mitigation  policies  in  relation  to  the  increasing  cumulative  case  counts  of
COVID-19  varied  by  locality  (Figure).  In  all  four  metropolitan  areas,  an  emergency
declaration  was  the  first  policy  issued,  before  large  increases  in  cumulative  cases.
Stay-at-home orders were the last mitigation policy to be issued in all areas except for
the New Orleans MSA, where a curfew in three of eight parishes was issued after the
stay-at-home order. In all four metropolitan areas, the percentage of residents leaving
home declined as the number of policies issued increased (Figure); in all four localities
the  percentage  leaving  home  was  close  to  80%  on  February  26,  and  by  April  1  the
percentage  leaving  home  was  42%  in  New  York  City,  47%  in  San  Francisco,  52%  in
Seattle,  and  61%  in  New  Orleans.  Overall,  across  the  four  areas,  emergency
declarations (the first policies issued) did not result in a sustained change in mobility;
however, declines in mobility occurred after implementation of combinations of policies
(such as limits on gatherings or school closures) and after the White House 15 Days to
Slow  the  Spread  guidelines  were  implemented.  There  were  additional  declines  in
mobility  following  stay-at-home  orders  in  all  four  locations.  The  average  3-day
percentage  change  also  varied  by  locality,  with  some  variation  across  the  four
metropolitan  areas  during  the  first  two  weeks  of  March,  followed  by  a  decline  and
leveling in the last two weeks of March. These changes also follow the issuance of a set
of  policies  and  rapid  decline  in  mobility  mid-March.  Top  During  February  26–April  1,
2020,  as  cumulative  cases  increased  and  community  mitigation  policies  were
implemented,  community  mobility  declined  in  four  U.S.  metropolitan  areas.  With  the
exception of emergency declarations, which were implemented as cases increased in
other  regions  and  internationally,  these  policies  were  implemented  during  the  period
when  case  counts  were  increasing  in  each  location,  but  the  timing  in  relation  to
cumulative  case  counts  varied.  Public  policies  to  increase  compliance  with  social
distancing, including limits on mass gatherings, school closures, business restrictions,
and stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders appear to be associated with decreases in
mobility.  Policies  related  to  specific  locations  or  community  organizations  (e.g.,  mass
gatherings, schools, restaurants, and bars) were often implemented within one or two
weeks  of  mid-March,  likely  a  result  of  increased  awareness  and  concern  about  the
potential  scope  of  the  outbreak  in  the  absence  of  mitigation.  This  awareness  and
concern  also  likely  impacted  the  public,  potentially  leading  to  further  decreases  in
mobility.  Thus,  the  potential  impact  of  interventions  on  mobility  as  well  as  this
increased  awareness  of  community  spread  of  disease  appears  to  be  cumulative  over
time.  Monitoring  adherence  to  community  mitigation  strategies  through  mobility
measures could improve the understanding of the types, combinations, and timing of
policies  that  are  associated  with  slowing  the  spread  of  COVID-19  as  well  as  other
infectious  diseases.  Finally,  there  appears  to  be  very  early  indications  of  potential
impact  of  policies  and  social  distancing  on  later  changes  in  cases.  There  are  likely  a
variety  of  contributors  to  these  changes,  including  public  health  efforts  to  contain
spread and individual efforts to increase personal protective practices. However, both
policies related to community mitigation and social distancing, operationalized here as
community  mobility,  could  have  contributed  to  these  changes.  The  findings  in  this
report  are  subject  to  at  least  four  limitations.  First,  these  data  suggest  temporal
correlations  between  issuance  of  public  policies  to  increase  mitigation  strategies  and
rising case counts, on one hand, and decreases in mobility, on the other as well as first
indications that these changes might impact growth of infections. The trends suggest
an association but cannot prove causality. Second, although mobile device data can be
used to understand movement within a community, the characteristics of those persons
using  these  devices  (e.g.,  age,  gender,  race,  and  ethnicity)  are  not  known,  so  the
results  might  not  be  generalizable  or  reflective  of  actual  mobility  patterns.  Further,
mobile  phone  coverage  was  limited  to  3%–6%  of  the  population  in  each  location.  In
addition, the data presented here track mobile devices, not persons, who might have
multiple devices (e.g., phone and tablet), who might not take their devices when they
leave the home, or who might travel outside their home but remain within 150 m (492
ft)  of  their  usual  nighttime  location.  Third,  confirmed  cumulative  cases  of  COVID-19
might not reflect the actual number of cases because of variability in access to testing
and recommendations for who should be tested during this period. Finally, these four
urban  metropolitan  areas  are  not  representative  of  communities  across  the  United
States,  and  community  mitigation  policies  might  have  a  very  different  impact  on
mobility  in  suburban  and  rural  communities.  These  temporal  trend  data  provide  a
preliminary  examination  of  local  timing  of  community  mitigation  measures  and
potential impacts on community mobility as well as very early indications of the impact
of community mitigation on disease growth. As the COVID-19 pandemic spreads across
the United States, the ability to assess the impact of mitigation strategies on reducing
COVID-19 transmission will improve. Decreasing numbers of new cases are needed to
curtail the COVID-19 pandemic in communities and relieve pressure on the health care
system.  Better  understanding  of  the  short-  and  long-term  impact  of  the  community
disruption that results from these measures is critical. However, this analysis suggests
that policies to increase social distancing when case counts are increasing can be an
important  tool  for  communities  as  changes  in  behavior  result  in  decreased  spread  of
COVID-19.  Top  Brian  Emerson,  Matthew  Wise,  CDC;  Tacoma-Pierce  County  Health
Department; Contra Costa Public Health; Snohomish Health District; Ross Epstein, Ryan
Squire,  Safegraph;  USAFacts.  Catherine  Clodfelter,  CDC  Public  Health  Law  Program;
Mara Howard-Williams, CDC Public Health Law Program; Rachel Hulkower, CDC Public
Health  Law  Program;  Gi  Jeong,  CDC  Public  Health  Law  Program;  Lisa  Landsman,  CDC
Public Health Law Program; Russell McCord, CDC Public Health Law Program; Amanda
Moreland,  CDC  Public  Health  Law  Program;  Julia  Shelburne,  CDC  Public  Health  Law
Program.  Alexander  Billioux,  Louisiana  Department  of  Health;  Julie  Hand,  Louisiana
Department of Health; Joseph Kanter, Louisiana Department of Health; Andrew Smith,
Louisiana Department of Health; Theresa Sokol, Louisiana Department of Health. Jeffrey
S. Duchin, Public Health – Seattle & King County; Meaghan S. Fagalde, Public Health –
Seattle & King County; Sargis Pogosjans,  Public Health – Seattle & King County. Robert
Brown,  Alameda  County  Public  Health  Department;  Sandra  Huang,  Alameda  County
Public Health Department; Nicholas Moss, Alameda County Public Health Department;
Erica Pan, Alameda County Public Health Department; Munira Shemsu, Alameda County
Public  Health  Department;  Emily  Yette,  Alameda  County  Public  Health  Department.
Carly  Bock,  San  Mateo  County  Health  Department;  Rachel  Curtis-Robles,  San  Mateo
County  Health  Department;  Cassius  Lockett,  San  Mateo  County  Health  Department;
Scott Morrow, San Mateo County Health Department; Catherine Sallenave, San Mateo
County  Health  Department.  Lisa  Santora,  Marin  County  Division  of  Public  Health;
Matthew  Willis,  Marin  County  Division  of  Public  Health.  Top  Corresponding  author:
Kathleen  A.  Ethier  for  the  CDC  COVID-19  Response  Team,  Kethier@cdc.gov,
404-639-7306.  Top  1CDC  COVID-19  Response  Team;  2Epidemic  Intelligence  Service,
CDC; 3Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, Georgia; 4Public Health Law Program,
CDC.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of
Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential
conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *  San  Francisco  metropolitan  statistical  area
(MSA) counties include Alameda, Contra Costa, San Francisco, San Mateo, and Marin;
Seattle  MSA  counties  include  King,  Snohomish,  and  Pierce;  New  York  City  boroughs
include The Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, and Staten Island; New Orleans MSA
parishes include Jefferson, Orleans, Plaquemines, St. Bernard, St. Charles, St. James, St.
John
 the
 Baptist,
 and
 St.
 Tammany.
 †
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/03.16.20_coronavirus-guidan
ce_8.5x11_315PM.pdf.  Top  Top  Abbreviations:  COVID-19  =  coronavirus  disease  2019;
MSA  =  metropolitan  statistical  area;  NA  =  not  applicable;  NR  =  none  reported.*
Issuance  dates  are  the  dates  the  issuing  official  signed  the  order  implementing  the
mandatory  intervention.  In  some  instances,  interventions  were  effective  either
immediately  or  within  1–3  days  of  issuance.  Recommendations  and  guidance  are  not
included.†  Dates  reflect  issuance  of  mandated  restrictions  on  the  size  of  mass
gatherings. The cancellation of individual events is excluded.§ Visitor limitations were
issued  for  all  licensed  health  care  providers.¶  Guidance  states  that  the  March  19
stay-at-home order “prohibits non-necessary visitation to these kinds of facilities except
at  the  end-of-life.”**  Although  no  statewide  school  closure  mandate  was  issued,  the
governor’s March 13 Executive Order N-26–20 describes multiple orders applicable to
local  educational  agencies  that  choose  to  close  to  address  COVID-19.††  Schools  also
closed  in  other  San  Francisco  MSA  counties,  but  decisions  were  made  at  the  school
district level and not as mandatory policies implemented at the municipal, county, or
state level.§§ Schools districts in the Seattle MSA began closing on March 11, but these
decisions were made at the district level and not as mandatory policies implemented at
the municipal, county, or state level. Top Abbreviations: CA = California; COVID-19 =
coronavirus disease 2019; LA = Louisiana; NY = New York; NYC = New York City; SF =
San  Francisco;  WA  =  Washington.  *  Public  policies  ordering  COVID-19  community
mitigation  interventions  presented  by  date  of  issuance.  †  Plotting  of  average  3-day
percentage  change  begins  when  cumulative  case  count  >20.  §  San  Francisco
metropolitan  statistical  area  (MSA)  counties  include  Alameda,  Contra  Costa,  San
Francisco,  San  Mateo,  and  Marin;  Seattle  MSA  counties  include  King,  Snohomish,  and
Pierce; New York City boroughs include The Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, and
Staten  Island;  New  Orleans  MSA  parishes  include  Jefferson,  Orleans,  Plaquemines,  St.
Bernard, St. Charles, St. James, St. John the Baptist, and St. Tammany. ¶ The primary
and  secondary  vertical  axis  are  different  across  locations  and  set  according  to  each
location’s data. Top Suggested citation for this article: Lasry A, Kidder D, Hast M, et al. 
Timing  of  Community  Mitigation  and  Changes  in  Reported  COVID-19  and  Community
Mobility ― Four U.S. Metropolitan Areas, February 26–April 1, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2020;69:451–457. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6915e2.htm
