Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / April 17, 2020 / 69(15);472–476 On April 14, 2020,
this  report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Amy  Heinzerling,  MD1,2;
Matthew  J.  Stuckey,  PhD3;  Tara  Scheuer,  MPH4;  Kerui  Xu,  PhD2,3;  Kiran  M.  Perkins,
MD3;  Heather  Resseger,  MSN5;  Shelley  Magill,  MD,  PhD3;  Jennifer  R.  Verani,  MD3;
Seema  Jain,  MD1;  Meileen  Acosta,  MPH4;  Erin  Epson,  MD1  (View  author  affiliations)
What is already known about this topic? Health care personnel (HCP) are at heightened
risk of acquiring COVID-19 infection, but limited information exists about transmission
in  health  care  settings.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  Among  121  HCP  exposed  to  a
patient  with  unrecognized  COVID-19,  43  became  symptomatic  and  were  tested  for
SARS-CoV-2, of whom three had positive test results; all three had unprotected patient
contact.  Exposures  while  performing  physical  examinations  or  during  nebulizer
treatments were more common among HCP with COVID-19. What are the implications
for  public  health  practice?  Unprotected,  prolonged  patient  contact,  as  well  as  certain
exposures,  including  some  aerosol-generating  procedures,  were  associated  with
SARS-CoV-2  infection  in  HCP.  Early  recognition  and  isolation  of  patients  with  possible
infection  and  recommended  PPE  use  can  help  minimize  unprotected,  high-risk  HCP
exposures  and  protect  the  health  care  workforce.  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF
downloads  Table  1  Table  2  Table  3  On  February  26,  2020,  the  first  U.S.  case  of
community-acquired coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was confirmed in a patient
hospitalized  in  Solano  County,  California  (1).  The  patient  was  initially  evaluated  at
hospital  A  on  February  15;  at  that  time,  COVID-19  was  not  suspected,  as  the  patient
denied travel or contact with symptomatic persons. During a 4-day hospitalization, the
patient
 was
 managed
 with
 standard
 precautions
 and
 underwent
 multiple
aerosol-generating  procedures  (AGPs),  including  nebulizer  treatments,  bilevel  positive
airway  pressure  (BiPAP)  ventilation,  endotracheal  intubation,  and  bronchoscopy.
Several  days  after  the  patient’s  transfer  to  hospital  B,  a  real-time  reverse
transcription–polymerase  chain  reaction  (real-time  RT-PCR)  test  for  SARS-CoV-2
returned positive. Among 121 hospital A health care personnel (HCP) who were exposed
to the patient, 43 (35.5%) developed symptoms during the 14 days after exposure and
were tested for SARS-CoV-2; three had positive test results and were among the first
known cases of probable occupational transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to HCP in the United
States. Little is known about specific risk factors for SARS-CoV-2 transmission in health
care settings. To better characterize and compare exposures among HCP who did and
did not develop COVID-19, standardized interviews were conducted with 37 hospital A
HCP who were tested for SARS-CoV-2, including the three who had positive test results.
Performing  physical  examinations  and  exposure  to  the  patient  during  nebulizer
treatments were more common among HCP with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 than
among  those  without  COVID-19;  HCP  with  COVID-19  also  had  exposures  of  longer
duration  to  the  patient.  Because  transmission-based  precautions  were  not  in  use,  no
HCP wore personal protective equipment (PPE) recommended for COVID-19 patient care
during  contact  with  the  index  patient.  Health  care  facilities  should  emphasize  early
recognition and isolation of patients with possible COVID-19 and use of recommended
PPE  to  minimize  unprotected,  high-risk  HCP  exposures  and  protect  the  health  care
workforce.  HCP  with  potential  exposures  to  the  index  patient  at  hospital  A  were
identified  through  medical  record  review.  Hospital  and  health  department  staff
members contacted HCP for initial risk stratification and classified HCP into categories
of high, medium, low, and no identifiable risk, according to CDC guidance.* HCP at high
or medium risk were furloughed and actively monitored; those at low risk were asked to
self-monitor for symptoms for 14 days from their last exposure.† Nasopharyngeal and
oropharyngeal  specimens  were  collected  once  from  HCP  who  developed  symptoms
consistent with COVID-19§ during their 14-day monitoring period, and specimens were
tested  for  SARS-CoV-2  using  real-time  RT-PCR  at  the  California  Department  of  Public
Health. Serologic testing and testing for other respiratory viruses was not performed.
The investigation team, including hospital, local and state health departments, and CDC
staff  members,  attempted  to  contact  all  43  tested  HCP  by  phone  to  conducted
interviews  regarding  index  patient  exposures  using  a  standardized  exposure
assessment  tool.  Two-sided  p-values  were  calculated  using  Fisher’s  exact  test  for
categorical  variables  and  Wilcoxon  rank-sum  test  for  continuous  variables;  p-values
<0.05  were  considered  statistically  significant.  Analyses  were  conducted  using  SAS
(version  9.4;  SAS  Institute).  The  California  Health  and  Human  Services  Agency’s
Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects and CDC determined this investigation
to be public health practice. Hospital A identified 145 HCP with potential exposure to
the index patient. After the initial interview, 24 (17%) HCP were classified as having no
identifiable risk; the remaining 121 were classified as having high (14), medium (80), or
low  (27)  risk.  Over  the  course  of  their  monitoring  periods,  43  (36%)  of  these  HCP
became symptomatic and underwent testing for SARS-CoV-2, with a median of 10 days
from last exposure to specimen collection (Table 1); SARS-CoV-2 was detected in three
(7%) HCP. Thirty-seven of 43 (86%) HCP who were tested were interviewed, including
all  three  HCP  with  positive  test  results.¶  Among  43  HCP  who  were  tested,  84%  were
female, 51% were registered nurses, and 95% were at high or medium risk (Table 1).
Among  the  three  HCP  with  COVID-19,  two  had  high-risk  and  one  had  medium-risk
exposures. Both HCP at high risk who developed COVID-19 had frequent, close contact
with  the  index  patient;  one  reported  being  present  for  a  total  of  3  hours  while  the
patient  was  on  BiPAP,  and  the  other  participated  in  BiPAP  placement  and  intubation.
Neither wore a facemask, respirator, eye protection, or gown. The third staff member
with COVID-19, who was at medium risk, reported close contact with the patient for a
total of 2 hours but not during AGPs. This staff member reported wearing a facemask
and gloves most of the time but removed the mask occasionally to speak and did not
wear eye protection. Seventeen (46%) of 37 interviewed HCP reported exposure to the
patient during at least one AGP (Table 2).** Being present for or assisting with nebulizer
treatments was more common among HCP who developed COVID-19 (67%) than among
those who did not (9%) (p = 0.04); being present for or assisting with BiPAP was also
more common among HCP with COVID-19, although the difference was not statistically
significant (p = 0.06). The median estimated duration of overall exposure to the patient
was  higher  among  HCP  with  COVID-19  (120  minutes)  than  among  those  without
COVID-19 (25 minutes) (p = 0.06). Similarly, the median duration of exposure during
AGPs†† was higher among HCP with COVID-19 (95 minutes) than among those without
COVID-19  (0  minutes)  (p  =  0.13)  (Table  3).  Among  non-AGP  clinical  activities,
performing a physical examination was more common among HCP with COVID-19 (p =
0.02) (Table 2). Some HCP reported wearing gloves or facemasks during index patient
care  activities  (Table  3);  however,  none  reported  use  of  eye  protection,  gowns,  N95
respirators,  or  powered  air-purifying  respirators  (PAPRs).  At  hospital  B,  146  HCP  had
high-,  medium-,  or  low-risk  exposures;  eight  became  symptomatic  and  were  tested,
none  of  whom  had  SARS-CoV-2  detected  (CS  Martin,  MSN,  personal  communication,
2020). Top HCP are at high risk for acquiring infections during novel disease outbreaks,
especially  before  transmission  dynamics  are  fully  characterized.  The  cases  reported
here are among the first known reports of occupational transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to
HCP in the United States, although more cases have since been identified (2). Little is
known  to  date  about  SARS-CoV-2  transmission  in  health  care  settings.  Reports  from
Illinois, Singapore, and Hong Kong have described cohorts of HCP exposed to patients
with COVID-19 without any documented HCP transmission (3–5); most HCP exposures in
these cases occurred with patients while HCP were using contact, droplet, or airborne
precautions.§§ As community transmission of COVID-19 increases, determining whether
HCP  infections  are  acquired  in  the  workplace  or  in  the  community  becomes  more
difficult.  This  investigation  presented  a  unique  opportunity  to  analyze  exposures
associated  with  COVID-19  transmission  in  a  health  care  setting  without  recognized
community exposures. Describing exposures among HCP who did and did not develop
COVID-19  can  inform  guidance  on  how  to  best  protect  HCP.  Among  a  cohort  of  121
exposed  HCP,  43  of  whom  were  symptomatic  and  tested,  three  developed  confirmed
COVID-19,  despite  multiple  unprotected  exposures  among  HCP.  HCP  who  developed
COVID-19  had  longer  durations  of  exposure  to  the  index  patient;  exposures  during
nebulizer  treatments  and  BiPAP  were  also  more  common  among  HCP  who  developed
COVID-19.  These  findings  underscore  the  heightened  COVID-19  transmission  risk
associated with prolonged, unprotected patient contact and the importance of ensuring
that HCP exposed to patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 are protected. CDC
recommends  use  of  N95  or  higher-level  respirators  and  airborne  infection  isolation
rooms when performing AGPs for patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19; for
care  that  does  not  include  AGPs,  CDC  recommends  use  of  respirators  where
available.¶¶  In  California,  the  Division  of  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Aerosol
Transmissible  Diseases  standard  requires  respirators  for  HCP  exposed  to  potentially
airborne pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2; PAPRs are required during AGPs.*** Studies of
other  respiratory  pathogens  have  documented  increased  transmission  risk  associated
with AGPs, many of which can generate large droplets as well as small particle aerosols
(6). A recent study found that SARS-CoV-2 generated through nebulization can remain
viable in aerosols <5 μm for hours, suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 could be transmitted at
least in part through small particle aerosols (7). Among the three HCP with COVID-19 at
hospital  A,  two  had  index  patient  exposures  during  AGPs;  one  did  not  and  reported
wearing a facemask but no eye protection for most of the contact time with the patient.
Given multiple unprotected exposures among HCP in this investigation, separating risks
associated  with  specific  procedures  from  those  associated  with  duration  of  exposure
and  lack  of  recommended  PPE  is  difficult.  More  research  to  determine  the  risks
associated with specific procedures and the protectiveness of different types of PPE, as
well as the extent of short-range aerosol transmission of SARS-CoV-2, is needed. Patient
source control (e.g., patient wearing a mask or connected to a closed-system ventilator
during HCP exposures) might also reduce risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Although the
index patient was not masked or ventilated for the majority of hospital A admission, at
hospital  B,  where  the  patient  remained  on  a  closed  system  ventilator  from  arrival  to
receiving a positive test result, none of the 146 HCP identified as exposed developed
known COVID-19 infection (8). Source control strategies, such as masking of patients,
visitors,  and  HCP,  should  be  considered  by  health  care  facilities  to  reduce  risk  of
SARS-CoV-2  transmission.  This  findings  in  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  three
limitations.  First,  exposures  among  HCP  were  self-reported  and  are  subject  to  recall
bias. Second, the low number of cases limits the ability to detect statistically significant
differences  in  exposures  and  does  not  allow  for  multivariable  analyses  to  adjust  for
potential  confounding.  Finally,  additional  infections  might  have  occurred  among
asymptomatic exposed HCP who were not tested, or among HCP who were tested as a
result of timing and limitations of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal specimen testing;
serologic testing was not performed. To protect HCP caring for patients with suspected
or confirmed COVID-19, health care facilities should continue to follow CDC, state, and
local  infection  control  and  PPE  guidance.  Early  recognition  and  prompt  isolation,
including  source  control,  for  patients  with  possible  infection  can  help  minimize
unprotected and high-risk HCP exposures. These measures are crucial to protect HCP
and preserve the health care workforce in the face of an outbreak already straining the
U.S. health care system. Top Laura Davis, Shai Davis, Sheka Jones-Espy, Denise Kirnig,
Bela  Matyas,  Sara  Naramore,  Asundep  Ntui,  Bridget  Oduni,  Jayleen  Richards,  Stacy
Souza, Christine Wu, Solano County Public Health; Aimee Brewer, Nicole Brocato, Traci
Duncan,  Seth  Kaufman,  NorthBay  Healthcare;  Stuart  H.  Cohen,  Carla  S.  Martin,  UC
Davis  Health;  Lauren  Stockman,  Selam  Tecle,  California  Department  of  Public  Health;
Victoria  Chu,  Christine  Dubray,  Lindsey  Duca,  Alberto  Garcia,  Andrew  Geller,  Reid
Harvey, Joseph Hicks, Oren Mayer, Anna Yousaf, CDC. Top Corresponding author: Amy
Heinzerling, ysf8@cdc.gov, 510-620-3711. Top 1California Department of Public Health;
2Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 3CDC COVID-19 Response Team; 4Solano County
Public  Health,  Fairfield,  California;  5NorthBay  Healthcare,  Fairfield,  California.  Top  All
authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal
Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of
interest were disclosed. Top * Exposure was defined according to CDC guidance for HCP
with  potential  exposure  to  COVID-19,  which  categorizes  exposures  based  on  factors
such as exposure to the patient during AGPs, personal protective equipment use, and
source
 control
 (e.g.,
 patient
 wearing
 a
 facemask)
 during
 exposure.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html.
 †
HCP  categorized  as  being  at  low  risk  were  allowed  to  continue  to  report  to  work  but
were checked for symptoms before the start of each shift; no additional follow-up was
conducted  for  HCP  categorized  as  having  no  identifiable  risk.  §  Including  fever
(subjective  or  measured  at  ≥100.4°F  [38°C]),  cough,  shortness  of  breath,  or  sore
throat. ¶ One of the remaining six HCP declined to participate; the other five could not
be  reached  after  at  least  three  attempted  phone  calls.  **  For  the  purposes  of  this
report,  the  following  procedures  during  the  patient’s  hospitalization  were  considered
AGPs:  airway  suctioning,  noninvasive  positive  pressure  ventilation  including  BiPAP,
manual  ventilation,  nebulizer  treatments,  breaking  the  ventilator  circuit,  sputum
induction, intubation, and bronchoscopy. Exposure during an AGP included both direct
participation in AGP (i.e., performing or assisting with intubation), as well as presence in
the  patient’s  room  while  AGP  was  being  performed.  ††  This  was  estimated  by  asking
interviewed HCP to report the number and average duration of exposures to the patient
during each AGP. Total estimated duration for each AGP was calculated by multiplying
the  number  of  exposures  by  average  duration  of  exposure  during  that  AGP.  Total
estimated  exposure  time  for  all  AGPs  was  calculated  by  adding  total  duration  of
exposures  across  all  AGPs.  §§  Additional  detail  on  recommended  transmission-based
precautions  recommended  for  patients  with  suspected  or  confirmed  COVID-19.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/infection-control/control-recommendations.
html.
 ¶¶
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/infection-control/control-recommendations.
html. *** Aerosol Transmissible Diseases. California Code of Regulations, Section 5199
(2009).  https://www.dir.ca.gov/title8/5199.html.  Top  Top  Abbreviation:  COVID-19  =
coronavirus disease 2019.* According to initial risk stratification by hospital and public
health  staff  members.  Top  Abbreviations:  BiPAP  =  bilevel  positive  airway  pressure;
COVID-19 = coronavirus disease 2019; CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; N/A
= not applicable.* Other patient care activities addressed in the exposure assessment
tool but not listed here were not reported by any interviewed HCP.† For all AGPs listed
here except intubation and bronchoscopy, exposure to AGP includes either performing
or  assisting  with  the  procedure  or  being  present  in  the  patient’s  room  while  the
procedure  was  being  performed.  For  intubation  and  bronchoscopy,  performing  or
assisting with the procedure and being present in the room are presented separately.
Top  Abbreviations:  AGPs  =  aerosol-generating  procedures;  COVID-19  =  coronavirus
disease 2019; IQR = interquartile range.* Versus sometimes or never.† No HCP reported
use  of  gowns,  N95  respirators,  powered  air-purifying  respirators  (PAPRs),  or  eye
protection  during  any  patient  care  activities  for  index  patient.§  Denominators  for  PPE
use during AGPs are numbers of HCP exposed to AGPs.¶ This was estimated by asking
each  interviewed  staff  member  to  report  the  number  and  average  duration  of  each
exposure  to  the  patient  during  AGPs.  Total  estimated  duration  for  each  AGP  was
calculated  by  multiplying  the  number  of  exposures  by  average  duration  of  exposure
during that AGP. Total estimated exposure time for all AGPs was calculated by adding
total  duration  of  exposures  across  all  AGPs.  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:
Heinzerling A, Stuckey MJ, Scheuer T, et al.  Transmission of COVID-19 to Health Care
Personnel  During  Exposures  to  a  Hospitalized  Patient  —  Solano  County,  California,
February
 2020.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2020;69:472–476.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e5. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6915e5.htm
