A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
  The  earlier  someone,  especially  an  infant,  starts  treatment  the  better.  If  someone
starts  treatment  during  the  first  1  to  2  weeks  before  coughing  paroxysms  occur,
symptoms may be lessened.  Antibiotics won't alter the course of the illness or prevent
transmission if given later in the illness. Healthcare providers should strongly consider
treating prior to test results if any of the following are present: Infants are a high-risk
group, as are pregnant women in their third trimester since they'll have contact with
their  newborn.  A  reasonable  guideline  is  to  treat  The  recommended  antibiotics  for
treatment or postexposure prophylaxis of pertussis are Healthcare providers can also
use  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxasole.  Healthcare  providers  should  choose  an  antibiotic
after  consideration  that  includes  the  Use  macrolides  with  caution.  An  association
between orally administered erythromycin and azithromycin with infantile hypertrophic
pyloric stenosis (IHPS) has been reported.  However, azithromycinA remains the drug of
choice  for  treatment  or  prophylaxis  of  pertussis  in  very  young  infants.  The  risk  of
developing severe pertussis and life-threatening complications outweighs the potential
risk of IHPS. 
 Monitor infants <1 month of age who receive a macrolide for the development of IHPS
and  for  other  serious  adverse  events.  Macrolides  (erythromycin,  clarithromycin,  and
azithromycin) are preferred for the treatment of pertussis. An alternative to macrolides
is
 trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
 Recommended
 antimicrobial
 agents
 for
 the
treatment  and  postexposure  prophylaxis  of  pertussis:  2005  CDC  guidelines  Pertussis,
also known as whooping cough, can cause serious illness in people of all ages but is
most  dangerous  for  babies.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages   Language
Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/hcp/clinical-care/index.html
