Recommendations from CDC, the National Institutes of Health, and 
the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Recommendations from CDC, the
National Institutes of Health, and 
the Infectious Diseases Society of America
 Prepared by 
      Lynne M. Mofenson, M.D.1, James Oleske, M.D.2, Leslie Serchuck, 
M.D.1, Russell Van Dyke, 
M.D.3, Cathy Wilfert, M.D.4 
      1National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
      2New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey 
      3Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 
      4Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
 
The material in this report originated in the Office of the Director, National Center for
HIV, STD and TB Prevention, Janet L. Collins, M.D., Acting Director.
      
 Corresponding  author:  Lynne  M.  Mofenson,  M.D.,  Pediatric,  Adolescent  and  Maternal
AIDS Branch, National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 6100 Executive Blvd., Room 4B11,
Rockville, MD 20852. Telephone: 301-435-6870; Fax: 301-496-8678.
Summary
 In 2001, CDC, the National Institutes of Health, and the Infectious Diseases Society of
America convened a 
working  group  to  develop  guidelines  for  therapy  of  human  immunodeficiency  virus
(HIV)-associated opportunistic infections to 
serve  as  a  companion  to  the  Guidelines  for  Prevention  of  Opportunistic  Infections
Among HIV-Infected Persons. In 
recognition  of  unique  considerations  related  to  HIV  infection  among  infants,  children,
and adolescents, a separate pediatric 
working group was established.
 Because HIV-infected women coinfected with opportunistic pathogens might be more
likely to transmit these infections 
to their infants than women without HIV infection, guidelines for treating opportunistic
pathogens among children 
should consider treatment of congentially acquired infections among both HIV-exposed
but uninfected children and those with HIV infection. In addition, the natural history of
opportunistic  infections  among  HIV-infected  children  might  differ  from  that  among
adults.  Compared  with  opportunistic  infections  among  HIV-infected  adults,  which  are
often caused 
by  reactivation  of  pathogens  acquired  before  HIV  infection  when  host  immunity  was
intact, opportunistic infections among children often reflect primary acquisition of the
pathogen and, among children with perinatal HIV infection, infection acquired after HIV
infection has been established and begun to compromise an already immature immune
system.  Laboratory  diagnosis  of  opportunistic  infections  can  be  more  difficult  with
children.  Finally,  treatment  recommendations  should  consider  differences  between
adults and children in terms of drug pharmacokinetics, dosing, 
formulations,  administration,  and  toxicities.  This  report  focuses  on  treatment  of
opportunistic infections that are common in HIV-exposed and infected infants, children,
and adolescents in the United States. 
Introduction
 In 1995, the U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS) and the Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) 
developed guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among adults, adolescents,
and children infected with 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (1). These evidence-based guidelines, developed
for health-care providers and patients, were revised in 1997, 1999, and 2002 
(2--4). Although individual guidelines for treatment of different 
opportunistic  infections  can  be  found  in  multiple  sources,  a  compilation  of
recommendations  for  treatment  and  management  of  common  HIV-associated
opportunistic infections into a single document has not been available. As a result, in
2001, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), IDSA, and CDC convened a working group
to develop guidelines for therapy 
of  HIV-associated  opportunistic  infections,  with  a  goal  of  providing  evidence-based
guidelines  for  health-care  providers  on  treatment  and  prophylaxis.  In  recognition  of
unique considerations for HIV-infected infants, children, and 
adolescents, including differences between adults and children in mode of acquisition,
natural history, diagnosis, and treatment 
of  HIV-related  opportunistic  infections,  a  separate  pediatric  guidelines  writing  group
was established.  
 In  1998,  the  Working  Group  on  Antiretroviral  Therapy  and  Medical  Management  of
HIV-Infected 
Children,  convened  by  the  Francois-Xavier  Bagnoud  Center  (FXBC),  published
guidelines for treatment of HIV and opportunistic infections among children in a special
supplement to 
Pediatrics (5). However, since these guidelines were 
published,  advances  have  been  made  in  laboratory  and  clinical  research  related  to
individual  opportunistic  infections,  and  use  of  highly  active  antiretroviral  therapy
(HAART) has dramatically increased in HIV-infected children, changing 
the  epidemiology  and  presentation  of  opportunistic  infections  among  children  and
adults. Members of the 
pediatric guidelines writing group for this report, in consultation with members of the
FXBC's  Working  Group  on  Antiretroviral  Therapy  and  Medical  Management  of
HIV-Infected  Children  and  other  infectious  disease  specialists,  have  developed  this
document  focused  on  treatment  of  HIV-associated  opportunistic  infections  among
infants and 
children.
 An important mode of acquisition of opportunistic infections and HIV 
infection among children is from an 
infected  mother  to  her  child.  HIV-infected  women  co-infected  with  opportunistic
pathogens might be more likely to transmit these infections to their infants than women
without HIV infection. For example, greater rates of perinatal transmission of hepatitis C
and cytomegalovirus have been reported from HIV-infected than uninfected women 
(6,7). In addition, HIV-infected women or HIV-infected family members co-infected with
certain opportunistic pathogens might be 
more  likely  to  transmit  these  infections  horizontally  to  their  children,  resulting  in  an
increased likelihood of 
primary acquisition of such infections in the young child.  For example, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection among 
children primarily reflects acquisition from family members with active tuberculosis (TB)
disease, and increase in the 
incidence  and  prevalence  of  tuberculosis  among  HIV-infected  persons  is  well
documented. HIV-exposed or 
-infected children in the United States might have a higher risk for exposure to 
M. tuberculosis than comparably aged children in the 
general U.S. population because of residence in households with HIV-infected adults 
(8). Therefore, infections with opportunistic pathogens might affect not just infants who
are  themselves  HIV-infected  but  also  infants  who  are  uninfected  with  HIV  but  who
become infected by the pathogen because of transmission from HIV-infected mothers 
or  family  members  with  co-infections.  Guidelines  for  treatment  of  opportunistic
infections  in  children  must  also  include  consideration  of  the  treatment  of  infections
among uninfected and HIV-infected children.
 The  natural  history  of  opportunistic  infections  among  children  might  differ  from  that
observed  among  HIV-infected  adults.  Many  opportunistic  infections  in  adults  are
secondary to reactivation of previously acquired opportunistic pathogens, which were
often acquired before HIV infection at a time when host immunity was intact. 
However,  opportunistic  infections  among  HIV-infected  children  more  often  reflect
primary  infection  with  the  pathogen.  In  addition,  among  children  with  perinatal  HIV
infection, the primary infection with the opportunistic pathogen 
is  occurring  after  HIV  infection  is  established  when  the  child's  immune  system  might
already  be  compromised.  This  can  lead  to  different  manifestations  of  disease
associated with the pathogen among children than among adults. For example, young
children with TB are more likely to have nonpulmonic and disseminated infection than
adults, even without concurrent HIV infection.
 Multiple  difficulties  exist  in  making  laboratory  diagnosis  of  various  infections  in
children. Diagnosis is often compounded by a child's inability to describe the symptoms
of disease. For infections where the primary 
diagnostic  modality  is  the  presence  of  antibody  (e.g.,  the  hepatitis  viruses  and
cytomegalovirus),  the  ability  to  make  a  diagnosis  in  young  infants  is  complicated  by
transplacental transfer of maternal antibody that can persist in the infant for 
12--15  months.   Assays  capable  of  directly  detecting  the  pathogen  are  required  to
definitively diagnose such infections in infants. In addition, diagnosing the etiology of
lung infections among children can be difficult because they do 
not generally produce sputum, and more invasive procedures might be needed.  
 Data related to the efficacy of various therapies for opportunistic infections in adults
can generally be extrapolated to children, but issues related to drug pharmacokinetics,
formulation, ease of administration, and drug dosing and 
toxicity  require  special  considerations  among  children.  Young  children  in  particular
metabolize  drugs  differently  from  adults  and  older  children.  However,  data  on
appropriate drug dosing recommendations for children aged <2 years often are lacking.
 The frequency of different opportunistic pathogens among HIV-infected children in the
pre-HAART era varied by 
age, pathogen, previous opportunistic infection, and immunologic status 
(9). In the pre-HAART era, the most common opportunistic infections among children in
the United States (event rates >1.0/100 child-years) were serious bacterial infections
(with  pneumonia,  often  presumptively  diagnosed,  and  bacteremia  being  most
common), herpes 
zoster, disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC), 
Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly 
carinii) pneumonia (PCP), and 
candidiasis  (esophageal  and  tracheobronchial  disease).  Less  commonly  observed
opportunistic infections (event 
rate  <1.0/100  child-years)  included  cytomegalovirus  disease,  cryptosporidiosis,
tuberculosis,  systemic  fungal  infections,  and  toxoplasmosis.  History  of  a  previous
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-defining opportunistic infection 
was  a  predictor  of  developing  a  new  infection.  Although  the  majority  of  infections
occurred among children who 
were  substantially  immunocompromised,  serious  bacterial  infections,  herpes  zoster,
and TB occurred across the spectrum 
of immune status.  
 Descriptions  of  opportunistic  infections  in  the  HAART  era  among  children  have  been
limited. As with 
HIV-infected  adults,  substantial  decreases  in  mortality  and  morbidity,  including
opportunistic  infections,  have  been  observed  among  children  receiving  HAART  (10).
Although the number of opportunistic infections has decreased, the relative prevalence
of AIDS-defining infections remains similar to that observed in the pre-HAART era 
(11).  
 In comparison with recurrent serious bacterial infections, few of the protozoan, fungal,
or viral opportunistic 
infections  complicating  HIV  are  curable  with  available  treatments.  Successful
implementation and maintenance of HAART, resulting in improved immune status, has
been  established  as  the  most  important  factor  in  control  of  opportunistic  infections
among both HIV-infected adults and children 
(12). For many opportunistic infections, following treatment 
of  the  initial  infectious  episode,  secondary  prophylaxis  in  the  form  of  suppressive
therapy is indicated to prevent recurrent clinical disease (4).
 These guidelines serve as a companion to the USPHS/IDSA 
Guidelines for the Prevention of Opportunistic 
Infections Among HIV-Infected Persons and the 
Guidelines for the Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in Persons Infected with 
the Human Immunodeficiency Virus, which is focused on HIV-infected adults. Treatment
of  opportunistic  infections  is  an  evolving  science,  and  availability  of  new  agents  or
clinical data on existing agents might change therapeutic options and preferences. As a
result, these recommendations will need to be periodically updated.
 During  development  of  these  guidelines,  members  of  the  pediatric  treatment
guidelines writing group and of 
the Working Group on Antiretroviral Therapy and Medical Management of HIV-Infected
Children reviewed 
published  manuscripts  and  abstracts  presented  at  professional  meetings  related  to
treatment  of  selected  pathogens  among  children  and  adults.  Because  the  guidelines
are targeted to HIV-exposed and infected children in the United States, 
the opportunistic pathogens discussed are those common to U.S. children and do not
include certain pathogens 
(e.g.,  Penicillium  marneffei)  that  might  be  seen  more  frequently  in  resource-poor
countries. The document is organized to provide information about the epidemiology,
clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment for each pathogen. 
Each treatment recommendation is accompanied by a rating that includes a letter and
a  Roman  number  and  is  similar  to  the  rating  systems  used  in  other  USPHS/IDSA
guidelines 
(13). The letter indicates the strength of the 
recommendation, which is based on the opinion of the Working Group, and the Roman
numeral reflects the nature of the evidence supporting the recommendation (Box).  
 Appendices at the end of this document summarize the treatment recommendations
for each of the 
opportunistic  pathogens  (Appendix  A),  provide  information  on  pediatric  drug
preparations and major toxicities (Appendix B), and provide information about clinically
significant  drug  interactions  for  the  drugs  recommended  for  treatment  of  individual
opportunistic infections among children 
(Appendix C).  
Treatment Recommendations by Organism
Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly 
carinii) Pneumonia
 
Epidemiology 
 Pneumocystis  microbes  are  classified  in  the  fungus  kingdom  on  the  basis  of  DNA
analysis but also share biologic characteristics with protozoa. Additional DNA analyses
have demonstrated that 
Pneumocystis  organisms  in  different  mammals  are  quite  different,  which  has  led  to
changes in taxonomy (14). The organism that infects humans and 
causes PCP is now named Pneumocystis 
jiroveci; P.carinii refers to the organism that is found only in rats. 
P.  jiroveci  is  usually  acquired  in  childhood;  serum  antibodies  are  found  in  >80%  of
children aged 2--4 years (15). Immunocompetent infants with P. 
jiroveci infection might have either mild respiratory symptoms or are asymptomatic. 
 PCP  remains  the  most  common  AIDS-indicator  disease  among  HIV-infected  children,
accounting for 33% of 
AIDS cases overall. The highest incidence of PCP in HIV-infected children is the first year
of  life,  with  cases  peaking  at  age  3--6  months  (16,17).  PCP  accounts  for  57%  of
AIDS-defining conditions among infants aged <1 year. The mortality 
rate among children with PCP is high. Among AIDS cases reported to CDC, before the
availability of HAART therapy, 
35% of children with PCP died within 2 months of diagnosis, and the estimated median
survival time was 19 
months (16,18).
 CD4+ cell counts are not a good indicator of risk for PCP in infants aged <1 year; many
young infants with PCP 
have CD4+ cell counts 
>1,500/µL, and counts can drop rapidly shortly before PCP develops in infants 
(19--21).  Since  publication  of  the  1995  PCP  prophylaxis  guidelines  recommending
initiation of primary PCP prophylaxis in all infants born to HIV-infected women for the
first year of life (or until lack of HIV infection is documented) 
(18,22), PCP has become unusual among HIV-infected infants born to women who know
their HIV serostatus during or soon 
after pregnancy. However, PCP is still seen in infants born to women with unrecognized
HIV infection 
(19,21).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Clinical features of PCP among HIV-infected children are similar to those in adults (i.e.,
fever, tachypnea, 
dyspnea, and cough), and the severity of these signs and symptoms might vary from
child to child. Onset can be abrupt or insidious with nonspecific symptoms (e.g., mild
cough, dyspnea, poor feeding, and weight loss). Certain patients 
might  not  be  febrile,  but  almost  all  patients  will  have  tachypnea  by  the  time
pneumonitis  is  observed  on  chest  radiograph  (23).  Physical  examination  might  show
bibasilar  rales  with  evidence  of  respiratory  distress  and  hypoxia.   Extrapulmonary
pneumocystosis is seen in <2.5% of HIV-infected adults 
(24); it is uncommon among HIV-infected children 
(25,26).  It  can  occur  without  concurrent  PCP  and  can  be  located  at  multiple
noncontiguous sites. Sites 
have  included  ear,  eye,  thyroid,  spleen,  gastrointestinal  tract,  peritoneum,  stomach,
duodenum,  small  intestine,  transverse  colon,  liver,  and  pancreas  and  less  frequently,
adrenal  glands,  bone  marrow,  heart,  kidney  and  ureter,  lymph  nodes,  meninges  and
cerebral cortex, and muscle. 
 Infants with dual infection with cytomegalovirus (CMV) and 
P. jiroveci might have more severe pneumonic disease 
and are more likely to require assisted ventilation, receive corticosteroids, or die than
those with PCP alone (27). Whether corticosteroids for PCP among children with dual 
P. jiroveci/CMV infection increases the risk for CMV dissemination 
to the lung is unclear.
 
Diagnosis
 The  majority  of  children  with  PCP  have  substantial  hypoxia  with  low  arterial  oxygen
pressure and an 
alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient of >30 mm/Hg. Lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) is often
increased  but  is  not  specific  for  PCP.  Serum  albumin  might  be  depressed.  Chest
radiographs most commonly indicate bilateral diffuse parenchymal infiltrates 
with "ground-glass" or reticulogranular appearance, but they also might be normal or
indicate only mild 
parenchymal  infiltrates.  The  earliest  infiltrates  are  perihilar,  progressing  peripherally
before  reaching  the  apical  portions  of  the  lung.  Rarely,  lobar,  cavitary,  nodular  or
miliary lesions, pneumothorax, or pneumomediastinum are observed 
(23).
 Definitive  diagnosis  of  PCP  requires  demonstration  of  the  organism  in  pulmonary
tissues or fluids. 
Diagnostic procedures are the same as used for adults with suspected PCP, but selected
procedures might be more difficult 
to perform in children.
 Induced  sputum  analysis,  where  the  patient  produces  sputum  after  inhalation  of
nebulized 3% hypertonic 
saline, might be difficult among children aged <2 years because of small airways and
poor  ability  to  produce  sputum.  Complications  can  include  nausea,  vomiting,  and
bronchospasm. Sensitivity of induced sputum analysis ranges from 25%--90%; because
negative predictive value is only 48%, following a negative induced sputum sample 
with bronchoalveolar lavage for definitive diagnosis might be necessary.
 Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage is 
the diagnostic procedure of choice for infants.  Sensitivity ranges 
from  55%--97%  and  might  be  positive  for  at  least  72  hours  after  PCP  treatment  has
been initiated; treatment should not be delayed while awaiting results. Complications
included hemoptysis, pneumothorax, transient increase in 
hypoxemia,  transient  increase  in  pulmonary  infiltrates  at  the  lavage  site,  and
postbronchoscopy fever. 
 Fiberoptic  bronchoscopy  with  transbronchial  biopsy  is  not  recommended  unless
bronchoalveolar lavage is negative 
or  nondiagnostic  despite  the  child  having  a  clinical  picture  consistent  with  PCP.
Sensitivity is 87%--95%, and cysts can be 
identified  up  to  10  days  after  initiation  of  treatment  (up  to  4--6  weeks  in  certain
patients). Complications 
include  pneumothorax  and  hemorrhage;  this  procedure  is  contraindicated  among
children  with  thrombocytopenia.   Open-lung  biopsy  is  the  most  sensitive  diagnostic
technique  but  because  it  requires  thoracotomy  and  often  chest  tube  drainage,  is  not
recommended routinely. Histopathology shows alveoli filled with eosinophilic, acellular,
proteinaceous material that contains cysts and trophozoites but few inflammatory cells.
Complications include pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and hemorrhage.
 Three types of stains can be used to diagnose 
P. jiroveci organisms in specimens. Gomori's methenamine-silver 
stains the cyst wall brown or black. Toluidine blue stains the cyst wall blue or lavender
and also stains fungal elements. Giemsa or Wright's stains stain the trophozoites and
intracystic sporozoites pale blue with a punctate red nucleus but, 
unlike
 other
 stains,
 these
 stains
 do
 not
 stain
 the
 cyst
 wall.
 Monoclonal
immunofluorescent  antibodies  that  stain  the  cyst  wall  also  can  be  used  for  diagnosis
and have enhanced specificity compared with the other methods.
 Identification  of  P.  jiroveci  DNA  sequences  using  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)
assays in blood or 
serum,  nasopharyngeal  aspirates,  and  bronchoalveolar  lavage  specimens  might  be
more sensitive in detecting infection in lavage specimens than standard cytologic stains
among children 
(28). However, this is a research tool and is not available 
at some institutions.
 Coinfection with other organisms (e.g., CMV or pneumococcus) has been reported in
HIV-infected 
children  (27,29,30).  Children  with  dual  infections  might  have  more  severe  disease.
Although the presence of CMV in 
lung secretions of children with PCP might indicate colonization that does not require
therapy, the presence of 
P. jiroveci is always an indication for treatment.
 
Treatment 
 Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) is the recommended treatment for PCP 
(AI).  The  dose  for  HIV-infected  children  aged  >2  months  is  15--20  mg/kg  body
weight/day  of  the  TMP  component  (75--100  mg/kg  of  SMX  component)  adminstered
intravenously in 3--4 divided doses, with the dose infused over 1 hour for 21 days 
(AI). After the acute pneumonitis has resolved, children with mild to moderate disease
who do not have malabsorption or 
diarrhea  can  be  adminstered  oral  treatment  with  the  same  dose  of  TMP/SMX  in  3--4
divided doses to complete a 21--day course.   Adverse reactions to TMP/SMX reported in
children include rash (including erythema multiforme and rarely 
Stevens
 Johnson
 syndrome),
 hematologic
 abnormalities
 (e.g.,
 neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia, megaloblastic, or 
aplastic  anemia),  gastrointestinal  complaints  (usually  mild),  hepatitis,  and  renal
disorders (e.g., interstitial nephritis) (31,32). The overall frequency of adverse reactions
appears  to  be  lower  among  HIV-infected  children  than  adults;  approximately  15%  of
children have substantial adverse reactions to TMP/SMX 
(23). For mild or moderate skin rash, TMP/SMX 
can  be  temporarily  discontinued  and  restarted  when  the  rash  has  resolved.  If  an
urticarial rash or Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome occurs, TMP/SMX should be discontinued and not readministered 
(EIII).
 Pentamidine  isothionate  (4  mg/kg/day  once  daily  administered  intravenously  over
60--90 minutes) is 
recommended for patients intolerant of TMP/SMX or who demonstrate clinical treatment
failure  after  5--7  days  of  TMP/SMX  therapy  (AI).  No  evidence  exists  for  synergistic  or
additive effects on efficacy of these agents; therefore, because of potential increased
toxicity, their combined use is not recommended 
(DIII). Among patients with clinical improvement after 
7--10 days of intravenous therapy with pentamidine, an oral regimen (e.g., atovaquone)
might be considered to complete 
a 21--day course (BIII). 
 The most common adverse drug reaction to
pentamidine is renal toxicity, which usually occurs after 2 weeks 
of therapy and can be averted by adequate hydration and careful monitoring of renal
function and electrolytes. 
Severe hypotension (particularly if infused rapidly), prolonged QT interval (torsades de
pointes), and cardiac arrhythmias can occur. Hypoglycemia (usually after 5--7 days of
therapy) or hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia, hyperkalemia, 
pancreatitis,  and  insulin-dependent  diabetes  mellitus  have  also  been  reported.  A
metallic or bitter taste might be experienced. Serious adverse reactions to pentamidine
have been reported in approximately 17% of children receiving pentamidine 
(33).  Care  should  be  taken  if  administering  this  drug  with  other  nephrotoxic  agents
(e.g., aminoglycosides, amphotericin 
B,  cisplatin,  or  vancomycin)  or  if  coadministered  with  agents  associated  with
pancreatitis (e.g., didanosine).
 Atovaquone is an alternative for treatment of mild to moderately severe PCP in adults 
(BI). Data are limited for children; dosage is 30--40 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses given
orally  with  fatty  foods.  Food  increases  the  bioavailability  of  atovaquone  1.4-fold  over
that achieved with the fasting state. Infants aged 3--24 months might require a 
higher 
dosage  of  45  mg/kg/day  (34)  (AII).  Atovaquone  concentration  is  increased  with
coadminstration of fluconazole 
and
 prednisone
 and
 decreased
 by
 coadministration
 with
 acyclovir,
 opiates,
cephalosporins, rifampin, and 
benzodiazepines.  Most  adverse  reactions  occur  after  the  first  week  of  therapy.  Skin
rashes (10%--15%), nausea, and diarrhea can occur. Elevated liver enzymes also might
be observed.
 Clindamycin/primaquine has been used for treatment of mild to moderate PCP among
adults 
(BI);  data  for  children  are  not  available  (CIII).  Primaquine  is  contraindicated  among
patients  with  glucose-6-dehydrogenase  deficiency  associated  with  the  possibility  of
inducing hemolytic anemia. Dose information for treatment of PCP is available only 
for  adults.  For  patients  weighing  <60  kg,  clindamycin  600  mg  intravenously  every  6
hours  for  10  days,  then  300--450  mg  orally  every  6  hours  to  complete  21  days  of
treatment is recommended. Primaquine is adminstered as 30 mg of the base orally for
21  days.  Dosing  for  children  is  based  on  use  of  these  drugs  for  treatment  of  other
infections: the 
usual  pediatric  dose  of  clindamycin  for  treatment  of  bacterial  infections  is  10  mg/kg
every 6 hours, and the pediatric dose of primaquine equivalent to an adult dose of 30
mg base (when used for malaria) is 0.3 mg/kg of the base daily. 
Adverse reactions include skin rashes, nausea, and diarrhea.
 Trimetrexate glucuronate with leucovorin (folinic acid) has been used as initial therapy
in severe PCP in adults 
(BI); data are limited for children (CIII). The dose is 45 
mg/m2/day of trimetrexate glucuronate for 21 days. Leucovorin should be administered
at 20 
mg/m2 every 6 hours for 24 days.
 Dapsone/trimethoprim is effective in treatment of mild-to-moderate PCP among adults
(BI); data on toxicity and efficacy among children are not available 
(CIII). The dose for adults of dapsone is 100 mg orally once daily 
and trimethoprim 15 mg/kg divided into 3 daily doses orally, administered for 21 days.
Among children aged <13 years, 
a dapsone dose of 2 mg/kg/day is required to achieve therapeutic levels in children 
(35) (AII). The pediatric dose of trimethoprim is 15 mg/kg divided into 3 daily doses. The
primary adverse reaction is reversible neutropenia; other reactions include skin rashes,
elevated serum transaminases, anemia, and thrombocytopenia.
 On the basis of studies in adults, a short course of corticosteroids might be indicated in
some cases of PCP of 
moderate or great severity, started within 72 hours of diagnosis 
(AI). Pediatric studies have indicated reduction in acute 
respiratory failure, decreased need for ventilation, and decrease in mortality with early
use  of  corticosteriods  in  HIV-infected  children  with  PCP  (36--38).  Indications  for
corticosteroid treatment include a 
PaO2 value of <70 mm Hg or an 
alveolar-arterial  gradient  of  >35  mm  Hg.  Doses  in  children  varied  between  studies.
Alternative regimens include 1) prednisone on days 1--5, 40 mg twice daily; days 6--10,
40 mg once daily; days 11--21, 20 mg once daily; 2) prednisone (or methylprednisolone
sodium)  on  days  1--5,  1  mg/kg  twice  daily;  day  6--10,  0.5  mg/kg  twice  daily;  days
11--21, 
0.5  mg/kg  once  daily;  or  3)  methylprednisolone  (intravenous)  on  days  1--7,  1  mg/kg
every 6 hours; days 8--9, 1 
mg/kg twice daily; days 10--11, 0.5 mg/kg twice daily; days 12--16, 1 mg/kg once daily.
 Some case reports about children have documented improved pulmonary function with
use of surfactant in cases 
of  severe  disease  (e.g.,  respiratory  distress  syndrome  with  established  respiratory
failure requiring ventilation) 
(39--41) (CIII). 
 Among HIV-infected children, lifelong suppression is indicated following treatment for
PCP to prevent 
recurrence;  details  on  secondary  prophylaxis  (maintenance  therapy)  have  been
published 
(4). Safety of discontinuation of secondary prophylaxis after immune reconstitution with
HAART in children has not been studied extensively. 
Toxoplasmosis
 
Epidemiology
 The major mode of transmission of Toxoplasma gondii 
infection among infants and young children is 
congenital, occurring almost exclusively among neonates born to women who sustain
primary 
Toxoplasma  infection  during  pregnancy.  The incidence of  congenital  toxoplasmosis  in
the United States is an estimated one case per 1,000--12,000 live-born infants (42,43)
and is believed to have decreased substantially during the preceding 20 years. Older 
children, adolescents, and adults typically acquire 
Toxoplasma infection by eating poorly cooked meat that contains parasitic 
cysts or by unintentionally ingesting sporulated oocysts in soil or contaminated food or
water.
 The  overall  risk  for  maternal-fetal  transmission  in  women  without  HIV  infection  who
acquire primary Toxoplasma infection during pregnancy is 29% (95% confience interval
[CI] = 25%--33%) (44). The risk for congenital infection is 
low  among  infants  born  to  women  who  become  infected  during  the  first  trimester
(range: 2%--6%) but 
increases sharply thereafter, with a risk as high as 81% for women acquiring infection
during  the  last  few  weeks  of  pregnancy  (44).  Infection  of  the  fetus  in  early  gestation
usually  results  in  more  severe  involvement,  compared  with  milder  disease  when
infection occurs late in gestation.  
 The  prevalence  of  latent  Toxoplasma  infection  among  women  with  and  without  HIV
infection in the United States 
was assessed in a cross-sectional study of 2,525 non-pregnant women enrolled in the
Women's Interagency Health 
Study (45). The prevalence of 
Toxoplasma  seropositivity  was  15%  and  did  not  differ  by  HIV  infection  status.  A  few
cases 
of mother-to-infant transmission of 
Toxoplasma in HIV-infected women have been reported 
(46--50). Perinatal transmission of Toxoplasma gondii from women without HIV infection
who have chronic Toxoplasma infection acquired before pregnancy is uncommon 
(51). However, in the setting of HIV co-infection, perinatal transmission of toxoplasma 
has been observed among women with chronic toxoplasma infection (transmission rate:
<4%), presumably because of reactivation of replication of the organism among women
with severe immune suppression 
(46--49).
 AIDS-defining infection of the central nervous system (CNS) with 
Toxoplasma gondii is uncommon 
amongHIV-infected children. It was reported as an AIDS-indicator condition in <1% of
pediatric AIDS cases, even before the advent of HAART (52). In most cases of 
Toxoplasma  encephalitis  among  HIV-infected  children,  infection  is  considered  to  have
occurred 
in  utero  (53,54).  More  rarely,  it  has  also  been  reported  among  older  HIV-infected
pediatric patients, presumably 
with primary acquired toxoplasmosis (54--56).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 In  studies  of  nonimmunocompromised  infants  with  congenital  toxoplasmosis,  the
majority of 
infants (70%-90%) are asymptomatic at birth; however, the majority of asymptomatic
children  develop  late  sequelae  (e.g.,  retinitis,  visual  impairment,  and  intellectual  or
neurologic impairment) with the interval until the onset of their symptoms 
ranging from several months to years. When symptoms do occur in newborns, either of
two  presentations  can  be  observed:  generalized  disease  or  predominantly  neurologic
disease. Symptoms can include maculopapular rash, 
generalized
 lymphadenopathy,
 hepatosplenomegaly,
 jaundice,
 hematologic
abnormalities  including  anemia,  thrombocytopenia  and  neutropenia,  and  substantial
CNS disease, including hydrocephalus, intracerebral calcification, 
microcephaly, chorioretinitis, and seizures 
(57).
 Similarly, toxoplasmosis acquired after birth is most often initially asymptomatic. When
symptoms occur, they 
are  frequently  nonspecific  and  can  include  malaise,  fever,  sore  throat,  myalgia,
lymphadenopathy (cervical), and 
a
 mononucleosis-like
 syndrome
 featuring
 a
 maculopapular
 rash
 and
hepatosplenomegaly.
  Toxoplasma  encephalitis  should  be  considered  among  all  HIV-infected  children  with
new neurologic 
findings.  Although  focal  findings  are  more  typical,  the  initial  presentation  can  be
variable  and  reflect  diffuse  CNS  disease.  Other  symptoms  include  fever,  reduced
alertness, and seizures.
 Isolated  ocular  toxoplasmosis  is  rare  and  usually  occurs  in  association  with  CNS
infection. As a result, a 
neurologic examination is indicated for children who have had 
Toxoplasma chorioretinitis diagnosed. Ocular toxoplasmosis 
appears as white retinal lesions with little associated hemorrhage; visual loss might be
observed initially.   Less frequently observed presentations among HIV-infected children
with  reactivated  chronic  toxoplasmosis  include  systemic  toxoplasmosis,  pneumonitis,
hepatitis, and cardiomyopathy/myocarditis 
(49,58).
 
Diagnosis
 HIV-infected women might be at increased risk for transmitting 
Toxoplasma gondii to their fetuses, and 
serologic  testing  for  Toxoplasma  should  be  performed  on  all  HIV-infected  pregnant
women. All infants whose mothers are 
both HIV-infected and seropositive for 
Toxoplasma should be evaluated for congenital toxoplasmosis 
(59). Congenital toxoplasmosis can be diagnosed by using enzyme immunoassay or an
immunosorbent assay to detect the presence of Toxoplasma-specific IgM, IgA, or IgE
in neonatal serum within the first 6 months of 
life or persistence of specific IgG antibody beyond age 12 months. IgA might be more
sensitive  for  detection  of  congenital  infection  than  IgM  or  IgE  (60--62).  However,
approximately 20%--30% of infants with congenital 
toxoplasmosis will not be identified in the 
neonatal period with IgA or IgM assays 
(63).
 Serologic  testing  is  the  major  method  of  diagnosis,  but  interpretation  of  available
assays is often confusing 
and difficult. Using the services of a specialized reference laboratory that is capable of
performing serology, isolation 
of 
organisms,  and  PCR,  and  offers  assistance  in  interpreting  results,  especially  when
attempting to diagnose 
congenital toxoplasmosis, can be helpful.
 Additional  methods  that  can  be  used  to  diagnose  infection  in  the  newborn  include
isolation of the 
Toxoplasma  parasite  by  mouse  inoculation,  or  inoculation  in  tissue  cultures  of
cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF),  urine,  placental  tissue,  amniotic  fluid,  or  infant  blood.
Toxoplasma 
gondii DNA can be detected by PCR performed in a reference laboratory on 
body fluids (e.g., white blood cells, CSF, amniotic fluid, or tissues) 
(60,62,63). If a possible diagnosis of 
congenital  toxoplasmosis  at  the  time  of  delivery  is  uncertain,  an  evaluation  of  the
neonate  should  be  undertaken  and  include  ophthalmologic,  auditory,  and  neurologic
examinations; lumbar puncture; and imaging of the head 
(either computerized tomography or magnetic resonance imaging scans) to determine
whether hydrocephalus or calcifications are present.  
 In the United States, routine Toxoplasma 
serologic screening of HIV-infected children whose mothers do not 
have  toxoplasmosis  is  not  recommended  because  of  its  low  prevalence.  However,  in
regions  with  high  incidence  of  Toxoplasma  infection,  serologic  testing  might  be
selectively  considered  for  HIV-infected  children  aged  >12  months.  HIV-infected
adolescents without a history of previous 
Toxoplasma infection should undergo serologic testing.
 A presumptive diagnosis of CNS toxoplasmosis is based on clinical symptoms, serologic
evidence of infection, and the presence of a space-occupying lesion on imaging studies
of the brain. Cases of 
Toxoplasma encephalitis have been reported in persons without 
Toxoplasma-specific IgG antibodies; therefore, negative serology does not exclude 
that diagnosis. Computerized tomography of the brain might indicate multiple, bilateral,
ring-enhancing  lesions  in  CNS  toxoplasmosis,  especially  in  the  basal  ganglia  and
cerebral corticomedullary junction. Magnetic resonance imaging is more sensitive and
will
 confirm
 basal
 ganglia
 lesions
 in
 the
 majority
 of
 patients.
F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose-positive emission tomography can be helpful in distinguishing 
Toxoplasma abscesses from primary CNS lymphoma, but 
the accuracy is not high and this test is not widely available.
 Definitive  diagnosis  of  Toxoplasma  encephalitis  requires  histologic  or  cytologic
confirmation by brain biopsy, 
which might demonstrate leptomeningeal inflammation, microglial nodules, gliosis, and 
Toxoplasma cysts. Biopsy should be considered when early neurologic deterioration is
present  despite  empiric  treatment  or  among  children  who  fail  to  respond  to
anti-Toxoplasma therapy after 10--14 days.
 
Treatment
 Pregnant  women  with  suspected  or  confirmed  primary  toxoplasmosis  and  newborns
with possible or 
documented  congenital  Toxoplasmosis  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  an
appropriate specialist. If an HIV-infected 
woman has a symptomatic Toxoplasma infection during pregnancy, empiric therapy of
the newborn should be 
strongly considered whether or not the mother was treated during pregnancy 
(BIII). 
 The preferred treatment for congenital toxoplasmosis is pyrimethamine (loading dose
of 2 mg/kg body weight/day 
for 2 days, then 1 mg/kg/day for 2--6 months, followed by 1 mg/kg adminstered three
times a week) combined 
with  sulfadiazine  (50  mg/kg/dose  twice  daily),  with  supplementary  leucovorin  (folinic
acid)  to  minimize  pyrimethamine-associated  hematologic  toxicity  (AII).   Although  the
optimal  duration  of  therapy  is  undefined,  the  recommended  duration  of  treatment  of
congenital toxoplasmosis for infants without HIV infection is 12 months 
(AII). Absent definitive data, the same recommendation applies to HIV-infected children
with congenital toxoplasmosis.  
 For  children  without  HIV  infection  who  have  mild  congenital  toxoplasmosis,  certain
experts  alternate  pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine/folinic  acid  monthly  with  spiramycin  (50
mg/kg orally twice daily) from the seventh through the 12th month of treatment (CIII).
However, among children with moderate to severe disease and those with HIV infection,
the full 12-month regimen of pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine should be administered 
(AII).
 HIV-infected children with acquired CNS, ocular, or systemic toxoplasmosis should be
treated with pyrimethamine 
(2 mg/kg/day for 3 days, followed by 1 mg/kg/day) and leucovorin (10--25 mg/day) plus
sulfadiazine  (25--50  mg/kg/dose  given  four  times  daily)  (AI).  Acute  therapy  should  be
continued for 6 weeks, assuming clinical and 
radiological improvement (BII). Longer courses of treatment might be required in cases
of extensive disease or poor response after 6 weeks. 
 Pyrimethamine can be associated with rash (including Stevens-Johnson syndrome) and
nausea. The primary toxicity 
of  pyrimethamine  is  reversible  bone  marrow  suppression  (i.e.,  neutropenia,  anemia,
and thrombocytopenia). A 
complete blood count should be performed at least weekly while the child is on daily
pyrimethamine and at least monthly while 
on less than daily dosing (AIII). Leucovorin (folinic acid) should always be administered
with pyrimethamine; 
increased doses of leucovorin might be required in the event of marrow suppression.
Because of the long half-life of pyrimethamine, leucovorin should be continued 1 week
after pyrimethamine has been 
discontinued. 
 Adverse
 effects
 of
 sulfadiazine
 include
 rash,
 fever,
 leukopenia,
 hepatitis,
gastrointestinal  symptoms  (nausea,  vomiting,  and  diarrhea),  and  crystalluria.  The
primary
 alternative
 for
 sulfadiazine
 in
 patients
 who
 develop
 sulfonamide
hypersensitivity  is  clindamycin  (5.0--7.5  mg/kg  orally  4  times  daily;  maximum  600
mg/dose),  adminstered  with  pyrimethamine  and  leucovorin  (AI).  Clindamycin  can  be
associated  with  fever,  rash,  and  gastrointestinal  symptoms  (e.g.,  nausea,  vomiting,
diarrhea, including pseudomembranous colitis) and hepatotoxicity.
 Azithromycin (900--1,200 mg/day) also has been used 
with pyrimethamine and leucovorin among sulfa-allergic adults instead of clindamycin
(BII), but this regimen has not been studied among children 
(CIII).
 Another alternative in adults is atovaquone (1,500 mg orally twice daily, adminstered
with meals) plus 
pyrimethamine  and  leucovorin,  or  atovaquone  with  sulfadiazine  alone,  or  atovaquone
as  a  single  agent  among  patients  intolerant  to  both  pyrimethamine  and  sulfadiazine
(BII); however, these regimens have not been studied among children 
(CIII).
 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
 (5
 mg/kg
 trimethoprim
 plus
 25
 mg/kg
sulfamethoxazole intravenously or orally adminstered twice daily) alone has been used
as  an  alternative  to  pyrimethamine-sulfadiazine  among  adults  (BI),  but  this  has  not
been studied among children 
(CIII).
 Corticosteriods (e.g., dexamethasone or prednisone) have been used among children
with CNS disease when 
CSF protein is very elevated (i.e., >1,000 mg/dL) or with focal lesions with substantial
mass effects 
(BIII). Because of the potential immunosuppressive effects of steroids, they should be
discontinued as soon as possible.  Among HIV-infected children, lifelong suppression is
indicated after treatment for toxoplasmosis to 
prevent recurrence; details on secondary prophylaxis (i.e., maintenance therapy) have
been published 
(4). Safety of discontinuation of secondary prophylaxis after immune reconstitution with
HAART among children has not been studied extensively.
Cryptosporidiosis/Microsporidiosis
 
Epidemiology
 Cryptosporidium  species  are  protozoal  parasites  that  mainly  cause  enteric  illness  in
humans and animals. The three most common species infecting humans are C. 
hominis (formerly C. parvum genotype 1 or human genotype), 
C. parvum (formerly C. parvum genotype 2 or bovine genotype), and 
C. meleagridis. In addition, infections with 
C. canis, C. felis, C. muris, and 
Cryptosporidium pig genotype have been reported in immunocompromised patients. 
Cryptosporidium parasites invade the gut mucosa, causing severe profuse, nonbloody,
watery diarrhea leading to dehydration and malnutrition 
in immunocompromised hosts.
 The  parasite  is  transmitted  by  ingestion  of  oocysts  excreted  in  the  feces  of  infected
animals and humans. The 
parasite is highly infectious, with an 
ID50 ranging from nine to 1,042 oocysts, depending on the isolate 
(64). Infection occurs when the ingested oocyst releases sporozoites, which attach to
and invade the intestinal epithelial cells. The parasite has a predilection for the jejunum
and terminal ileum 
(64). 
 Person-to-person transmission is common in child care centers. Outbreaks have been
associated with ingestion 
of contaminated drinking water in large metropolitan areas and with public swimming
pools. Foodborne and person-to-person spread also have been documented 
(64). Cryptosporidiosis has been reported in 3%--4% of 
HIV-infected children in the United States, but occurs more frequently among 
children outside of the United States, particularly 
in Africa (65).
 Microspora  species  are  obligate,  intracellular,  spore-forming  protozoa  that  primarily
cause moderate to severe diarrhea among children. Enterocytozoon bieneusi 
and Encephalitozoon intestinalis are the most common microsporidia that 
cause infection among patients with HIV infection. In addition to the 
Enterocytozoon and Encephalitozoon 
microsporidia genera, Nosema, Pleistophora, Trachipleistophora, 
Brachiola, and Vittaforma species have been implicated in 
human  infections.  The  Microspora  parasites  develop  in  enterocytes  and  are  excreted
with feces and, like 
C.  parvum,  are  transmitted  by  the  fecal-oral  route,  which  can  include  ingestion  of
contaminated  food  or  water  (66).  Microsporidiosis  has  been  reported  in  up  to  7%  of
HIV-infected Thai children with acute and chronic diarrhea (67).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Frequent,  usually  nonbloody,  watery,  persistent  diarrhea  is  the  most  common
manifestation of both 
cryptosporidial and microsporidial infection, with abdominal cramps, fatigue, vomiting,
anorexia, weight loss, and poor weight 
gain. Fever and vomiting are relatively common in children, 
mimicking  viral  gastroenteritis  (65).  Among  immunocompromised  children,  chronic
severe  diarrhea  can  result  in  malnutrition,  failure  to  thrive,  and  substantial  intestinal
fluid losses, resulting in severe dehydration and even death. Clinical history or physical
examination does 
not allow differentiation of cryptosporidial or microsporidial infection from those caused
by other pathogens.
 Cryptosporidium can migrate into the bile duct and result in inflammation of the biliary
epithelium, 
acalculous cholecystitis, and sclerosing cholangitis. Symptoms include fever and right
upper abdominal pain and elevated 
alkaline phosphatase. Although infection is usually limited to the gastrointestinal tract,
pulmonary  or  disseminated  infection  also  can  occur  among  immunocompromised
children. In addition to acute and chronic diarrhea, microsporidia species 
have  been  described  in  cases  of  hepatitis,  peritonitis,  keratoconjunctivitis,  myositis,
cholangitis, sinusitis, and 
disseminated CNS disease. 
 
Diagnosis
 For diagnosis of cryptosporidiosis, stool samples are concentrated by using the sucrose
flotation or 
formalin-ethyl acetate method to concentrate the oocysts. A sample is then stained by
using a modified Kinyoun acid-fast stain and examined for small (4--6 um in diameter)
acid-fast positive oocysts. Monoclonal antibody-based 
fluorescein-conjugated stain for oocysts in stool and an enzyme immunoassay to detect
antigen in stool are preferred to staining methods because of enhanced sensitivity and
specificity. Oocyst excretion can be intermittent; therefore, the parasite might not be
detected  in  every  stool.  At  least  3  stool  samples  should  be  submitted  for  oocyst
evaluation. Organisms also can 
be identified on small intestinal biopsy or intestinal fluid samples.
 For diagnosis of microsporidia infection, thin smears of unconcentrated stool-formalin
suspension or 
duodenal  aspirates  can  be  stained  with  modified  trichrome  stain.  Chemofluorescent
agents (e.g., Calcofluor white) are helpful for the quick identification of spores in stool
samples. Microsporidia spores are stained pink to red and are 1--3 
um in size and ovoid and contain a distinctive equatorial-belt-like stripe.
 Urine sediment examination by light microscopy can be used to identify microsporidia
spores in disseminated 
disease with Encephalitozoonidae and Trachipleistophora. Enterocytozoon bieneusi 
is  not  associated  with  disseminated  disease.  Transmission  electron  microscopy  is
needed for speciation.
 Endoscopy  should  be considered  for  all  patients  with  chronic  diarrhea  of  >2 months
duration and negative 
stool  examinations.  Touch  preparations  are  useful  for  rapid  diagnosis  (i.e.,  within  24
hours). Sensitive assays using 
PCR amplification of parasite DNA sequences extracted from stool or biopsy specimens
have been developed 
for Cryptosporidium and Enterocytozoon 
bieneusi (68,69), but are research tools and not commercially available.
 
Treatment
 Immune reconstitution resulting from HAART frequently results in clearance of 
Cryptosporidium  and  Microsporidium  infections.  Effective  HAART  is  the  recommended
treatment for these infections 
(70)  (AII).  Supportive  care  with  hydration,  correction  of  electrolyte  abnormalities,  and
nutritional  supplementation  should  be  provided  (AIII).  Antimotility  agents  should  be
used with caution among young children 
(CIII).
 No  consistently  effective  therapy  is  available  for  either  cryptosporidiosis  or
microsporidiosis, and duration of 
treatment among HIV-infected persons is uncertain. Certain agents have demonstrated
efficacy  in  decreasing  the  severity  of  symptoms  among  children.  Nitazoxanide  is
approved for treatment of diarrhea caused by 
Cryptosporidium  and  Giardia  lamblia  among  children  and  is  available  in  a  liquid
formulation 
(BI for uninfected children and CIII HIV-infected children). 
An  Egyptian  clinical  trial  among  100  HIV-uninfected  patients,  half  of  them  children,
randomized patients to a 3-day course of nitazoxanide or placebo. Nitazoxanide therapy
reduced  the  duration  of  both  diarrhea  and  oocyst  shedding;  among  children,  clinical
response was 88% with nitazoxanide and 38% with placebo 
(71).  No  substantial  adverse  events  were  reported,  and  adverse  events  that  were
reported  were  similar  in  the  treatment  and  placebo  groups  in  this  study.  A  study  in
Zambia among 100 children aged 12--35 months, half HIV-infected, reported a clinical 
response  of  56%  with  treatment  compared  with  23%  with  placebo  among
HIV-uninfected children, but among 
HIV-infected 
children, the drug was no more effective than placebo 
(72). However, in a study among HIV-infected adults in 
Mexico, 14 days of nitazoxanide resulted in 67% response using 1,000 mg twice daily
and 63% using 500 mg twice 
daily,  compared  with  25%  with  placebo  (73).  One  study  among  HIV-infected  adults
demonstrated clinical response in patients with CD4 cell count 
>50/µL but not those with CD4 cell count 
<50/µL (74). The recommended dose 
for children is 100 mg orally twice daily for children aged 1--3 years and 200 mg twice
daily for children aged 4--11 years. A tablet preparation is not yet approved.
 Certain specialists recommend paromomycin (25--35 mg/kg body weight/day orally in
2--4 divided doses; 
maximum  dose:  500  mg  four  times  daily)  for  the  treatment  of  cryptosporidiosis  in
HIV-infected children 
(CIII). However, in a placebo-controlled trial in HIV-infected adults, paromomycin was no
more effective than placebo for the treatment of symptomatic cryptosporidiosis (75). 
 Azithromycin has demonstrated some activity against C. parvum infection in a limited
number of 
HIV-infected children (76) (CIII). An azithromycin regimen of 10 mg/kg per day on day 1
and  5  mg/kg  per  day  on  days  2--10  was  successful  in  rapidly  resolving  enteric
symptoms in three of four HIV-infected children with cryptosporidiosis 
(76). Oral hyperimmune bovine colostrum and oral immune 
globulin have variable benefits among immunocompromised 
patients with cryptosporidiosis (CIII).
 For treatment of microsporidia infection, albendazole (dosage for person weighing <60
kg is 7.5 mg/kg orally 
twice daily; maximum dose: 400 mg orally twice daily) decreases diarrhea, sometimes
with  eradication  of  the  organism  (AII).  Albendazole  appears  to  be  more  effective  for
cases caused by 
Encephalitozoon intestinalis (77) and other 
microsporidia species but is not active against 
Enterocytozoon  bienesi.  Nitazoxanide  has  been  used  for  treatment  of  Enterocytozoon
bienesi infection among HIV-infected adults (78). 
 Fumagillin® (Sanofi-Synthelabo Laboratories, Gentilly, France) is an antibiotic derived
from the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus, which has been used to treat microsporidiosis in
animals  and  humans.  In  a  placebo-controlled  study  of  immunocompromised  adults
(including HIV-infected adults) with 
Enterocytozoon bieneusi microsporidiosis, 
fumagillin  (20  mg/dose  orally  three  times  daily  for  2  weeks)  was  associated  with
decreased diarrhea and clearance of microsporidial spores, which was not observed in
placebo patients 
(79). Dose-related bone marrow toxicity was the principal 
adverse  effect  of  fumagillin,  with  reversible  thrombocytopenia  and  neutropenia  being
the  most  frequent  adverse  events.  No  data  are  available  on  use  of  fumagillin  among
HIV-infected children 
(CIII), and the drug is not available in the 
United  States.  Ocular  infections  caused  by  microsporidia  among  HIV-infected  adults
have been treated topically with fumagillin eye drops prepared from 
Fumidil-B®, a commercial product (Mid-Continent Agrimarketing, Inc., Olathe, KS) used 
to control a microsporidial disease of honeybees.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
 
Epidemiology
 In 2002, approximately 15,000 new cases of TB disease were diagnosed in the United
States. Of these, 6% 
were among children aged <15 years (80). Although the number of cases in this age
group  has  been  decreasing  since  1992,  the  number  coinfected  with  HIV  is  uncertain
because only a limited number of U.S. children who have TB have 
been  tested  for  HIV  infection.  In  a  study  of  TB  cases  in  the  United  States  during
1993--2000, more adults than children 
had an HIV test reported (41.4 versus 16.1%); the majority of children (83.9%) did not
have a reported HIV test 
result (81). Overall, 12.9% of adults were reported to be coinfected with HIV, compared
with 1.1% of all childhood TB cases (81).
 Incident  case  rates  of  TB  disease  among  HIV-exposed  or  -infected  children  were
reported in one study from the 
early 1990s to be up to 100-fold higher than those in comparably aged children in the
general U.S. population 
(8).  Data  from  international  studies  indicate  an  increased  risk  for  TB  disease  among
HIV-infected children; coinfection with 
HIV occurred in up to 48% of hospitalized South African children with culture-proven TB 
(82,83). In New York City, 3% of approximately 1,400 HIV-infected children and 0.5% of
HIV-exposed uninfected children had active TB diagnosed during 1989--1995 (84).
 Extrapulmonary and miliary TB are more common among younger children (aged <4
years) 
(85,86) who do not have HIV infection.Younger children are also more likely to progress
more rapidly from infection to active disease than older 
children  and  adults  and  might  not  be  recognized  as  having  TB  disease  because  they
might have negative skin tests 
and fewer symptoms of disease (87). Despite evidence that extrapulmonary TB occurs
more  frequently  among  HIV-infected  rather  than  uninfected  adults,  this  is  less  clear
among children in areas where TB is endemic (88,89).
 Congenital  TB  is  rare  but  has  been  reported  among  children  born  to  HIV-infected
women with active TB (90). The true incidence and whether the rate is higher among
these children compared with children born to non-HIV-infected women with active TB
are unknown. Congenital TB can result from hematogenous dissemination of 
M.  tuberculosis  after  maternal  mycobacteremia,  rupture  of  a  placental  tubercule  into
the fetal circulation, or ingestion of infected amniotic fluid or maternal blood at delivery.
The mother might not have symptoms of TB disease, and subclinical 
maternal genital TB also can result in an infected neonate 
(90).
 Children  with  TB  disease  are  almost  always  infected  by  an  adult  in  their  daily
environment, and their 
infection  represents  primary  infection  rather  than  the  reactivation  disease  observed
among adults 
(8,91). Identification and treatment of the source patient and evaluation of all exposed
children  is  particularly  important;  all  confirmed  and  suspected  TB  cases  should  be
reported to state and local health departments, who will assist in contact evaluation. 
In  addition,  other  exposed  members  of  the  household  should  be  evaluated  because
other secondary TB cases and 
latent  infections  with  M.  tuberculosis  often  are  found.  Latent  infections  should  be
treated to prevent cases. HIV counseling 
and  testing  should  be  offered  to  TB  contacts  because  coexisting  HIV  infection,  which
increases the risk for TB disease, 
can reduce the sensitivity of the tuberculin test.
 Multidrug-resistant  TB  is  unusual  among  U.S.-born  TB  patients.  Data  from  U.S.
surveillance during 1993--2001 among pediatric patients with TB indicate that 
M. tuberculosis with resistance to any of the first-line anti-TB drugs 
was identified in 15.2% of children with culture-positive 
M. tuberculosis, with higher rates among foreign-born 
children (19.2%) than U.S.-born children (14.1%) 
(81). However, the prevalence of multidrug resistance (e.g., at least 
isoniazid and rifampin) was lower: 2.8% in foreign-born children and 1.4% in U.S.-born
children with TB.  Data are limited about the incidence of drug resistant strains of TB
among HIV-infected U.S. children. In one retrospective survey study of 70 PACTG sites,
multiple resistant strains 
of M. tuberculosis were observed in 15%--20% 
of HIV-infected children with TB.The majority of cases were from one state with a peak
in incidence of disease 
(8), reflecting the increase in drug-resistant TB among adults infected with TB to which
the children were exposed (92,93). 
 Drug-resistant M. tuberculosis is as transmissible as drug-susceptible 
M. tuberculosis and remains drug resistant in a 
new host. Contacts to drug-resistant TB should be treated under the assumption that
any newly diagnosed infections 
are similarly drug resistant.
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Clinical  signs  of  infection  in  the  infant  with  congenital  TB  disease  are  nonspecific.  
Predominant early symptoms 
are inadequate feeding and failure to gain weight during the first weeks of life; upper
respiratory  symptoms  and  progressive  hepatosplenomegaly  might  appear  later  with
fever,  progressive  pneumonia,  and  meningitis.  Certain  infants  might  present  more
acutely with progressive respiratory distress, apnea, jaundice, and abdominal distention
(94).
 Children  with  pulmonary  TB  might  have  little  or  no  symptoms.  Symptoms,  when
present, might be nonspecific 
(e.g.,  weight  loss,  fever,  and  failure  to  thrive).  TB  among  young  children  rarely
manifests  with  the  typical  apical  lung  infiltrates  and  late  cavitation  observed  among
adults  with  TB.  More  commonly,  pulmonary  TB  appears  as  a  localized  pulmonary
infiltrate  with  associated  hilar  lymphadenopathy.  Multiple  lobes  are  involved  in  up  to
25% of 
children.  Concomitant  atelectasis  might  result  from  hilar  adenopathy  compressing
bronchi or from endobronchial granulomas.  Clinical presentation of TB disease among
children with HIV infection is similar to that among children without 
HIV infection (86,95). Signs and symptoms might be consistent with acute pneumonia,
with nonspecific radiological opacities without hilar adenopathy 
(83,88,96). Older HIV-infected children and adolescents might have 
clinical presentations more similar to that seen in HIV-infected adults 
(97). In countries with a high burden of TB, 
the incidence of treatment failure and mortality is higher among HIV-infected children 
(86,98).  Commonly  reported  sites  of  extrapulmonary  disease  among  children  include
lymph  nodes,  hematogenous  (military),  CNS,  bone,  pericardium,  peritoneum,  and
pleura 
(86,96,99,100).
 
Diagnosis
 Because of the difficulty of definitively diagnosing TB disease among children, a high
index of suspicion is 
important. M. tuberculosis can be detected in culture of gastric aspirate samples from
approximately 50% of children without 
HIV  infection  who  have  TB  disease  (101).  Suspicion  for  and  diagnosis  of  TB  in
HIV-infected children is further 
complicated by the frequent presence of pre-existing or coincidental fever, pulmonary
symptoms, and radiographic 
abnormalities  (e.g.,  chronic  lymphoid  interstitial  pneumonitis  or  coincident  pulmonary
bacterial infection) in this population (102,103).
 Because of the difficulty in obtaining a definitive culture-proven diagnosis of TB disease
among  children,  the  diagnosis  of  TB  disease  usually  involves  linking  the  child  to  an
adult with confirmed pulmonary TB together with a positive tuberculin skin test (TST)
and an abnormal radiograph or physical examination in the child 
(101).  However,  a  negative  TST  result  cannot  exclude  TB  disease  among  children
because approximately 10% of children without HIV infection but with culture-positive
TB disease do not react initially to a TST 
(59). HIV infection further decreases TST 
reactivity. Therefore, a TST result among children, particularly HIV-infected children, is
less useful than in adults. Although 
a positive test is useful to confirm the diagnosis, a negative test would not rule out the
possibility  of  TB  disease.   Because  children  with  HIV  infection  are  considered  at  high
risk for TB, annual Mantoux tuberculin skin testing of this population is recommended,
beginning at age 3--12 months, using intradermally injected 5 TU purified 
protein derivative (PPD) (59). Among children and adults with HIV infection, >5 mm of
induration is considered a positive (diagnostic) reaction. Multiple puncture TB skin tests
(e.g., Tine) are not recommended.
 The  use  of  control  skin  antigens  at  the  time  of  PPD  testing  to  identify  anergy  is  of
uncertain value and no 
longer  routinely  recommended;  however,  if  anergy  testing  is  performed,  mumps  and
candida are appropriate control 
antigens (104). Even without HIV infection, approximately 10% of children and adults
with culture-negative TB have a 
negative TST, and up to 50% with miliary TB and meningitis have an initially negative
TST 
(101). Children aged <2 years or those who have HIV infection might be more likely to
have a negative skin test 
(99,100).
 Although  acid-fast  stained  sputum  smears  are  positive  in  50%--70%  of  adults  with
pulmonary TB, children with 
TB disease rarely produce sputum voluntarily and typically have a low bacterial load 
(101).  Acid-fast  stains  of  early  morning  gastric  aspirates  are  positive  in  0-20%  of
children  with  TB,  and  in  children  with  extrapulmonary  TB,  acid-fast  stains  of  samples
such  as  lymph  node,  CSF,  and  joint  fluid  are  usually  positive  in  <25%  of  children.
Although the sensitivity 
of  stained  specimen  smears  is  less  among  children  than  adults,  a  positive  smear  is
indicative of mycobacteria, although 
it does not differentiate M. tuberculosis from other mycobacterial species.
 Smears of all specimens should be prepared, stained (using either the Ziehl-Neelsen
method or 
auramine-rhodamine  staining  in  conjunction  with  fluorescence  microscopy),  and
evaluated  for  the  presence  of  acid-fast  organisms.  Auramine-rhodamine  staining
followed  by  fluorescent  microscopy  is  more  efficient  than  traditional  carbol  fuchsin
stains (101).
 A definitive diagnosis of TB disease requires isolation of 
M. tuberculosis from expectorated sputum, 
bronchoalveolar  lavage  (BAL)  fluid,  aspirated  gastric  fluid  (obtained  in  the  early
morning after the child fasts overnight), biopsied lung, peripheral lymph node or other
tissue (depending on location of disease), or mycobacterial blood culture 
(105,106). In addition, availability of an isolate allows drug susceptibility testing to be
performed.
 Three consecutive morning gastric aspirates yield a positive culture of 
M.  tuberculosis  in  up  to  70%  of  infants  and  30%--50%  of  children  with  clinical
pulmonary TB 
(101). Gastric lavage samples, collected on three 
consecutive  mornings,  has  a  higher  yield  on  culture  (50%)  than  a  single  sample
collected  by  bronchoalveolar  lavage  (10%)  (107).  Nasopharyngeal  aspiration  was
evaluated in one study of 64 children aged 1 month--16 years and was found to have
comparable sensitivity and specificity as gastric aspirate culture 
(108). Sputum induction was safe and almost twice 
as  effective  in  identifying  M.  tuberculosis  compared  with  gastric  lavage  specimens  in
one South African study of children aged <5 years with community-acquired pneumonia
(109). The culture yield from other fluids and tissues from children with extrapulmonary
TB is <50%, even with optimal samples. 
 Strenuous  efforts  should  be  made  to  obtain  diagnostic  specimens  (three  each  of
sputum  or  gastric  aspirate  specimens  or  an  induced  sputum  for  culture)  whenever  a
presumptive diagnosis of TB is made or when it is highly 
suspected despite negative skin testing results (i.e., because of a history of exposure to
a person with active TB). Specimens 
should  be  cultured  with  radiometric  culture  methods  and  DNA  probes  for  species
identification. 
M. tuberculosis can be isolated and identified in 7--14 days.
 Antimycobacterial drug susceptibility testing should be performed on the initial 
M.  tuberculosis  isolate  and  on  subsequent  isolates  if  treatment  failure  or  relapse  is
suspected;  the  radiometric  culture  system  has  been  adapted  to  perform  rapid
sensitivity testing. Before obtaining results of susceptibility testing and if an organism
has not been 
able  to  be  isolated  from  specimens  from  the  child,  the  antimycobacterial  drug
susceptibility of the 
M. tuberculosis isolate from the source case can be used to define the probable drug
susceptibility of the child's organism and to design the empiric therapeutic regimen for
the child.
 Diagnosis  can  be  facilitated  by  use  of  PCR  amplification  techniques  that  allow  rapid
amplification of 
mycobacterial-species  specific  target  sequences  that  are  detected  by  a  molecular
probe. Two commercial kits are available for rapid, direct detection of M. tuberculosis,
and both are labeled for use on sputum only. One is labeled for use on sputum only with
AFB detected on the smear. When these tests are used for other specimens, sensitivity
and specificity might 
be unsatisfactory.
 PCR  assays  provide  adjunctive,  but  not  primary,  diagnosis  for  evaluation  of  children
with TB, because a negative 
PCR  does  not  rule  out  TB  as  a  diagnostic  possibility  and  a  positive  result  does  not
represent  absolute  confirmation  of  M.  tuberculosis  infection.  However,  it  might  be
useful in suggesting the diagnosis of TB among HIV-infected children with unexplained
pulmonary  disease,  when  both  culture  and  tuberculin  skin  tests  may  be  falsely
negative. Although 
both DNA and RNA amplification systems are available, only DNA systems have been
used in published pediatric 
studies. Results for PCR testing for M. 
tuberculosis on gastric aspirates from children have been disappointing with 
sensitivity varying between 45%--83% 
(110--112). In one study, PCR specificity was only 80%; false positives occurred 
in children with Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare 
disease, which is not an uncommon infection among 
HIV-infected children (112).
 
Treatment
 Principles  for  treatment  of  TB  in  the  HIV-infected  child  are  the  same  as  for  the
HIV-uninfected  child.  However,  optimal  therapy  has  not  been  defined,  and  modified
treatment durations, schedules, and medications are 
recommended  for  specific  instances.  Because  of  overlapping  drug  toxicities,  children
being treated for both HIV and TB should be managed by a specialist with expertise in
treating both these conditions 
(AIII).
 Because  of  the  high  risk  for  dissemination  among  children  aged  <4  years,  TB
treatment should be initiated as soon 
as  the  diagnosis  of  TB  is  suspected  (AIII).  Although  the  optimal  timing  of  initiation  of
antiretroviral therapy during 
TB  treatment  is  unknown,  in  the  setting  of  antiretroviral  naïve  HIV-infected  children,
treatment  of  TB  should  be  initiated  4--8  weeks  before  initiating  antiretroviral
medications to improve adherence and better differentiate potential side effects (BIII).
For  children  already  receiving  antiretroviral  therapy  who  have  had  TB  diagnosed,  the
child's 
antiretroviral  regimen  should  be  reviewed  and  altered,  if  needed,  to  ensure  optimal
treatment for both TB and HIV and to 
minimize potential toxicities and drug-drug interactions 
(BIII).
 The  major  problem  limiting  successful  treatment  is  inadequate  adherence  to
prescribed treatment regimens. Use 
of directly observed therapy (DOT) decreases the rates of relapse, treatment failures,
and drug resistance. Therefore, 
DOT is recommended for treatment of children and adolescents with TB in the United
States 
(59)  (AII).  For  the  first  2  months  of  treatment,  DOT  should  be  adminstered  daily
(induction  phase).  After  this,  DOT  is  usually  given  two  to  three  times  weekly
(continuation  phase).  For  patients  on  rifampin-  or  rifabutin-based  regimens  and  who
have 
severe  immunosuppression,  three-times  weekly  regimens  are  preferred  because  of
concerns about development of 
rifamycin resistance by M. tuberculosis 
(BII). However, data on the efficacy of three-times weekly regimens among children 
are limited.
 Initial empiric treatment of active disease (induction phase) should generally consist of
a 4-drug regimen 
(isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and either
ethambutol or streptomycin) to allow for the possibility of a drug-resistant 
organism (AI). Ethionamide can be used as an alternative to ethambutol in cases of TB
meningitis because ethionamide has 
better CNS penetration than ethambutol
(AIII).
 Subsequent  modifications  of  therapy  should  be  based  on  susceptibility  testing  if
possible. The drug 
susceptibility  pattern  from  the  isolate  of  the  adult  source  case  might  help  guide
treatment in cases where an isolate is not available from the child (59). If the organism
is  susceptible  to  isoniazid,  rifampin,  and  pyrazinamide  during  the  2-month  period  of
induction  therapy,  ethambutol  can  be  discontinued  and  induction  therapy  completed
using 3 drugs 
(AI).
 Following the 2-month induction phase, for treatment of 
M. tuberculosis known to be sensitive to isoniazid 
and rifampin, therapy is continued with isoniazid and rifampin to complete therapy 
(AI); daily or intermittent (2--3 times weekly) therapy is acceptable 
(59,112). However, children with severe immunosuppression should receive either daily
or  thrice  weekly  treatment  during  the  continuation  phase,  because  TB  treatment
regimens with once- or 
twice-weekly  dosing  have  been  associated  with  an  increased  rate  of  acquisition  of
rifamycin resistance among HIV-infected adults with low CD4 cell counts (<100 
cells/µL) (113) (AII).
 Many clinicians report high rates of treatment failure and relapse when only 6 months
of treatment is 
administered (the recommended duration of therapy for children without HIV infection) 
(59,112,114).  For  HIV-infected  children  with  active  pulmonary  disease,  the  minimum
recommended duration of antituberculous drug treatment is 9 months; for children with
extrapulmonary disease involving the bones or joints, CNS, or miliary disease, the 
minimum recommended duration of treatment is 12 months 
(59,112,115) (AIII). These recommendations assume that 
the organism is susceptible to the medications, that compliance with the medications
has been assured, and that the child has had a clinical and microbiologic response to
therapy.
 For treatment of drug-resistant TB, a minimum of three drugs should be administered, 
including at least 2 bactericidal drugs to which the isolate is susceptible 
(AII). Regimens can include three to six drugs with varying levels 
of  activity.  Children  infected  with  multidrug-resistant  TB  (e.g.,  resistance  to  at  least
isoniazid  and  rifampin)  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  an  expert  in  this
condition 
(AIII). If the strain is resistant only to isoniazid, 
isoniazid  should  be  discontinued  and  the  patient  treated  with  9--12  months  of  a
rifampin- or rifabutin-containing regimen (e.g., rifampin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol
(BII); ethionamide or streptomycin can be substituted for ethambutol if 
the M. tuberculosis isolate is sensitive to these agents). If the strain is resistant only to
rifampin,  risk  for  relapse  and  treatment  failure  is  increased.  Rifampin  should  be
discontinued and a 2-month induction phase of isoniazid, 
pyrazinamide,  ethambutol  and  streptomycin  administered,  followed  by  an  additional
continuation phase of isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol to complete a minimum
of a 12-month course of therapy, with the exact length of therapy based on clinical and
radiologic  improvement  (BIII).  Among  older  adolescents  with  rifampin  monoresistant
strains, 
isoniazid,  ethambutol,  and  a  fluoroquinolone  can  be  administered,  with  pyrazinamide
added for the first 2 months 
(BIII); an injectable agent (e.g., aminoglycoside such as streptomycin or amikacin) also
can be included in the first 2--3 months for patients with severe disease (BIII). When the
strain is resistant to isoniazid and rifampin (multidrug-resistant 
TB),  therapeutic  regimens  must  be  individualized  based  on  the  resistance  pattern,
relative  activities  of  the  drugs,  extent  of  disease,  and  any  co-morbid  conditions.
Therapy  frequently  requires  12--24  months.   Isoniazid  (10--15  mg/kg  body  weight
adminstered orally once daily [maximum dose: 300 mg/day]) is available 
as syrup, but certain specialists advise against using it because the syrup is unstable
and frequently causes diarrhea. When isoniazid is adminstered in a dosage exceeding
10  mg/kg  in  combination  with  rifampin,  the  incidence  of  hepatic  toxicity  might  be
increased. Pills can be pulverized at the time of administration and mixed with a small
amount of appealing food immediately before giving it to the child. Dose for two--times
weekly administration is 20--30 mg/kg/dose (maximum dose: 900 mg).
 Gastric  upset  during  the  initial  weeks  of  isoniazid  treatment  occurs  frequently.
Hepatotoxicity is the most 
common adverse effect and includes subclinical hepatic enzyme elevation and clinical
hepatitis  that  can  be  reversible  when  drug  is  discontinued  or  rarely  progresses  to
hepatic failure. Hepatotoxicity is less frequent in children than in adults. 
Transient asymptomatic serum transaminase elevations have been noted in 3%--10%
and clinical hepatitis in <1% of 
children
 receiving
 isoniazid,
 although
 <1%
 of
 children
 required
 treatment
discontinuation 
(115,116). However, the rate of hepatotoxicity might be higher in children on multiple
hepatotoxic  medications.  Other  toxicities  reported  with  isoniazid  include  peripheral
neuritis,  mild  CNS  effects,  and  rare  hypersensitivity  reactions.  Pyridoxine  is
recommended 
for  children  and  adolescents  on  meat-  and  milk-deficient  diets  and  children  with
nutritional deficiencies, including all symptomatic HIV-infected children (AII).
 Rifampin (10-20 mg/kg adminstered orally once daily [maximum dose: 600 mg/day]) is
available  only  as  a  capsule.  It  can  be  administered  by  opening  the  capsule  and
sprinkling the contents on food. Alternatively, a suspension can be formulated by the
pharmacy, although the stability of the 
ad hoc suspension is unknown. Dose for twice 
weekly administration is 10--20 mg/kg per dose (maximum dose: 600 mg).
 Rifampin  is  excreted  in  urine,  tears,  sweat,  and  other  body  fluids  and  colors  them
orange; contact lenses may 
be stained. The most common adverse reaction to rifampin therapy is gastrointestinal
upset. Other reactions include skin rash, hepatitis, thrombocytopenia, and cholestatic
jaundice.  An  influenza-like  syndrome,  hemolytic  anemia,  and  acute  renal  failure  have
been reported among adults receiving high doses of rifampin.
 Rifampin induces hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes and can accelerate clearance of
drugs metabolized by the 
liver  (e.g.,  protease  inhibitors  and  non-nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors),
resulting in subtherapeutic levels of the drug. As a result, concurrent administration of
rifampin  and  single  protease  inhibitors,  with  the  exception  of  ritonavir,  is  not
recommended  (117)  (EII).  Coadministration  of  ritonavir-boosted  saquinavir,  with  400
mg ritonavir boosting, 
with  rifampin  is  possible,  but  low-dose  ritonavir-boosted  dual  protease  inhibitor
regimens should not be used. 
Concurrent  administration  of  rifampin  with  the  non-nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase
inhibitor delavirdine also is contraindicated because of similar drug interactions 
(EII). However, concomitant administration of rifampin with efavirenz (and 
perhaps  nevirapine)  is  possible  (117).  Rifampin-  and  nevirapine-containing  regimens
should be used only when no other options are available and close clinical and virologic
monitoring  can  be  performed  because  of  the  decrease  in  nevirapine  levels  that  can
occur with concomitant administration 
(117).
 Rifabutin  (10--20  mg/kg  adminstered  orally  once  daily)  is  a  suitable  alternative  to
rifampin in children on 
HAART that proscribes the use of rifampin; however, experience in children is limited 
(BIII).  Major  toxicities  of  rifabutin  include  leukopenia,  gastrointestinal  upset,
polyarthralgias,  rash,  elevated  transaminases,  and  skin  and  secretion  discoloration
(pseudojaundice).  Anterior  uveitis  has  been  reported  among  adults  and  children
receiving rifabutin 
as  prophylaxis  or  a  part  of  a  combination  regimen  for  treatment,  usually  when
adminstered at higher doses 
(118).
 Rifabutin also increases hepatic metabolism of many drugs but is a less potent inducer
of cytochrome P450 
enzymes  than  rifampin  and  has  fewer  problematic  drug  interactions  than  rifampin.
However, adjustments in doses of 
rifabutin  and  the  coadministered  antiretroviral  drugs  might  be  necessary  for  certain
combinations 
(117).  Coadministration  of  rifabutin  with  certain  protease  inhibitors  can  result  in
increased  rifabutin  concentration  and  thus  potential  toxicity;  therefore,  a  decrease  in
rifabutin dose by 50% is required when coadministered with ritonavir, indinavir, 
nelfinavir,  amprenavir,  or  ritonavir-boosted  saquinavir.  An  increased  dose  (by
50%--100%) of rifabutin is needed 
when  coadministered  with  efavirenz  (117)  because  of  decreased  rifabutin  levels  with
coadministration. Rifabutin should not be coadministered with delavirdine or hard gel
capsule saquinavir without ritonavir boosting because of 
substantial decreases in the concomitant protease inhibitor drug levels 
(EII). Other drugs that inhibit hepatic metabolism 
(e.g., fluconazole) also can increase concentrations of rifabutin and consequent toxicity
and might require dose adjustment 
or discontinuation of rifabutin.
 Pyrazinamide (20--40 mg/kg/day  is adminstered  orally  once daily  [maximum dose:  2
g/day]) is available only as 
a scored tablet. It is generally administered during the first 2 months of TB therapy. If
pyrazinamide is to be continued 
on a two- to three-times-weekly schedule, it should be administered at a dose of 50--70
mg/kg/dose (maximum dose: 2 
g). Adverse effects include hepatotoxicity and hyperuricemia, arthralgias, skin rash, and
gastrointestinal  intolerance.   Ethambutol  (15--25  mg/kg  administered  orally  in  single
oral dose [maximum dose: 1.0 g]) is available only as 
a scored tablet. Although not approved for use among children because of concern for
optic nerve toxicity that might not be easily recognizable with pediatric use, it has been
used in children without toxicity 
(BIII). Dose for twice weekly administration is 50 mg/kg per dose (maximum dose: 1.0 
g). The major toxicity is optic neuritis, with symptoms 
of  blurry  vision,  central  scotomata,  and  red-green  color  blindness,  which  is  usually
reversible and rare at doses of 15 
mg/kg among children with normal renal function. Children receiving ethambutol should
have monthly monitoring of 
visual acuity and color discrimination if possible 
(AIII). Other toxicities include headache, nausea, peripheral 
neuropathy, rash, and hyperuricemia.
 Secondary  drugs  used  in  treatment  of  resistant  TB  have  not  been  well  studied  in
children. These medications 
should  be  used  in  consultation  with  a  TB  specialist.  Ethionamide  (15--20  mg/kg
adminstered orally divided into 2--3 doses 
per  day  [maximum  dose:  1.0  g/day])  is  available  only  in  tablet  formulation.  Data  are
unavailable to support 
intermittent (e.g. twice or three times weekly) dosing of this drug. Ethionamide might
be  useful  for  children  with  drug-resistant  TB  or  TB  meningitis  because  the  drug
achieves increased concentration in CSF 
(59). Nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, 
and  abdominal  pain  are  the  most  common  adverse  effects.  Other  adverse  effects
include hepatitis, arthralgias, 
gynecomastia, 
photosensitive dermatitis, and a metallic taste in the mouth. Hypothyroidism has been
reported with ethionamide 
use, and periodic (e.g., monthly) monitoring of thyroid hormone serum concentrations
is recommended (AIII).
 Streptomycin  (20--40  mg/kg/day  adminstered  intramuscularly  once  daily  [maximum
dose: 1 g/day]) is an alternative drug that can be substituted for ethambutol 
(BIII). It also is used in combination quadruple therapy with 
rifampin, isoniazid, and pyrazinamide for CNS TB (meningitis and tuberculoma). Dosage
for twice weekly administration is 20 mg/kg per dose intramuscularly (maximum dose:
1 g). If streptomycin is not available, kanamycin (15--30 
mg/kg adminstered intramuscularly once daily 
[maximum dose: 1 g/day]) or amikacin (15--30 mg/kg 
adminstered intravenously or intramuscularly once daily [maximum dose: 1 g/day]) are
active against most strains of streptomycin-resistant M. tuberculosis. Amikacin has the
advantage  of  a  lower  rate  of  ototoxicity  and  has  largely  replaced  kanamycin  in  the
treatment  of  adults.  Major  adverse  effects  of  aminoglycoside  drugs  are  oto-  and
nephrotoxicity. Periodic 
audiometry, monitoring of vestibular function (if possible), and blood urea nitrogen and
creatinine are 
recommended.
 Capreomycin (15--30 mg/kg adminstered intravenously 
or intramuscularly once daily [maximum dose: 1 g/day]) is 
a secondary drug used for drug-resistant TB. The major adverse effect is toxicity to the
eighth cranial nerve. Renal 
toxicity also might be seen, with electrolyte disturbances secondary to tubular damage
and elevated serum 
creatinine.  Monitoring  of  hearing  with  audiograms  monthly,  periodic  examinations  of
vestibular  function,  and  regular  monitoring  of  blood  urea  nitrogen  and  creatinine  are
recommended 
(AIII). 
 Quinolones  such  as  ciprofloxacin  (10--15  mg/kg  adminstered  orally  twice  daily
[maximum  dose:  1.5  g/day]),  ofloxacin  (400--800  mg  total  given  orally  once  daily  in
adults [maximum dose: 800 mg/day]) levofloxacin (500--1,000 mg adminstered orally
once daily in adults) and moxifloxacin (400 mg adminstered orally once daily in adults)
can be 
used. Adverse effects of quinolones include gastrointestinal upset, diarrhea, rash, and
headache. Cartilage damage has been observed with use of the fluoroquinolone drugs
in animals and, theoretically, these drugs could have an effect on growing cartilage in
children;  they  are  not  approved  for  persons  aged  <18  years  and  use  in  younger
persons requires an assessment of potential risks and benefits 
(119) (CIII). Ciprofloxacin has had the greatest use among children and appears to 
be well tolerated and not associated with arthropathy 
(120).
 Cycloserine (10--20 mg/kg adminstered orally once daily 
[maximum dose: 1 g]) is another second-line 
antimycobacterial that might be needed for treatment of drug-resistant infections. The
major  adverse  reactions  are  emotional  and  behavioral  disturbances,  and  periodic
assessment of mental status is recommended. Convulsions and 
peripheral  neuropathy  can  occur,  especially  if  adminstered  with  isoniazid,  and
coadministration of pyridoxine (150 mg/day) is recommended (AII).
 Para-amino salicylic acid (200-300 mg/kg adminstered orally divided into 3 or 4 daily
doses [maximum dose: 10 
g/day]) also can be used for treatment of drug-resistant TB. The adverse effects of the
drug are 
predominantly  gastrointestinal  (nausea,  vomiting,  and  diarrhea).  Hypersensitivity
reactions  occur  in  5%--10%  of  persons,  and  hepatitis  can  occur.  Hepatic  enzyme
monitoring is recommended 
(AIII). Thiacetazone can cause severe and often fatal 
reactions among HIV-infected children, including severe rash and aplastic anemia, and
should not be used 
(EIII).
 Unlike the majority of children without HIV infection, HIV-infected children on anti-TB
medications should 
have  liver  enzymes  obtained  at  baseline  and  monthly  for  the  first  few  months  of
therapy 
(AIII).  If  symptoms  of  drug  toxicity  develop,  a  physical  examination  and  repeat  liver
enzyme measurement should be performed 
(AIII). Mild elevations in serum transaminases (e.g., 2--3 times upper limit of normal) do
not require discontinuation of drugs if other 
findings are normal (AII).
 Adjunctive  treatment  with  corticosteriods  is  indicated  for  children  with  tuberculous
meningitis; dexamethasone 
lowers mortality and long-term neurologic impairment 
(AII). These drugs might be considered for children with pleural 
or pericardial effusions, severe miliary disease, and substantial endobronchial disease 
(BIII).  Appropriate  antituberculous  therapy  must  be  administered  concomitantly.  Most
experts use 1 to 2 mg/kg/day of prednisone or its equivalent for 6--8 weeks.
 Monthly monitoring of clinical and bacteriologic response to therapy is important 
(AII). For children with pulmonary TB, chest radiographs should be obtained after 2--3
months of therapy to evaluate response 
(AIII).  Hilar  adenopathy  might  persist  for  as  long  as  2--3  years  despite  successful
antituberculous therapy, and a normal radiograph is not 
a  criterion  to  discontinue  therapy.  Follow-up  radiographs  after  completion  of  therapy
are not necessary unless 
clinical symptoms recur.
 An immune reconstitution syndrome in patients receiving anti-TB therapy in the setting
of HAART has been 
reported in HIV-infected adults (121--123). New onset of systemic symptoms, especially
high fever, expanding CNS lesions, 
and  worsening  adenopathy,  pulmonary  infiltrates,  or  pleural  effusions  have  been
reported in the setting of HAART up 
to several months after starting TB therapy. Persons with mild-to-moderate symptoms
of immune reconstitution 
syndrome  have  been  treated  symptomatically  with  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory
drugs  while  continuing  anti-TB  and  HIV  therapies.  In  certain  cases,  use  of  systemic
corticosteriods  steroids  for  1--2  weeks  results  in  improvement  while  continuing  to
receive TB/HIV therapies 
(121--123) (CIII).
Mycobacterium avium Complex Disease
 
Epidemiology
 Mycobacterium  avium  complex  (MAC)  refers  to  multiple  related  species  of
nontuberculous mycobacteria (e.g., M. avium, M. intracellulare, 
M. paratuberculosis) that are widely distributed in the environment. MAC is the cause of
the  second  most  common  opportunistic  infection  among  children  with  HIV  infection
after  PCP,  and  is  presumably  acquired  by  common  environmental  exposures  through
inhallation, ingestion, or inoculation 
(124). Respiratory and gastrointestinal colonization can act as portals of entry that can
lead to disseminated infection (125).
 The proportion of children with AIDS and disseminated MAC has been higher among
children with hemophilia 
or  transfusion-acquired  HIV  infection  (approximately  13%--14%)  than  those  with
perinatal HIV infection (5%) 
(124). The median age at diagnosis of disseminated MAC in children with hemophilia or
transfusion-associated AIDS is 9 years, compared with 3 years in those with perinatal
infection. Data on the incidence of and risk factors for MAC 
among children receiving HAART are limited.
 MAC can appear as isolated lymphadenitis among HIV-infected children. Presentation
with isolated MAC 
pulmonary disease is a marker of high risk for dissemination; 72% of children develop
disseminated MAC within a mean time of 
8 months (126). Disseminated infection with MAC in pediatric HIV infection rarely occurs
during the first year of life; its frequency increases with age and declining 
CD4+ count, and it is a frequent complication of advanced 
immunologic  deterioration  among  HIV-infected  children  (124,127,128).  Disseminated
MAC can occur at higher 
CD4+  cell  counts  among  younger  HIV-infected  children  than  older  children  or  adults,
especially  among  children  aged  <2  years.  Age-related  CD4+  cell  counts  levels
considered  as  high  risk  for  MAC  warranting  consideration  of  prophylaxis  are  <750/µL
among HIV-infected children <1 year old; 
<500/µL for children aged 1--2 years; <75/µL for children aged 2--6 
years; and <50/µL for children aged >6 years 
(4,129--131).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Respiratory symptoms are uncommon among HIV-infected children with disseminated
MAC, and isolated 
pulmonary  disease  is  rare  (125).  Symptoms  commonly  associated  with  disseminated
MAC infection among children 
include  recurrent  fever,  weight  loss  or  failure  to  thrive,  neutropenia,  night  sweats,
fatigue,  chronic  diarrhea,  malabsorption,  and  persistent  or  recurrent  abdominal  pain.
Lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly can be found. 
Laboratory  abnormalities  include  anemia,  leukopenia,  and  thrombocytopenia.  Serum
chemistries  are  usually  normal,  although  certain  children  might  have  elevations  in
alkaline phosphatase or lactate dehydrogenase.
 
Diagnosis
 Procedures  used  to  diagnose  MAC  in  children  are  the  same  as  used  in  HIV-infected
adults.  Definitive diagnosis is accomplished by isolation of the organism from the blood
or from biopsy specimens from normally sterile sites 
(e.g.,  bone  marrow,  lymph  node,  or  other  tissues).  Multiple  mycobacterial  blood
cultures over time might be required to yield a positive result. Recovery of organisms
from  blood  is  enhanced  by  use  of  a  radiometric  broth  medium  or  lysis-centrifugation
culture technique.
 Histology  demonstrating  macrophage-containing  acid-fast  bacilli  strongly  indicates
MAC in a patient with 
typical  signs  and  symptoms,  but  culture  is  essential  to  differentiate  nontuberculous
mycobacteria from 
M. tuberculosis and to determine which nontuberculous mycobacteria are the cause of
infection  and  the  antimycobacterial  drug  susceptibilities  of  the  organism.  The  Bactec
method for radiometric susceptibility testing can be used. Susceptibility thresholds for 
clarithromycin are minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of 
>32 ug/ml and an MIC of >256 ug/ml for 
azithromycin (132).
 Identification of MAC in stool or respiratory tract secretions indicates colonization but
not necessarily invasive disease. Although not available widely, use of PCR might be of
future value for diagnostic purposes 
(133,134).
 
Treatment
 Treatment  of  disseminated  MAC  infection  should  be  done  in  consultation  with  a
pediatric infectious disease specialist with expertise in pediatric HIV infection 
(AIII). Combination therapy with a minimum of 2 drugs is 
recommended  (AI).  Monotherapy  with  a  macrolide  results  in  emergence  of  high-level
drug  resistance  within  weeks.   The  most  effective  way  to  prevent  disseminated  MAC
among HIV-infected children is to preserve immune 
function  through  use  of  effective  antiretroviral  therapy.  In  addition,  improved
immunologic  status  is  important  for  control  of  MAC  disease  among  children  with
disseminated disease; potent antiretroviral therapy should be initiated 
among  children  with  MAC  disease  who  are  antiretroviral-naïve.  However,  the  optimal
time to start HAART in this situation is unknown; certain clinicians treat MAC 1--2 weeks
before starting HAART to try to minimize the occurrence of 
immune reconstitution syndrome, although whether this makes a difference is unknown
(CIII). HAART should be continued and optimized for those already being 
treated. Prolonged survival among HIV-infected adults with MAC has 
been  associated  with  receiving  therapy  that  included  clarithromycin  and  receiving
combination antiretroviral therapy that included a protease inhibitor (135).
 Initial empiric therapy should include at least two drugs: clarithromycin or azithromycin
plus ethambutol 
(AI).  Certain  specialists  use  clarithromycin  as  the  preferred  first  agent,  reserving
azithromycin  for  patients  with  substantial  intolerance  to  clarithromycin  or  when  drug
interactions with clarithromycin are a concern 
(AII).
 Rifabutin  can  be  added  as  a  third  drug  to  the  clarithromycin/ethambutol  regimen,
particularly in patients with more severe symptoms or disseminated disease 
(AI). A study in adult patients demonstrated a survival benefit with 
the  addition  of  rifabutin  to  clarithromycin  plus  ethambutol.  Drugs  that  can  increase
cytochrome P3A activity 
(e.g., rifabutin) can lead to increased clearance of other drugs (e.g., protease inhibitors
and non-nucleoside 
reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors),  and  increased  toxicity  might  be  observed  with
concomitant  administration  of  drugs  competing  for  the  same  metabolic  pathways.
Therefore,  drug  interactions  should  be  checked  carefully,  and  more  intensive  toxicity
monitoring might be warranted if such drugs are given concomitantly 
(AIII).  A  decrease  in  rifabutin  dosage  by  50%  is  required  when  coadministered  with
ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, amprenavir, or ritonavir-boosted saquinavir; an increased
dose (by 50%--100%) of rifabutin is needed when coadministered with efavirenz 
(117).  Rifabutin  should  not  be  coadministered  with  delavirdine  or  hard  gel  capsule
saquinavir without ritonavir boosting because of 
substantial decreases in the concomitant protease inhibitor drug levels 
(EII).
    Additional drugs can be considered depending on severity of illness. In a patient with
severe illness, if 
rifabutin  cannot  be  administered,  ciprofloxacin,  levofloxacin  and  amikacin  or
streptomycin have been used 
(CIII). In one study in HIV-infected adults, amikacin did not provide additional clinical or
microbiologic benefit in a clinical trial 
of  disseminated  MAC  therapy  (136,137).  In  other  studies,  clofazamine  was  not
associated with clinical or 
microbiologic benefit and was associated with increased mortality and is therefore not
recommended 
(EII).
 Clarithromycin is adminstered at a dose of 7.5--15.0 mg/kg body weight orally twice
daily (maximum dose: 500 
mg  twice  daily)  (AI).  Major  toxicities  include  nausea,  diarrhea,  and  abdominal  pain.
Uncommon toxicities 
include
 headache,
 leukopenia,
 altered
 taste,
 and
 elevated
 transaminases.
Clarithromycin can inhibit hepatic metabolism of other drugs cleared by the liver, thus
potential drug interactions with concomitantly administered drugs need to 
be considered.
 Azithromycin  is  adminstered  at  a  dose  of  10--12  mg/kg  orally  once  daily  (maximum
dose: 500 mg daily) and can 
be  given  as  an  alternative  to  clarithromycin  (AII).  Major  toxicities  include  nausea,
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and 
possible  ototoxicity;  uncommon  adverse  effects  include  headache,  leukopenia,  and
elevated  transaminases.  Azithromycin  has  a  minor  effect  on  hepatic  metabolism  of
other drugs and has less drug interactions than clarithromycin 
(138).
 Ethambutol is adminstered at a dose of 15--25 mg/kg and is adminstered in single oral
dose (maximum dose: 
1.0 g) (AI). It is available only as a scored tablet. Although not approved for use among
children  because  of  concern  for  optic  nerve  toxicity  that  might  not  be  easily
recognizable  with  pediatric  use,  it  has  been  used  among  children  without  a  high
incidence of toxicity. The major toxicity is optic neuritis, with symptoms of blurry vision,
central scotomata, and red-
green  color  blindness,  which  is  usually  reversible  and  is  rare  at  doses  of  15  mg/kg.
Children receiving ethambutol 
should have monthly monitoring of visual acuity and color discrimination if possible 
(AII).  Other  toxicities  include  headache,  nausea,  peripheral  neuropathy,  rash,  and
hyperuricemia.
 Rifabutin is adminstered at a dose of 10--20 mg /kg orally once daily (maximum dose:
300 mg/day) 
(AI). The drug is not available in a liquid formulation, but a suspension (10 mg/mL in
cherry  or  simple  syrup)  can  be  formulated  from  the  contents  of  capsules.  Major
toxicities of rifabutin include leukopenia, gastrointestinal upset, polyarthralgias, 
rash,  elevated  transaminases,  and  skin  and  secretion  discoloration  (pseudojaundice).
Anterior  uveitis  has  been  reported  in  adults  and  children  receiving  rifabutin  as
prophylaxis  or  a  part  of  a  combination  regimen  for  treatment,  usually  when
adminstered at higher doses (139).
 Ciprofloxacin  is  adminstered  at  a  dose  of  20--30  mg/kg  intravenously  or  orally  once
daily (maximum dose: 1.5 
grams). Adverse effects of quinolones include gastrointestinal upset, diarrhea, rash, and
headache. Cartilage damage has been observed with use of the fluoroquinolone drugs
in  animals,  and  theoretically,  these  drugs  can  have  an  effect  on  growing  cartilage  in
children.  They  are  not  approved  for  persons  aged  <18  years  and  use  in  younger
persons requires an assessment of potential risks and benefits 
(119) (CIII). Of the quinolone drugs, ciprofloxacin has had the greatest 
use  among  children  and  appears  to  be  well-tolerated  and  not  associated  with
arthropathy 
(120).
 Amikacin can be adminstered at a total daily dose of 15--30 mg/kg/day divided every
12--24  hours  (maximum  dose:  1.5  grams)  (CIII).  Amikacin  is  available  only  for
intravenous administration and might be useful as a second-line agent. Ototoxicity and
renal toxicity are adverse effects.
 Most patients demonstrate substantial clinical improvement during the first 4--6 weeks
of therapy. 
Microbiologic response can be monitored by blood cultures every 4 weeks during initial
therapy 
(BIII).  However,  elimination  of  the  organism  from  the  blood  might  require  up  to  12
weeks  of  effective  therapy.  An  immune  reconstitution  syndrome  in  patients  receiving
MAC therapy in the setting of HAART has been reported among HIV-infected adults 
(140).  New  onset  of  systemic  symptoms,  especially  fever  or  abdominal  pain,
leukocytosis, and focal lymphadenitis (cervical, 
thoracic,  or abdominal) associated  with  pre-existing  but relatively  asymptomatic  MAC
infection, has been seen after 
starting HAART. Before initiation of HAART among HIV-infected children with low 
CD4+ cell counts, consideration should 
be given for an assessment for MAC and treatment if MAC is identified. However, recent
data indicate that 
MAC  prophylaxis  with  azithromycin  did  not  prevent  the  development  of  immune
reconstitution disease 
(141).  Children  with  moderate  symptoms  of  immune  reconstitution  syndrome  can  be
treated symptomatically with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or, if unresponsive
to nonsteroidals, a short course (e.g., 4 weeks) of systemic corticosteroid 
therapy while continuing to receive HAART (CIII).
 Among  HIV-infected  children  with  MAC  disease,  after  initial  therapy,  lifetime  chronic
suppressive 
maintenance  therapy  for  MAC  (secondary  prophylaxis)  is  required.  Although
discontinuation  of  secondary  prophylaxis  in  adults  receiving  HAART  has  been
evaluated,  the  safety  of  discontinuation  of  secondary  prophylaxis  after  immunologic
recovery with HAART among children has not been studied extensively.
Serious and Recurrent Bacterial Infections
 
Epidemiology
 In  an  evaluation  of  opportunistic  infections  diagnosed  in  approximately  3,000
HIV-infected children participating 
in Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group protocols in the pre-HAART era, serious bacterial
infections were the 
most commonly diagnosed infection, with an event rate of 15/100 child-years 
(9). Pneumonia was the most common 
bacterial  infection  (11  per  100  child-years),  followed  by  bacteremia  (three/100
child-years),  and  urinary  tract  infection  (two/100  child-years).  Other  serious  bacterial
infections, including osteomyelitis, meningitis, abscess, and septic arthritis, occurred at
rates <0.2/100-child years.
 Acute  pneumonia  was  associated  with  increased  risk  for  long-term  mortality  among
HIV-infected children in 
one study, although multiple episodes of acute pneumonia probably represent a marker
for progressive disease 
and  immunologic  dysfunction  rather  than  being  causally  associated  with  increased
long-term mortality 
(142).  Because  of  difficulties  obtaining  appropriate  specimens  (e.g.,  sputum)  from
young children, bacterial pneumonia is most often a presumptive diagnosis in a child
with fever, pulmonic symptoms, and an abnormal chest radiogram unless 
an 
accompanying  bacteremia  exists.  In  a  study  of  intravenous  immune  globulin
prophylaxis of bacterial infections, 
only  12%  of  acute  presumed  bacterial  pneumonia  episodes  had  a  bacterial  pathogen
identified 
(142).  Chronic  lung  disease  might  predispose  persons  to  development  of  acute
pneumonia;  in  one  study,  the  incidence  of  acute  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  in
HIV-infected children with chronic lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis was approximately 
10-fold higher than in a community-based study of non-HIV--infected children 
(143).
 In  a  study  of  1,215  hospitalized  South  African  children  with  lower  respiratory  tract
infections, HIV infection 
was  identified  in  45.1%;  bacteremia  occurred  in  14.9%  of  HIV-infected  and  6.5%  of
uninfected children with 
pneumonia (144). The estimated relative incidence of bacteremic pneumonia caused by
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae 
type b (Hib), Staphylococcus aureus, or 
Escherichia coli was higher in HIV-infected than uninfected 
children. These organisms were more likely to be resistant to common antibiotics (e.g.,
methicillin,  penicillin,  and  trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole)  in  HIV-infected  children.
Mortality  was  higher  among  HIV-infected  than  uninfected  children  with  pneumonia
(13.1% versus 2.1%, respectively).
  Streptococcus  pneumoniae  is  the  most  prominent  invasive  bacterial  pathogen  in
children  with  HIV  infection  both  in  the  United  States  and  worldwide,  accounting  for
>50% of bacterial blood-stream infections in HIV-infected 
children  (9,145--148).  HIV-infected  children  have  a  markedly  increased  risk  for
pneumococcal infection compared with those who are not HIV-infected (149,150). The
incidence  of  invasive  pneumococcal  disease  is  6.1  cases/100  patient-years  among
HIV-infected children through age 7 years 
(151).
 In  studies  from  Malawi  and  South  Africa  of  approximately  600  children  (36%
HIV-infected) with acute 
bacterial  meningitis,  HIV-infected  children  were  substantially  more  likely  than  those
without HIV infection to have 
S. pneumoniae as the cause of their meningitis (58% and 74% of HIV-infected children
in Malawi and South 
African  studies,  respectively,  compared  with  32%  and  29%  in  children  without  HIV
infection) 
(152,153). The high incidence of invasive pneumococcal infections among HIV-infected
children does not appear to be caused by increased rates of asymptomatic colonization
with S. 
pneumoniae (154,155).
 Among  children  with  invasive  pneumococcal  infections,  studies  vary  on  whether
penicillin-resistant 
pneumococci  strains  are  more  commonly  isolated  from  HIV-infected  than  uninfected
persons 
(147,151,156--158).  Although  reports  among  children  without  HIV  infection  have  not
demonstrated a difference in the case-fatality rate in those with penicillin-susceptible
and  nonsusceptible  pneumococcal  infections  (case-fatality  rate  was  associated  with
severity 
of  disease  and  underlying  illness)  (159),  in  a  multivariate  analysis  of  mortality  in
HIV-infected,  predominantly  adult  patients  with  pneumococcal  bacteremia,  high-level
penicillin-resistance, the severity of illness, and Hispanic ethnicity were independently
associated with mortality 
(160).
 Hib  also  has  been  reported  to  be  more  common  in  HIV-infected  children  before
availability of Hib vaccine. In a 
study  in  South  African  children  who  had  not  received  Hib  conjugate  vaccine,  the
estimated relative annual rate of 
overall  invasive  Hib  disease  in  children  aged  <1  year  was  5.9  times  greater  among
HIV-infected  than  uninfected  children,  and  HIV-infected  children  were  also  at  greater
risk for having bacteremic pneumonia 
(161).
 Although  the  frequency  of  gram-negative  bacteremia  is  lower  than  gram-positive
bacteremia among 
HIV-infected children, gram-negative bacteremia is more common among children with
advanced HIV disease or 
immunosuppression or those with central venous catheters. However, in children aged
<5  years,  gram-negative  bacteremia  also  was  observed  among  children  with  milder
levels of immune suppression. In a study of 680 HIV-infected children in Miami, 
Florida,  through  1997,  a  total  of  72  (10.6%)  had  95  episodes  of  gram-negative
bacteremia;  the  predominant  organisms  identified  in  those  with  gram-negative
bacteremia were 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (26%), 
nontyphoidal Salmonella (15%), Escherichia coli 
(15%), and Haemophilus influenzae 
(13%) (162). The relative frequency of the organisms varied 
over time, with the relative frequency of P. 
aeruginosa bacteremia increasing from 13% before 1984 to 56% during 
1995--1997 and Salmonella from 7% before 1984 to 22% during 1995--1997. However, 
H. influenzae was not observed after 1990 (presumably decreasing after incorporation
of  Hib  vaccine  into  routine  childhood  vaccinations).  The  overall  case-fatality  rate  for
gram-negative bacteremia was 43%.
 The presence of a central venous catheter increases the risk for bacterial infections in
HIV-infected children, but 
the incidence is similar to that observed among children with cancer 
(163). S. aureus is the most commonly 
isolated pathogen in catheter-associated bacteremia in HIV-infected children 
(163). P. aeroginosa also is common. 
Other organisms associated with catheter-associated bacteremia include 
S. epidermidis, Enterococcus, and Bacillus cereus.
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Clinical  presentation  will  be  dependent  on  the  particular  type  of  recurrent  bacterial
infection (e.g., bacteremia/sepsis, osteomyelitis/septic arthritis, pneumonia, meningitis,
and sinusitis/otitis media) 
(164).  HIV-infected  children  with  invasive  bacterial  infections  typically  have  a  clinical
presentation similar to children without HIV infection, with an acute presentation and
fever 
(150,151,165). Studies have indicated that HIV-infected children might be less likely 
than children without HIV infection to have leukocytosis 
(151).
 The classical signs, symptoms, and laboratory test abnormalities that usually indicate
invasive bacterial infection 
(e.g.,  fever  and  elevated  white  blood  cell  count)  are  usually  present  but  might  be
lacking  among  HIV-infected  children  having  reduced  immune  competence  (150,164).
One  third  of  HIV-infected  children  who  experience  acute  pneumonia  have  recurrent
episodes (142).
 In studies in Malawian and South African children with acute bacterial meningitis, the
clinical presentation 
of children with and without HIV infection was similar 
(152,153). However, in the Malawi study, HIV-infected 
children  were  6.4-fold  more  likely  to  have  recurrent  meningitis  than  children  without
HIV  infection,  although  the  study  did  not  differentiate  recrudescence  from  new
infections 
(152). In both studies, HIV-infected children were more likely to die 
of meningitis than children without HIV infection.
 
Diagnosis
 Attempted isolation of a pathogenic organism from normally sterile sites (e.g., blood,
CSF, and pleural fluid) 
is  strongly  recommended.  This  is  particularly  important  because  of  an  increasing
incidence of antimicrobial resistance, including penicillin-resistant S. 
pneumoniae and community-acquired methicillin-resistant 
S. aureus.
 The diagnosis of pneumonia is most typically made on the basis of clinical (e.g., fever,
dyspnea,
 tachypnea,
 cough,
 and
 rales)
 and
 radiographic
 findings,
 although
differenciating  viral  from  bacterial  pneumonia  clinically  is  difficult  (166).  Sputum
induction obtained by nebulization with hypertonic (5%) saline has been evaluated for
diagnosis  of  pneumonia  in  210  South  African  infants  and  children  (median  age:  6
months), 66% of whom had HIV infection 
(167). The procedure was well-tolerated, and identified an etiology in 63% of children
with pneumonia (identification of bacteria in 101, M. tuberculosis in 19, and PCP in 12
children). Culture of blood and pleural fluid, if present, should be done.  Among children
with bacterimia, a source for the bacteremia should be sought. In addition to routine 
chest  radiographs,  other  diagnostic  radiologic  evaluations  might  be  necessary  (e.g.,
chest, abdomen, and ultrasound 
studies)  among  HIV-infected  children  with  compromised  immune  systems  to  identify
less apparent foci of infection (e.g., bronchiectasis and internal organ abscesses) 
(168--170). Among children with central venous catheters, both 
a peripheral and catheter blood culture should be obtained; if the catheter is removed,
the catheter tip should be sent for culture. Assays for detection of bacterial antigens or
evidence by molecular biology techniques are important for the diagnostic evaluation of
HIV-infected  children  in  whom  unusual  pathogens  might  be  involved  or  difficult  to
identify or culture by standard techniques. For example, 
Bordetella pertussis and Chlamydia 
pneumoniae can be identified by a PCR assay of nasopharyngeal secretions 
(166).
 
Treatment 
 The
 local
 prevalence
 of
 resistance
 to
 common
 infectious
 agents
 (i.e.,
penicillin-resistant 
S. pneumoniae and methicillin-resistant S. 
aureus)  and  the  recent  use  of  prophylactic  or  therapeutic  antibiotics  should  be
considered when 
initiating  empiric  therapy.  When  the  organism  is  identified,  antibiotic  susceptibility
testing should be performed and therapy based on the results of susceptibility testing 
(AII). 
 HIV-infected  children  whose  immune  systems  are  not  seriously  compromised  (CDC
Immune Class I) and who are 
not  neutropenic  can  be  expected  to  respond  similarly  to  HIV-uninfected  children  and
should be treated with the 
usual antimicrobial agents recommended for the most likely bacterial organisms 
(AIII).  For  example,  for  HIV-infected  children  outside  of  the  neonatal  period  with
suspected community-acquired bacteremia, bacterial pneumonia, or meningitis, empiric
therapy with an extended-spectrum cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone (80--100 mg/kg
body 
weight in 1 or 2 divided doses [maximum daily adult dose: 4 g]), cefotaxime (150--200
mg/kg divided into 3 or 4 
doses [maximum daily adult dose: 8--10 g]), or 
cefuroxime (100--150 mg/kg divided into 3 doses [maximum daily adult dose: 4--6 g]) is
reasonable until culture results are available (166,171) (AIII).
 Initial empiric therapy of HIV-infected children with suspected catheter sepsis should
include coverage for both gram-positive and enteric gram-negative organisms, such as
ceftazidime  (125--150  mg/kg  divided  into  3  doses  [maximum  daily  adult  dose:  6  g]),
which has 
anti-Pseudomonas activity, and vancomycin (40--60 mg/kg divided into 4 
doses [maximum daily adult dose: 2--4 g]) to cover 
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (AIII). Severely immunocompromised 
HIV-infected  children  with  invasive  or  recurrent  bacterial  infections  might  require
expanded  empiric  antimicrobial  treatment  covering  a  broad  range  of  resistant
organisms similar to that chosen for suspected catheter 
sepsis pending results of diagnostic evaluations and cultures 
(AIII).
 HIV-infected children aged <5 years should receive Hib and heptavalent pneumococcal
conjugate vaccines 
(AII). In a placebo-controlled trial of a 9-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine among
South African children, although 
vaccine  efficacy  was  somewhat  lower  among  children  with  HIV  infection  than  those
without (65% versus 85%, 
respectively),  the  incidence  of  invasive  pneumococcal  disease  was  substantially
decreased among HIV-infected vaccine recipients (157). HIV-infected children aged >2
years  also  should  receive  the  23-valent  pneumococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  (>2
months  after  their  last  conjugate  vaccine  dose),  with  a  single  revaccination  with  the
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine 3--5 years later if the child is aged <10 years or
after 5 years if the child is aged >10 years 
(4,172) (AIII).
Syphilis
 
Epidemiology
 Treponema  pallidum  can  be  transmitted  from  mother  to  child  at  any  stage  of
pregnancy or during delivery. 
Untreated  or  inadequately  treated  primary  and  secondary  syphilis  during  pregnancy
leads to congenital infection in 60%--100% 
of infants. Treatment of the mother for syphilis 
>30 days before delivery is required for effective in utero 
treatment.
 Congenital  syphilis  has  been  reported  despite  adequate  maternal  treatment.  Factors
that contribute to 
treatment failure include maternal stage of syphilis (early stage), advancing gestational
age at treatment, higher VDRL 
(Venereal  Disease  Research  Laboratory)  titers  at  treatment  and  delivery,  and  short
interval  from  treatment  to  delivery  (<30  days)  (173,174).  In  2000,  the  rate  of
congenital  syphilis  among  HIV  uninfected  infants  was  13.4  cases/100,000  live-born
infants compared with 27.8 cases in 1997 
(175). During that same time, the prevalence of primary and 
secondary syphilis in women of reproductive age also decreased substantially. 
 Drug  use  during  pregnancy,  particularly  cocaine,  is  substantially  associated  with  an
increased risk for maternal 
and congenital syphilis (176). Infants born to HIV-infected women have a substantially
higher rate for congenital syphilis than in the general population. One large U.S. study
conducted during 1988--1994 reported the rate of 
congenital  syphilis  was  approximately  50  times  greater  among  infants  born  to
HIV-infected women 
(177). Although mother-to-child HIV transmission does not appear to be increased when
syphilis  is  effectively  treated  before  pregnancy  (178),  concurrent  coinfection  during
pregnancy might increase the rate for perinatal HIV transmission 
(177,178).
 Half of all new HIV infections in the United States occur among persons aged 15--24
years, with most 
infections  transmitted  sexually.  In  addition,  approximately  two  thirds  of  the  sexually
transmitted diseases diagnosed annually 
in the United States occur among persons aged <24 years. As a result, the prevalence
and incidence of syphilis among HIV-infected youth and of HIV infection among youth
with  syphilis  is  expected  to  be  higher  than  the  general  population.  In  a  study  of  320
HIV-infected  and  uninfected  adolescents  aged  12--19  years  in  the  United  States,  the
prevalence  of  syphilis  was  9%  among  HIV-infected  girls  and  6%  among  HIV-infected
boys 
(179). In a meta-analysis of 30 studies, the median HIV seroprevalence among persons
infected with syphilis in the United States was 15.7% (27.5% among men and 12.4%
among women with syphilis) 
(180).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Untreated early syphilis during pregnancy can lead to spontaneous abortion, stillbirth,
hydrops fetalis, 
preterm delivery, and perinatal death in up to 40% of pregnancies 
(181). In a study of 148 infants born to mothers 
with  untreated  or  inadequately  treated  syphilis,  47%  had  clinical,  radiographic,  or
conventional laboratory findings 
consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of  congenital  syphilis,  and  44%  had  a  positive  rabbit
infectivity test, PCR assay, or IgM immunoblot 
of serum, blood, or CSF (182).
 At birth, approximately 60% of infants with congenital syphilis are asymptomatic 
(183). If untreated, symptoms can occur within 3 weeks--6 months after birth and might
include  hepatosplenomegaly,  jaundice,  mucocutaneous  lesions,  skin  rash,  nasal
discharge,
 pseudoparalysis
 of
 an
 extremity,
 anemia,
 thrombocytopenia,
 and
osteochondritis. 
Late manifestations of congenital syphilis (after age 2 years) involve CNS, bones, teeth,
eyes,  and  skin.  Manifestations  include  mental  retardation,  interstitial  keratitis,  cranial
nerve  deafness,  anterior  bowing  of  the  skin,  frontal  bossing,  mulberry  molars,
Hutchinson teeth, saddle nose, rhaades, and Clutton joints. HIV-infected persons with 
acquired  early  syphilis  might  be  at  increased  risk  for  neurological  complications  and
uveitis and have higher rates of treatment failure.  
Diagnosis
 The standard serologic tests for syphilis in adults are based on the measurement of IgG
antibody. Because 
IgG  antibody  in  the  infant  reflects  transplacental  passively  transferred  antibody  from
the mother, interpretation of 
reactive serologic tests for syphilis among infants is difficult. Therefore, the diagnosis of
neonatal congenital syphilis depends 
on a combination of results from physical, radiologic, serologic, and direct microscopic
examinations.
 All  infants  born  to  women  with  reactive  nontreponemal  and  treponemal  test  results
should be evaluated with 
a quantitative nontreponemal test (e.g., VDRL slide test, rapid plasma regain (RPR), and
the automated regain test). Testing should be performed on neonatal serum because of
the potential for maternal blood contamination of the umbilical cord blood specimens.
Performing  specific  treponemal  tests,  such  as  the  fluorescent  treponemal  antibody
absorption (FTA-ABS) test and T. 
pallidum particle agglutination (TP-PA) test, is not necessary for evaluation 
of  congenital  syphilis  in  the  neonate.  No  commercially  available  IgM  test  is
recommended  for  diagnostic  use.   Darkfield  microscopic  examination  or  direct
fluorescent antibody staining of lesions or body fluids should 
be  performed,  although  false-negative  results  are  common.  Definitive  diagnosis  of
congenital syphilis can be made 
if  T.  pallidum  is  detected  in  umbilical  cord,  placenta,  nasal  discharge,  or  skin  lesion
material.  Pathologic  examination  of  placenta  and  umbilical  cord  with  specific
fluoroscent antitreponemal antibody staining is recommended.
 Evaluation  of  suspected  cases  of  congenital  syphilis  should  include  a  physical
examination, complete blood 
count,  differential  and  platelet  count,  and  CSF  analysis  for  VDRL,  cell  count,  and
protein.
 HIV-infected
 infants
 might
 have
 increased
 cell
 counts
 and
 protein
concentrations even in the absence of neurosyphilis. Other tests should be performed
as  clinically  indicated  (e.g.,  long-bone  radiographs,  chest  radiograph,  liver-function
tests, cranial ultrasound, ophthalmologic examination, and auditory brainstem 
response).
 A presumptive case of syphilis is defined as an infant born to a mother with untreated
or inadequately treated 
syphilis at delivery, regardless of findings in the infant, or any infant who has a reactive
treponemal test result and clinical signs or symptoms of congenital syphilis on physical
examination, or an abnormal CSF finding without other cause or 
positive CSF VDRL.
 For diagnosis of acquired syphilis, a reactive nontreponemal test must be confirmed by
a specific treponemal test 
such as FTA-ABS or TP-PA. These tests will remain positive for life, even with successful
treatment.  The  prozone  phenomenon  (a  weakly  reactive  or  falsely  negative)  reaction
might occur more frequently in HIV-infected persons 
(184). Treponemal antibody titers do not correlate with disease activity and should not
be  used  to  monitor  treatment  response.  CSF  evaluation  should  be  performed  among
HIV-infected adolescents with acquired syphilis who have neurologic or 
ocular symptoms or signs, although some clinicians recommend a CSF examination for
all 
HIV-infected patients.
 
Treatment
 Data  are  insufficient  about  whether  infants  who  have  congenital  syphilis  and  whose
mothers are coinfected with 
HIV require different evaluation, therapy, or follow-up for syphilis than is recommended
for all infants 
(185).  Some  studies  in  adults  have  shown  a  lag  in  serological  improvement  in
appropriately treated patients with HIV infection (186).
 Infants should be treated if mothers have untreated or inadequately treated syphilis
(including treatment 
with erythromycin or any other nonpenicillin regimen) or no documentation of having
received treatment; received 
treatment  <4  weeks  before  delivery;  been  treated  with  penicillin  but  titers  did  not
decrease by four-fold; or have four-fold 
or greater increase in nontreponemal antibody titer suggesting relapse or reinfection 
(185)  (AII).  Infants  should  be  treated  regardless  of  maternal  history  if  an  abnormal
examination  consistent  with  congenital  syphilis,  positive  darkfield  or  fluorescent
antibody test of body fluid(s), or serum quantitative nontreponemal serologic titer that
is the same or 
four-fold greater than maternal titer are observed 
(185) (AII).
 Treatment  for  proven  or  highly  probable  congenital  syphilis  is  aqueous  crystalline
penicillin G at a dose of 
100,000--150,000  units/kg/day,  administered  as  50,000  units/kg  body  weight/dose
intravenously every 12 hours during the first 7 days of life and every 8 hours thereafter
for a total of 10 days 
(AII). If congenital syphilis is diagnosed after 1 month 
of  life,  the  dose  of  aqueous  penicillin  G  should  be  increased  to  200,000--300,000
units/kg  intravenously  every  6  hours  for  10  days  (AII).  An  alternative  to  aqueous
penicillin G is procaine penicillin G at a dose of 50,000 
units/kg/dose intramuscularly/day in a single dose for 10 days 
(BII). However, aqueous penicillin G is preferred because of its 
higher penetration into the CSF.
 Asymptomatic  infants  born  to  mothers  who  have  had  adequate  treatment  and
response to therapy and normal 
physical  examination  and  CSF  findings  but  who  have  a  serum  quantitative
nontreponemal serologic titer that is the same or four-fold higher than maternal titer
might be treated with a single dose of benzathine penicillin G 50,000 
units/kg/dose intramuscularly with careful clinical and serologic follow-up 
(BII). However, certain health-care providers would 
treat  such  infants  with  the  standard  10  days  of  aqueous  penicillin  because  physical
examination and laboratory test results cannot definitively exclude congenital syphilis
in all cases 
(BII).
 Infants with treated congenital syphilis should be examined at age 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12
months, with 
serologic nontreponemal tests performed at age 3, 6 and 12 months after conclusion of
treatment or until results 
become  nonreactive  (AIII).  If  initial  CSF  examination  was  abnormal,  repeat  lumbar
puncture should be conducted every 6 months until results are normal. Nontreponemal
antibody titers should decline by age 3 months and be nonreactive by age 6 months if
the infant was adequately treated or not infected (e.g., passive antibody transfer from
mother). 
Children with increasing titers or persistently positive titers (even if low levels) at age
6--12 months should be evaluated and considered for retreatment (AIII). Children with
congenital syphilis who also are HIV-infected might take longer 
to become nonreactive and might require retreatment.
 Acquired  syphilis  is  treated  with  a  single  dose  of  benzathine  penicillin  G  50,000
units/kg intramuscularly for 
early stage disease (e.g., primary, secondary, and early latent disease) 
(AII). For late latent disease, 3 doses of 
benzathine  penicillin  G  50,000  units/kg  should  be  administered  intramuscularly  once
weekly for 3 doses 
(AIII).  Alternative  therapies  (e.g.,  doxycycline,  ceftriaxone,  or  azithromycin)  have  not
been  evaluated  among  HIV-infected  patients  and  should  not  be  used  as  first-line
therapy (185) 
(EIII). Neurosyphilis should be treated with aqueous penicillin 
G  200,000--300,000  units/kg  intravenously  every  6  hours  (maximum  dose:  18--24
million units/day) for 10--14 
days (AII).
 Children  and  adolescents  with  acquired  syphilis  should  have  clinical  and  serologic
response monitored at age 3, 6, 
9, 12, and 24 months after therapy (BIII). Nontreponemal test titers should decline by at
least four-fold by 6--12 
months  after  successful  therapy.  If  initial  CSF  examination  was  abnormal,  repeat
lumbar puncture should be conducted at 3 
and 6 months after therapy and then every 6 months until results are normal and VDRL
is negative.
Candida Infections
 
Epidemiology
 The most common fungal infections among HIV-infected children are caused by 
Candida  species.  Oral  thrush  and  diaper  dermatitis  occur  among  50%--85%  of
HIV-infected children. 
Candida albicans is the most common cause 
of mucosal and esophageal candidiasis.
 Candida  esophagitis  is  reported  as  the  AIDS-defining  condition  in  approximately
12%--16% of children aged 
<13 years in the United States, and continues to be seen in the post-HAART era among
children who are not responding to therapy (187,188). The condition is often associated
with low 
CD4+ cell count (<100/µl), high viral load, 
and neutropenia (<500/µL) within 4 weeks of the episode (9,187,189). In the pre-HAART
era, concomitant 
oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC) occurred in 94% of children with candida esophagitis
(187). In one study of HIV-infected 
children, the strongest risk factors for esophageal candidiasis were OPC and low 
CD4+  count  and  percentage.  Children  who  develop  esophageal  candidiasis  despite
being treated with HAART are less likely to have typical symptoms (e.g., odynophagia
and retrosternal pain) or have concomitant OPC 
(189). Laryngeal and epiglottal candidiasis also have 
been reported (190). 
 Disseminated candidiasis is infrequent among HIV-infected children, but 
Candida can disseminate from the esophagus particularly when coinfection with HSV or
CMV is present 
(187,191).   Fungemia  occurs  in  up  to  12%  of  HIV-infected  children  with  chronically
indwelling central venous catheters for total parental nutrition or intravenous antibiotics
(188,192).  Approximately  50%  of  reported  cases  of  fungemia  among  HIV-infected
children are caused 
by non-albicans Candida species including 
C. tropicalis, C. pseudotropicalis, C. parapsilosis, C. glabrata, C. 
krusei,and C. dubliniensis. A substantial number of children who develop fungemia have
received systemically absorbed oral 
antifungal  azole  compounds  (ketoconazole  or  fluconazole)  for  control  of  oral  and
esophageal candidiasis 
(188).
 Common  complications  of  disseminated  candidiasis  include  endophthalmitis,
hepatosplenic, and renal 
candidiasis,  and  osteomyelitis.  Early  detection  and  treatment  of  candidemia  can
decrease  mortality.  Overall  mortality  was  90%  in  one  study  in  children  who  had  >14
days  of  fever  and  symptoms  before  diagnosis  of  disseminated  infection  with  Candida
species (191).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Clinical manifestations of OPC are variable and include pseudomembranous (thrush),
erythematous 
(atrophic), hyperplastic (hypertrophic), and angular cheilitis. Thrush is the most classic
form  of  oral  candidiasis,  appearing  as  creamy  white  curdlike  patches  with  inflamed
underlying mucosa that is exposed after removal of the exudate. It can 
be found on the oropharyngeal mucosa, palate, and tonsils. Erythematous OPC are flat
erythematous lesions on 
the  mucosal  surface.  Hyperplastic  candidiasis  is  composed  of  raised  white  plaques
appearing on the lower surface of the tongue, palate, and buccal mucosa and cannot be
removed. Angular cheilitis occurs as red, fissured lesions in the corners of the mouth.
 Esophageal candidiasis can present with odynophagia, dysphagia, or retrosternal pain,
which can be severe enough to cause dehydration and weight loss in children. Although
common, evidence of oropharyngeal candidiasis might 
be  absent  among  children  with  esophageal  candidiasis,  particularly  those  receiving
HAART. Unlike adults, a substantial number of children might experience nausea and 
vomiting.
 New onset fever in an HIV-infected child with advanced disease and a central venous
catheter  is  the  most  common  clinical  manifestation  of  candidemia.  Renal  candidiasis
might
 appear
 with
 candiduria
 and
 ultrasonographically
 demonstrated
 renal
parenchymal lesions without symptoms related to renal disease 
(188).  Systemic  fungemia  can  lead  to  endogenous  endophthalmitis,  and  ocular
examination  by  an  ophthalmologist  might  be  warranted  among  children  with
candidemia.
 
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis  of  oral  candidiasis  can  be  made  by  a  KOH  preparation  and  culture  with
microscopic demonstration 
of budding yeast cells in wet mounts or biopsy specimens. For recurrent or refractory
OPC, cultures with 
in vitro susceptibility testing can be used to guide antifungal 
treatment (193).
 Esophageal candidiasis has a classic cobblestoning appearance on barium swallow. In
refractory symptomatic cases, endoscopy should be performed to rule out other causes
of  refractory  esophagitis  (e.g.,  herpes  simplex  virus  [HSV],  CMV,  MAC,  and
azole-resistant Candida 
species). Endoscopy might show few small white raised plaques to 
elevated confluent plaques with hyperemia and extensive ulceration.
 Diagnosis  of  candidemia  is  best  made  with  blood  cultures  using  lysis-centrifugation
techniques 
(188) or automated broth based systems 
(194).  When  fungemia  is  present,  retinal  examination  for  endophthalmitis,  abdominal
CT 
or  ultrasound  for  hepatic  or  renal  involvement,  and  bone  scans  if  osteomyelitis  is
clinically suspected might be appropriate. 
Treatment
 
Oropharyngeal Candidiasis
 
Esophageal Disease
 
Invasive Disease
 
Epidemiology
 Cryptococcal infections occur much less frequently among HIV-infected children (1%)
than adults 
(191,222,223). Infection primarily occurs among HIV-infected children aged 6--12 years
and
 most
 frequently
 in
 those
 with
 CD4+
 cell
 counts
 indicating
 severe
immunosuppression.  
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Meningoencephalitis  is  the  most  common  initial  manifestation  of  cryptococcosis.  It
typically evolves over days 
to  weeks  with  fever,  headache,  and  altered  mental  status.  In  the  United  States,
meningismus, photophobia, and 
focal neurological signs are uncommon presenting symptoms in children 
(191,223). However, in Zimbabwe, 
cryptococcal meningoencephalitis presents more acutely, with up to 70% of children in
one study presenting with nuchal rigidity, approximately 40% with seizure activity, and
approximately 20% having focal neurologic signs 
(224). CNS mass lesions (cryptococcomas) have not been reported among 
children. 
 The skin might be secondarily involved in disseminated cryptococcosis. Lesions might
be small, 
translucent  umbilicated  papules  indistinguishable  from  molluscum  contagiosum,
nodules,  or  ulcers  or  infiltrated  plaques  resembling  cellulitis.  Cutaneous  lesions  have
been  reported  as  the  presenting  manifestation  of  disseminated  cryptococcosis  in  an
HIV-infected African child (225).
 Pulmonary  cryptococcus  without  dissemination  is  unusual  among  children  but  can
present as unexplained 
recurrent fever, cough with scant sputum, intrathoracic lymphadenopathy, and focal or
diffuse pulmonary infiltrates. It might be asymptomatic with pulmonary nodules found
on routine chest radiograph.
 
Diagnosis
 Among  HIV-infected  children  with  CNS  disease,  CSF  cell  count,  glucose,  and  protein
might be virtually normal, 
but the opening pressure is usually elevated 
(226). Similarly, results of computerized tomography scan usually 
are nonspecific but might show signs of increased intracranial pressure, hydrocephalus,
or focal lesions, especially in the basal ganglia. 
 For  diagnosis  of  suspected  CNS  disease,  microscopic  examination  of  CSF  on  India
ink-stained wet mounts should 
be performed. Cryptococcal antigen can be detected in CSF, serum, or bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid by latex 
agglutination
 test.
 However,
 CSF
 antigen
 detection
 might
 be
 negative
 in
culture-positive cryptococcal meningitis; high titers 
of  antigen  (prozone  effect),  low  levels  of  antigen,  or  nonencapsulated  strains  can
contribute to this effect 
(227,228).
 Cryptococcal antigen titers in CSF can be helpful in evaluating response to therapy or
ongoing relapse; 
however, changes in serum antigen titers do not correlate with clinical response. A rise
in CSF antigen titer during 
suppressive  therapy  is  associated  with  relapse.  Specifically,  a  CSF  titer  of  >1:8  after
completion of therapy appears to be indicative of treatment failure or pending relapse 
(229).
 Fungal  cultures  from  CSF,  sputum  and  blood  might  identify  the  organism,  with  the
lysis-centrifugation method 
being the most sensitive for blood specimens. Acapsular variants of 
Cryptococees neoformans can be identified using 
culture-based methods (230). In selected cases (e.g., in patients with refractory disease
or relapse) susceptibility testing of the C. neoformans isolate can be beneficial.
 Diffuse  pulmonary  disease  can  be  diagnosed  through  bronchoalveolar  lavage  and
direct examination of India 
ink-stained specimens, culture, and antigen detection. Focal pulmonary and skin lesions
might  require  biopsy  with  culture  and  staining.  Molecular  PCR-based  assays  using
primers  derived  from  5.8s  rRNA  and  18S  rRNA  have  been  used  on  an  investigational
basis.
 
Treatment
 Without treatment, cryptococcosis is fatal. Treatment for cryptococcal disease has not
been studied in a controlled manner in pediatric patients. Data from the adult literature
have  resulted  in  a  recommendation  for  the  use  of  combination  therapy  for  severe
cryptococcosis and cryptococcal meningitis 
(231) (AI). For children with severe 
disease  that  is  isolated  to  the  lungs,  amphotericin  B  induction  therapy,  usually
combined  with  an  initial  2  weeks  of  flucytosine,  is  recommended  until  symptoms  are
controlled 
(AI). After treatment of acute pulmonary disease, maintenance 
therapy with fluconazole or itraconazole is recommended.
 Adverse  effects  of  amphotericin  B  are  primarily  nephrotoxicity;  permanent
nephrotoxicity is related to 
cumulative  dose.  Nephrotoxicity  can  be  ameliorated  by  hydration  with  0.9%  saline
intravenously  over  30  minute  before  the  amphotericin  B  infusion.  Infusion-related
fevers, chills, nausea, and vomiting can occur, although they are less 
frequent in children than adults. Onset is usually within 1--3 hours after the infusion is
started,  typical  duration  is  <1  hour,  and  the  febrile  reactions  tend  to  decrease  in
frequency over time. Pretreatment with acetaminophen or 
diphenhydramine 
might  alleviate  febrile  reactions.  Idiosyncratic  reactions  including  hypotension,
arrhythmias, and allergic 
reactions,
 including
 anaphylaxis,
 occur
 less
 frequently.
 Hepatic
 toxicity,
thrombophlebitis, anemia, and neurotoxicity 
(manifested  as  confusion  or  delirium,  hearing  loss,  blurred  vision,  or  seizures)  also
might occur.
 Flucytosine  has  the  potential  for  considerable  toxicity,  especially  affecting  the  bone
marrow (anemia, leukopenia, 
and thrombocytopenia), liver, gastrointestinal tract, kidney, and skin. Levels should be
monitored and doses adjusted to 
keep  the  level  between  40--60  µg/mL,  particularly  in  patients  with  renal  impairment
where toxic levels can result in 
bone  marrow  suppression;  the  drug  should  be  avoided  among  children  with  severe
renal impairment 
(EIII).
 For  children  with  mild-to-moderate  cryptococcosis  that  is  isolated  to  the  lungs,
fluconazole alone can be used 
for  treatment  of  HIV-infected  children,  followed  by  life-long  suppressive  therapy  with
fluconazole 
(BII). Alternatively, itraconazole can be used for treatment and suppressive therapy 
(BII). Fluconazole and the other azoles have 
relatively low rates of toxicity, but have substantial drug interactions that can limit their
use.  Because  of  their  ability  to  inhibit  the  cytochrome  P-450-dependent  hepatic
enzymes, the potential for drug interactions, particularly with 
antiretroviral drugs, should be carefully evaluated before initiation of therapy 
(AIII). Skin rash and pruritis might be seen with 
all azole drugs, and rare cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome have been reported with
fluconazole. Asymptomatic increases 
in transaminases and, less frequently, hepatitis can occur; rare cases of fatal hepatitis
have been reported. 
Thrombocytopenia and leukopenia have been reported with itraconazole.
 For meningeal and extrameningeal cryptococcosis, initial therapy with the combination
of amphotericin B (at a dose 
of 0.7--1.5 mg/kg body weight/day) plus flucytosine (25 mg/kg/dose adminstered four
times 
daily) for a minimum of 2 weeks (induction) is recommended 
(AI). This regimen was superior to single-drug therapy with either amphotericin 
B or fluconazole in two clinical trials among HIV-infected adults 
(232).
 In  cases  of  cryptococcal  meningitis  where  flucytosine  cannot  be  administered,
amphotericin B 
alone can be administered (BI). Doses of 0.5--1.5 mg/kg/day of amphotericin B among
children being treated for cryptococcal meningitis have been well tolerated 
(222). Lipid formulations of amphotericin B have been used for treatment 
of  cryptococcal  meningitis  among  adults  and  might  be  useful  among  patients  with
impaired renal function, although 
the optimal dose has not been determined; liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome) at a
dose of 4 mg/kg daily has 
been  effective  (AI).  Children  treated  with  liposomal  amphotericin  B  (AmBisome)  at  a
dose of 2 mg/kg/day have had a 
good effect, and doses to 7.5 mg/kg/day have been used for refractory cases 
(233,234). Acute, infusion-related reactions 
might  be  seen  in  about  20%  of  patients  receiving  lipid  formulations,  including  chest
pain, dyspnea, hypoxia, severe 
abdomen, flank or leg pain, and flushing and urticarial. The majority of reactions occur
within the first 5 minutes of infusion and rapidly resolve with temporary interruption of
the amphotericin infusion and administration of 
intravenous diphenhydramine (221). Premedication with diphenhydramine can reduce
the  incidence  of  these  reactions.   Fluconazole  plus  flucytosine  (235)  is  superior  to
fluconazole  alone  and  provides  an  alternative  option  to  amphotericin  B  for  acute
therapy of invasive disease; however, little data is available on this combination among
children  (232)  (CIII).  The  combination  regimen  has  more  toxicity  than  treatment  with
fluconazole alone 
(232).
 After  successful  acute  induction  therapy  in  stable  patients,  amphotericin  B  and
flucytosine can be discontinued 
and  consolidation  therapy  with  fluconazole  (5-6  mg/kg/dose  intravenously  or  orally
adminstered twice daily) administered for a minimum of 8 weeks or until CSF cultures
are stable 
(193,232)  (AI).  Fluconazole  has  more  rapid  clearance  and  shorter  half-life  among
children than adults 
(236), and higher doses of fluconazole are recommended for treatment 
of  disseminated  disease.  Following  induction  and  consolidation  therapy,  maintenance
suppressive therapy with lower dose fluconazole should be instituted (AI). If fluconazole
cannot  be  administered,  itraconazole  is  an  alternative  for  consolidation  (2--5
mg/kg/dose administered twice daily), but might be less active than fluconazole 
(237)  (BI).  In  cases  of  refractory  cryptococcal  meningitis  where  systemic  antifungal
administration has failed, intrathecal or intraventricular amphotericin B has been used
(CII).
 Oral acetazolamide should not be used for reduction of elevated intracranial pressure
in cryptococcal 
meningitis (DIII); it was associated with an excess of severe acidosis, hypokalemia, and
other adverse effects compared with placebo in a clinical trial among adults 
(238). Recommendations for the management of elevated intracranial pressure are 
the same as for adults (4,232).
 Prevention  of  relapse  after  successful  treatment  requires  lifelong  suppressive
treatment; details on 
secondary prophylaxis (maintenance therapy) have been published 
(4). Safety of discontinuation of secondary 
prophylaxis following immune reconstitution with HAART among children has not been
studied extensively.
Histoplasmosis
 
Epidemiology
 The  incidence  of  disseminated  histoplasmosis  among  HIV-infected  pediatric  patients
living in the United States 
is 0.4% (239). Infection among children might be greater in Latin American countries
with reports ranging from 2.7% to 3.8% in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico 
(240,241). No evidence exists of histoplasmosis dissemination in the fetus or 
that infection is more severe during pregnancy. 
 
Clinical Manifestations
 The  most  common  presenting  symptom  among  children  and  adults  with  AIDS  with
disseminated histoplasmosis 
is  prolonged  fever.  In  comparison  with  adults,  children  predominantly  have  malaise,
weight loss, and nonproductive 
cough  (242,243).  In  addition,  interstitial  pneumonitis  as  seen  in  adults  is  rarely
observed among children, but a 
primary  pulmonary  focus  frequently  leads  to  widespread  dissemination  among
HIV-infected children. The most 
frequent physical finding is hepatosplenomegaly (89% in infants) 
(242). Cutaneous lesions that are erythematous and 
nodular might occur.
 CNS  involvement  with  meningitis  and  focal  brain  lesions  is  common  among
HIV-infected adults and might result from reactivated infection in the setting of low 
CD4+ cell number. Anemia and thrombocytopenia are the most 
common hematologic abnormalities found, although pancytopenia has been reported.
Elevated liver transaminases also occur.  
Diagnosis  
 Culture  of  the  organism  is  the  definitive  method  of  diagnosis.  Blood  cultures  using
lysis-centrifugation  blood  cultured  system  are  highly  sensitive  in  HIV-associated
disseminated  histoplasmosis,  but  the  organism  might  require  up  to  6  weeks  to  grow.
Identification of Histoplasma 
capsulatum can be shortened in cultures through the use of a DNA 
probe. Although PCR and DNA probes have been studied for detection of 
H. capsulatum DNA in tissues and body fluids, 
they have not been validated and are used only for research 
(244).
 Detection  of  H.  capsulatum  polysaccharide  antigen,  using  an  enzyme-linked
immunoassay (EIA), in 
urine,  bronchoalveolar  lavage  or  CSF,  and/or  serum  is  a  rapid,  sensitive,  and  specific
method for diagnosis; it can be 
detected  before  culture  positivity  and,  in  acute  histoplasmosis,  is  positive  before
antibody detection 
(244).  EIA  sensitivity  is  greatest  among  patients  with  disseminated  disease  or  acute
pulmonary  infection  and  less  with  chronic  or  reactivation  disease;  however,  primary
infection with acute disease is most common in children. EIA sensitivity is greater in 
urine  than  serum  because  patients  rarely  exhibit  antigenemia  without  antigenuria;
patients with pulmonary disease 
might have high antigen levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid 
(244).
 Antigen concentrations decline with treatment, and failure to decline in both urine and
serum indicates 
treatment failure; similarly, after a decline, an increase in antigen (>2--4 units) in urine
or serum indicates relapse (244). Cross-reacting antigens can occur in blastomycosis,
paracoccidioidmycosis, and 
Penicillium marneffei infections.
 Serologic tests to detect antibody to Histoplasma 
are positive in the majority of patients without HIV infection 
who have histoplasmosis; however, serologic tests are not useful for diagnosis of acute
histoplasmosis and might 
be undetectable in immunosuppressed patients 
(193). Histoplasmin skin tests are no longer available and were not 
useful for diagnosis of disseminated disease because >70% of tests are negative 
(242,243).
 Diagnosis of CNS disease is difficult, particularly if the patient has isolated meningitis
without disseminated disease. The highest sensitivity is achieved by testing CSF for 
Histoplasma antigen and antibody and culture: CSF culture is 
only  positive  in  20%--60%  of  patients,  CSF  antigen  is  positive  in  40%--70%,  and  CSF
antibody is positive in 70%--90% (244).
 
Treatment
 Disseminated  histoplasmosis  is  fatal  without  antifungal  treatment.  Treatment  for
disseminated  histoplasmosis  has  not  been  studied  in  a  controlled  manner  among
pediatric  patients.  Pediatric  treatment  recommendations  for  HIV-infected  children  are
based on data from the adult literature.  
 Among nonimmunocompromised HIV-infected adults who do not require hospitalization
and have mild symptoms 
of histoplasmosis, itraconazole alone has been used, administered for 3--4 months 
(245)  (AII).  Although  experience  with  itraconazole  among  children  is  limited,
itraconazole capsules at doses of 6--8 mg/kg body weight/day given for 3--12 months
has been used effectively for treatment of mild disseminated histoplasmosis in a limited
number 
of nonimmunocompromised children without HIV infection 
(246).
 High-dose fluconazole is an alternative for patients with mild 
histoplasmosis who cannot take itraconazole, but is 
less effective, and the organism can develop drug resistance (247) (CII). Because of the
ability of the azole drugs to 
inhibit  the  cytochrome  P-450-dependent  hepatic  enzymes,  the  potential  for  drug
interactions should be carefully 
evaluated  before  initiation  of  therapy  (AIII).  For  example,  cardiac  toxicity  among
patients  receiving  terfenadine  or  astemizole  has  been  reported  with  concomitant
itraconazole. The most frequent adverse effects of the azoles drugs are 
gastrointestinal,  including  nausea  and  vomiting.  Skin  rash  and  pruritis  might  be  seen
with azole drugs, and rare cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome have been reported with
fluconazole. Asymptomatic increases in transaminases might be observed in 1%--13%
of  patients  receiving  azole  drugs,  and  less  frequently,  hepatitis;  rare  cases  of  fatal
hepatitis  have  been  reported.  Thrombocytopenia  and  leukopenia  have  been  reported
with itraconazole.
 Among HIV-infected adults or children with more severe disseminated histoplasmosis
who require hospitalization 
or who are immunocompromised, amphotericin B is recommended for the initial phase
of induction therapy 
(AI).  Amphotericin  B  at  a  dose  of  1  mg/kg  for  an  average  of  30  days  has  been
effectively used for treatment of disseminated histoplasmosis in immunocompromised
non-HIV--infected children 
(243). The duration of amphotericin B 
therapy  among  HIV-infected  children  is  usually  4--6  weeks,  followed  by  itraconazole
chronic suppressive therapy.
 Adverse  effects  of  amphotericin  B  are  primarily  nephrotoxicity;  permanent
nephrotoxicity is related to 
cumulative  dose.  Nephrotoxicity  can  be  ameliorated  by  hydration  with  0.9%  saline
intravenously  over  30  minute  before  the  amphotericin  B  infusion.  Infusion-related
fevers, chills, nausea, and vomiting might occur, although they are 
less frequent in children than adults. Onset is usually within 1--3 hours after the infusion
is  started,  typical  duration  is  <1  hour,  and  the  febrile  reactions  tend  to  decrease  in
frequency over time. Pretreatment with acetaminophen 
or  diphenhydramine  can  alleviate  febrile  reactions.  Idiosyncratic  reactions  including
hypotension, arrhythmias, and 
allergic  reactions,  including  anaphylaxis,  occur  less  frequently.  Hepatic  toxicity,
thrombophlebitis,  and  anemia,  and  rarely  neurotoxicity  (manifested  as  confusion  or
delirium, hearing loss, blurred vision, or seizures), also might occur.  Certain health-care
providers limit amphotericin B therapy to 2--3 weeks, followed by 3--6 months of 
consolidation  therapy  with  itraconazole  after  the  patient  is  clinically  stabilized  and
afebrile 
(59) (AII). After successful treatment of acute disease, itraconazole chronic suppressive
therapy (secondary prophylaxis) should be instituted. However, children with confirmed
H.  capsulatum  meningitis,  amphotericin  B  therapy  should  be  continued  for  12--16
weeks, followed 
by chronic suppressive therapy (secondary prophylaxis) with itraconazole 
(AII).
 Liposomal  amphotericin  B  is  an  alternative  for  patients  who  cannot  tolerate
conventional amphotericin and in 
one  randomized  trial  was  associated  with  improved  treatment  response  and  survival
and less toxicity compared 
with conventional amphotericin B induction therapy 
(247--249) (AI). Acute, infusion-related reactions might be observed 
in  approximately  20%  of  patients  receiving  lipid  formulations,  including  chest  pain,
dyspnea, and hypoxia; 
severe abdomen, flank or leg pain; or flushing and urticarial. The majority of reactions
occurs  within  the  first  5  minutes  of  infusion  and  rapidly  resolve  with  temporary
interruption of the amphotericin infusion and administration of 
intravenous diphenhydramine (221). Premedication with diphenhydramine can reduce
the incidence of these 
reactions.
 Prevention  of  relapse  after  successful  treatment  requires  lifelong  suppressive
treatment; details on 
secondary prophylaxis (maintenance therapy) have been published 
(4). Safety of discontinuation of secondary 
prophylaxis following immune reconstitution with HAART among children has not been
studied extensively.
Coccidioidomycosis
 
Epidemiology
 Children with HIV infection are at increased risk for infection with 
Coccidioides immitis in areas where coccidioidomycosis is endemic (e.g., southwestern
United States, northern Mexico, and Central and South America). Primary infection of
the  newborn  occurs  rarely.  However,  infection  of  the  genital  tract  of  the  mother  can
result 
in placental involvement, coccidioidal endometritis, and aspiration of infected amniotic
fluid by the fetus. Both in 
utero and perinatal transmission of Coccidioides 
immitis have been reported.
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Fever  and  dyspnea  are  common  presenting  symptoms  among  children,  along  with
chills, weight 
loss, lymphadenopathy, chest pain, and headache 
(250,251). With pulmonary disease, chest radiographs exhibit 
bilateral  diffuse  reticulonodular  pulmonary  infiltrates.  Patients  might  experience
persistent pulmonary nodules or thin-walled cavities. Diffuse pneumonia caused by 
C. immitis is usually accompanied by fungemia, and patients should be 
evaluated  for  systemic  disease  and  extrapulmonary  lesions  (e.g.,  meningitis).
Disseminated  disease  with  diffuse  erythematous  maculopapular  rash,  erythema
multiforme, erythema nodosum, or arthralgias and infection in bones, joints, and CNS
can occur.
 
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis  can  be  made  by  direct  examination  and  culture  of  respiratory  secretions,
CSF, or by biopsy of 
suspicious  pulmonary  or  cutaneous  lesions  to  reveal  characteristic  double-contoured
spherules with endospores and without budding. Blood cultures are positive <15% of
the time in HIV-associated coccidioidomycosis. A DNA probe can identify C. immitis in
cultures.
 IgM antibody detected by latex agglutination, enzyme immunoassay, immunodiffusion,
or tube precipitin 
appears  early  and  is  an  indication  of  acute  infection.  IgG  antibody  gradually  appears
over the first few months after 
primary  infection  and  does  not  disappear  in  the  presence  of  disseminated  disease.
Titers  of  >1:16--1:32  are  associated  with  disseminated  disease,  except  in  cases  of
isolated meningitis 
(194). Serological tests (e.g., complement fixation, 
tube precipitation and immunodiffusion assays) might have reduced diagnostic use in
severely immunosuppressed HIV-infected patients.
 
Treatment
 Experience is limited in treating coccidioidomycosis among HIV-infected children, and
recommendations are 
generally  based  on  experience  with  adults.  On  the  basis  of  data  from  HIV-infected
adults for treatment of diffuse pulmonary 
or  disseminated  disease,  induction  therapy  with  amphotericin  B  at  a  dose  of  0.5--1.0
mg/kg body weight/day 
is recommended until clinical improvement is observed 
(AII); several weeks of therapy often are required to produce 
clear  evidence  of  improvement  (252).  Following  acute  therapy,  chronic  suppressive
therapy with fluconazole or itraconazole is recommended (AII).
 Alternative treatment for disseminated nonmeningitic infection that is stable includes
fluconazole (5--6 
mg/kg  administered  twice  daily)  or  itraconazole  (4--10  mg/kg  twice  daily  for  3  days
followed by 2--5 mg/kg 
administered twice daily) (BIII).
 CNS infections, including meningitis, should be treated with high-dose fluconazole (5--6
mg/kg/dose  admistered  twice  daily)  because,  unlike  amphotericin  B,  it  crosses  the
blood brain barrier well 
(AII).  For  CNS  infections  unresponsive  to  fluconazole,  intravenous  amphotericin  B  is
used and augmented by intrathecal amphotericin B (CI). Consultation with a specialist is
recommended when treating children with meningeal disease.
 Fluconazole  can  inhibit  the  cytochrome  P-450-dependent  hepatic  enzymes,  and  the
potential for drug 
interactions should be evaluated carefully before initiation of therapy 
(AIII). The most frequent adverse effects of fluconazole 
are  gastrointestinal,  including  nausea  and  vomiting.  Skin  rash  and  pruritis  might  be
observed  and  rare  cases  of  Stevens-Johnson  syndrome  have  been  reported  with
fluconazole. Asymptomatic increases in transaminases can be observed 
in  1%--13%  of  patients  receiving  azole  drugs,  and  less  frequently,  patients  with
hepatitis; rare cases of fatal hepatitis have been reported.
 Surgical  debridement  or  excision  of  localized,  persistent,  progressive,  or  resistant
lesions in bone and lung might 
be helpful. Lung cavities with recurrent bleeding and those larger than 6 cm in diameter
are at greater risk for rupture and require surgery.
 As  with  other  disseminated  fungal  infections,  continued  chronic  suppressive  therapy
with fluconazole or itraconazole is recommended following completion of initial therapy;
details on secondary prophylaxis (maintenance therapy) 
have  been  published  (4).  Safety  of  discontinuation  of  secondary  prophylaxis  after
immune reconstitution with HAART among children has not been studied extensively.
Cytomegalovirus
 
Epidemiology
 Infection with human CMV is common and usually inapparent; acquisition of CMV can
occur during infancy, 
early childhood, or adolescence. Transmission can occur from an infected woman to her
offspring; horizontally by contact with virus-containing saliva, urine, or sexual fluid; or
through transfusion of infected blood or transplantation of infected organs. CMV is the
most  common  perinatally  transmitted  infection,  occurring  in  0.2%--2.2%  of  live-born
infants 
in  the  United  States  (253).  In  early  childhood,  infection  usually  occurs  secondary  to
exposure to infected saliva or urine. Infection occurs at younger ages in locations where
sanitation is less optimal. Among adolescents, sexual transmission is the major mode of
CMV acquisition.
 Congenital  (in  utero)  CMV  infection  occurs  most  commonly  among  infants  born  to
women with primary 
CMV infection during pregnancy. Following primary infection during pregnancy, the rate
of transmission to the fetus 
is approximately 30%--40% (254,255). In comparison, the rate of congenital infection
after recurrent CMV infection 
is  lower  (range:  0.15%--1.0%)  (253,256,257).  In  utero  transmission  with  recurrent
infection can occur because 
of reactivation of infection among women infected before pregnancy or reinfection with
a different CMV strain 
among women who are CMV seropositive 
(258,259).
 CMV  also  can  be  transmitted  during  the  intrapartum  or  postpartum  periods  from
mother to infant. Up to 57% 
of infants whose mothers shed CMV at or around the time of delivery become infected
with CMV, and up to 53% 
of children who are breastfed with milk that contains infectious virus can become CMV
infected. However, symptomatic CMV disease in the infant is much less common when
CMV is acquired intrapartum or through breastfeeding.  In the United States, the overall
prevalence of CMV infection among women of childbearing age is 50%--80%, 
with the highest prevalence in women in lower socioeconomic strata 
(254,260). The prevalence of CMV infection 
among  HIV-infected  pregnant  women  is  higher  than  in  the  general  population,  with
approximately 90% of 
HIV-infected pregnant women coinfected with CMV 
(261,262).
 HIV-infected women with CMV infection have a higher rate of CMV shedding from the
cervix than women 
without HIV infection (52%--59% compared with 14%--35% in HIV-uninfected cohorts) 
(263).  The  risk  for  mother  to  child  transmission  of  CMV  might  be  increased  among
infants born to women dually infected with CMV and HIV. In 
one study of 440 infants born to HIV-infected women in the United States, the overall
rate of in 
utero infection was 4.5%, higher than the <2% rate of in 
utero infection in the general U.S. population.
 HIV-infected children appear to be at higher risk for acquisition of CMV infection during
early childhood 
than  children  without  HIV  infection  (7).  The  rate  of  CMV  acquisition  in  HIV-infected
children appears to be particularly high during the first 12 months of life but continues
to remain higher among HIV-infected than uninfected children through age 4 years as
they become exposed to CMV infection in other children in child care or school settings.
 CMV disease is less frequent among HIV-infected children than 
HIV-infected adults but contributes substantially 
to morbidity and mortality. CMV causes 8%-10% of pediatric AIDS-defining illness. In a
group of 189 
HIV-infected children followed at the National Cancer Institute, the overall prevalence of
CMV infection was 30%, with a prevalence of symptomatic CMV-related disease of 9%,
one half of which was CMV retinitis 
(264). Among patients with positive CMV 
urine cultures, 25% had evidence of CMV disease. Children with positive CMV cultures
had lower survival 
rates than those without positive CMV cultures.
 Symptomatic  HIV-infected  children  with  CMV  coinfection  have  a  higher  rate  of  CMV
viruria than 
asymptomatic HIV-infected or HIV-exposed children. Overall, one third of HIV-infected
children shed CMV (up to 60% with AIDS) 
compared  with  15%--20%  of  CMV-infected,  HIV-exposed  but  uninfected  children  and
<15% of CMV-infected 
infants not exposed to HIV (265).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Approximately 10% of infants with in utero
CMV infection are symptomatic at birth with congenital CMV 
syndrome (CMV inclusion disease); mortality of children with symptomatic disease is as
high as 30%. Newborns 
with  symptomatic  congenital  CMV  infection  are  usually  small  for  gestational  age  and
might have 
purpura/petechiae,
 jaundice,
 hepatosplenomegaly,
 chorioretinitis,
 microcephaly,
intracranial calcifications, and hearing impairment. Approximately 90% of infants with
symptomatic disease at birth who survive have late complications, 
including  substantial  hearing  loss,  mental  retardation,  chorioretinitis,  optic  atrophy,
seizures, or learning disabilities (254). Although the majority of children with in 
utero CMV infection do not have symptoms at birth, 10%--15% are at 
risk  for  developing  later  developmental  abnormalities,  sensorineural  hearing  loss,
chorioretinitis, or neurologic defects.  HIV-infected children with CMV coinfection appear
to have accelerated progression of HIV disease compared 
with  those  without  CMV  infection  (7,264,266).  In  one  study,  53%  of  infants  with
HIV/CMV coinfection had progression 
to  AIDS  or  death  by  age  18  months,  compared  with  22%  of  HIV-infected  children
without CMV infection; those 
with CMV coinfection also were more likely to have central nervous disease (36% versus
9%). The relative risk for 
HIV  disease  progression  in  those  with  CMV  coinfection  compared  with  those  without
coinfection was 2.6 (95% CI = 1.1--6.0) (7).
 CMV  retinitis  is  the  most  frequent  severe  manifestation  of  CMV  disease  among
HIV-infected children, accounting 
for  approximately  25%  of  CMV  AIDS-defining  illnesses.  CMV  retinitis  among  young
HIV-infected children is 
frequently asymptomatic and discovered on routine examination.  Older children with
CMV  retinitis  present  similarly  to  adults  with  floaters,  loss  of  peripheral  vision,  or
reduction in central vision.
 Diagnosis of CMV retinitis is based on clinical appearance with white and yellow retinal
infiltrates and 
associated  retinal  hemorrhages.  A  more  indolent,  granular  retinitis  also  might  occur.
HIV-infected  children  with  CD4+  cell  counts  <100/µL  are  more  likely  to  develop  CMV
retinitis than those with higher CD4+ cell counts, but CD4+ cell count is 
less predictive of risk for CMV disease in young infants, and systemic and localized CMV
disease also can occur among HIV-infected infants with higher age-adjusted 
CD4+ cell counts (265,267).
 End-organ  CMV  disease  has  been  reported  in  the  lung,  liver,  gastrointestinal  tract,
pancreas,  kidney,  sinuses,  and  CNS  (267--270).  In  children  with  extraocular  CMV
disease, predominantly nonspecific symptoms (e.g., fever, poor weight gain, and loss of
developmental milestones with laboratory abnormalities of anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and elevated lactic dehydrogenase) are initially observed, although the extent to which
CMV or HIV infection itself are contributing to these findings is unclear 
(25). Gastrointestinal manifestations among HIV-infected children include CMV 
colitis  (most  common  GI  manifestation),  oral,  and  esophageal  ulcers,  hepatic
involvement, ascending cholangiopathy, 
or  gastritis.  Sigmoidoscopy  in  CMV  colitis  is  nonspecific,  demonstrating  diffuse
erythema, submucosal hemorrhage, and diffuse mucosal ulcerations.
 The role of CMV in pulmonary disease among HIV-infected 
children is difficult to assess because it is often 
isolated with other organisms (e.g., P. 
jiroveci). Histologic evidence of CMV disease is needed to determine if active disease 
is present. CMV pneumonia is an interstitial process with gradual onset of shortness of
breath and dry, 
nonproductive cough; auscultatory findings might be minimal.
 CNS  manifestations  of  CMV  include  subacute  encephalopathy,  myelitis,  and
polyradiculopathy (primarily observed 
in adults but rarely reported among children). CSF findings are nonspecific and might
indicate a 
polymorphonuclear predominance (>50% of patients), elevated protein (75%), and low
glucose (30%). However, up to 20% of 
children have completely normal CSF. 
 
Diagnosis
 CMV infection versus disease might be difficult to differentiate in HIV-infected children.
Because of 
transplacental transfer of antibody from mother to child, a positive CMV antibody assay
in  an  infant  aged  <12  months  is  indicative  of  maternal  infection  but  not  necessarily
infection of the infant. In an infant aged >12 months, a positive CMV 
antibody assay indicates previous infection with CMV but not necessarily active disease.
At any age, a positive CMV culture 
is indicative of infection, but not necessarily of disease.
 CMV  can  be  isolated  in  cell  culture  from  peripheral  blood  leukocytes  or  body  fluids
(e.g., urine) or 
tissues.  Using  centrifugation-assisted  shell  vial  culture  amplification  techniques,  CMV
can be detected within 16--40 hours of culture inoculation. A positive blood buffy-coat
culture establishes a diagnosis of CMV infection and increases the 
likelihood  that  disease  or  symptoms  were  caused  by  CMV,  because  children  with
positive blood cultures are at higher risk for developing end-organ disease.
 Different methods have been used to detect viral antigen or DNA directly and identify
patients at risk 
for development of CMV disease, including detection of pp65 antigenemia, qualitative
and quantitative PCR, and 
DNA hybridization. The DNA assays are more sensitive than buffy-coat or urine cultures
for detecting CMV and can be 
used  to  identify  patients  at  higher  risk  for  development  of  clinically  recognizable
disease. CMV DNA detection in CSF 
by DNA PCR is highly sensitive for CMV disease. Quantitative DNA PCR can be used as a
marker of risk for disease 
and to monitor response to therapy (271).
 Recovery of virus from tissues (e.g., endoscopically guided biopsies of gastrointestinal
or pulmonary tissue) 
provides evidence of infection in symptomatic patients. The limitation of this method is
that it takes 1--6 weeks to detect visible cytopathic effects in cell culture. Staining of
shell vial culture with CMV monoclonal antibodies or immunostaining for CMV antigens
can  allow  earlier  diagnosis  of  infection.  Histopathology  demonstrates  characteristic
"owl's 
eye"  intranuclear  and  smaller  intracytoplasmic  inclusion  bodies  in  biopsy  specimens;
staining with CMV 
monoclonal antibodies or immunostaining for CMV antigens also can be done. The same
procedure can be used on cells 
obtained from bronchoalveolar lavage.
 Some pediatric HIV experts recommend testing all infants with HIV infection for CMV
infection with a urine 
culture  during  the  first  months  of  life  to  identify  infants  with  congenital,  perinatal,  or
early  postnatal  infection.  In  addition,  annual  CMV  antibody  testing  of  previously
seronegative  and  culture  negative  infants  and  children,  beginning  at  age  1  year,  will
identify those who develop occult CMV infections, permitting appropriate screening for 
retinitis.
 Children  with  dual  HIV/CMV  infection  should  have  a  dilated  retinal  examination
performed by an 
ophthalmologist experienced in this diagnosis every 4--6 months after they are severely
immunocompromised.  Older  children  and  adolescents  should  be  counseled  to  report
"floaters" and visual changes.
 
Treatment
 Treatment  of  newborns  with  symptomatic  congenital  CMV  disease  with  ganciclovir
(4--6 mg/kg 
administered intravenously every 12 hours for 6 weeks) has been evaluated in a phase
II study 
(272). The higher dose of 12 mg/kg body weight/day led to a substantial decrease in
the  overall  quantity  of  virus  in  the  urine  and  other  sites  (BI).  In  a  phase  III  trial  of
ganciclovir treatment of infants with symptomatic congenital CMV infection, ganciclovir
begun in 
the neonatal period resulted in more rapid resolution of liver enzyme abnormalities and
less hearing loss at age 
6--12  months  compared  with  no  treatment,  although  approximately  two  thirds  of  the
infants had substantial 
neutropenia  during  therapy  (273).  Neutropenia  was  severe  enough  to  require  dose
modification in 48% and treatment 
with  granulocyte  colony  stimulating  factor  in  7%  and  was  complicated  by
gram-negative sepsis in one neonate.
 The drug of choice for initial treatment of disseminated CMV disease, including CMV
retinitis, in 
HIV-infected children is intravenous ganciclovir 
(AI). The dose is 5 mg/kg/dose twice daily administered intravenously over 
1--2  hours  for  14--21  days  followed  by  lifelong  maintenance  therapy.  With  long-term
therapy,  the  emergence  of  ganciclovir-resistant  CMV  strains  has  occurred.  The  major
side  effect  of  ganciclovir  is  myelosuppression  (i.e.,  anemia,  neutropenia,  and
thrombocytopenia). Dose reduction or interruption might be necessary in up to 40% of
patients because of hematologic toxicity; granulocyte colony-stimulating factor can be
used to ameliorate marrow suppression. 
Renal toxicity, as seen by increased serum creatinine, also can occur and might require
ganciclovir dose modification. Other toxic reactions include CNS effects, gastrointestinal
dysfunction, thrombophlebitis, and elevated liver enzymes.  An alternative drug to treat
CMV disease or for use in ganciclovir-resistant CMV infections in HIV-infected children is
foscarnet (AI). Foscarnet when used for suppression has been associated with increased
length of survival relative to ganciclovir in HIV-infected adult patients. The 
pediatric dose is 60 mg/kg/dose every 8 hours 
administered  intravenously  over  1--2  hours  for  14--21  days  followed  by  lifelong
maintenance  therapy.  The  dose  of  foscarnet  should  be  administered  slowly  over  the
course of 2 hours (i.e., no faster than 1 mg/kg/minute). Infusing foscarnet with saline 
fluid loading can minimize renal toxicity. Doses should be modified among patients with
renal insufficiency. The 
main toxicity of foscarnet is decreased renal function; up to 30% of patients experience
an increase in serum creatinine levels. 
Renal  toxicity  and  foscarnet  binding  to  divalent  metal  ions  such  as  calcium  leads  to
metabolic abnormalities 
in  approximately  one  third  of  patients,  and  serious  electrolyte  imbalances  (including
abnormalities in calcium, 
phosphorus,  magnesium,  and  potassium  levels)  and  secondary  seizures,  cardiac
dysrhythmias, abnormal liver transaminases, and and CNS symptoms can occur.
 Combination  therapy  with  ganciclovir  and  foscarnet  delays  progression  of  retinitis  in
certain patients 
failing monotherapy (267,274--276) and can be used as initial therapy among children
with sight-threatening disease (BIII). Combination therapy also has been used for adult
patients  with  retinitis  that  has  relapsed  on  single-agent  therapy.   Valganciclovir,  a
prodrug  of  ganciclovir,  is  one  of  the  first-line  treatments  for  HIV-infected  adults  with
CMV 
retinitis at an induction dose of 900 mg orally twice daily for 21 days, followed by 900
mg orally once daily as 
maintenance (276) (AI). Valganciclovir is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
and rapidly metabolized to ganciclovir in the intestine and liver. Its major adverse effect
is myelosuppression. However, data on appropriate dosage of this drug 
for children are not available (CIII).
 Before the availability of valganciclovir,
oral ganciclovir in combination with an intraocular ganciclovir implant 
had  been  used  for  maintenance  treatment  of  CMV  retinitis  in  adults.  Oral  ganciclovir
has been studied in a limited 
number  of  children.  Children  require  a  higher  oral  dose  of  ganciclovir  than  adults  to
achieve target serum levels because of 
low bioavailability and greater clearance. A dose of 30 mg/kg administered orally every
8 hours produced serum levels 
similar to the dose effective for maintenance treatment of CMV retinitis in adults (1 g
orally every 8 hours) 
(277).  The  combination  of  oral  ganciclovir  with  a  ganciclovir  sustained  release
intraocular implant, replaced every 6--9 
months, could be considered for treatment and chronic suppression of CMV retinitis in
older children 
(4) (BIII). Among children old enough to receive the adult dosage, valganciclovir would
be the preferred drug instead of oral ganciclovir (AI).
 Cidofovir (5 mg/kg intravenously once a week for 2 weeks, then 5 mg/kg once every 2
weeks for maintenance 
therapy) is effective in treating CMV retinitis among adult patients who are intolerant of
other therapies 
(AI). However, cidofovir has not been studied in pediatric patients with CMV disease 
(CIII). The major side effect of cidofovir is 
nephrotoxicity;  the  drug  produces  proximal  tubular  dysfunction  including  Fanconi
syndrome  and  acute  renal  failure.  To  minimize  nephrotoxicity,  probenicid  should  be
administered before each infusion, and intravenous hydration with normal saline should
be  administered  before  and  after  each  cidofovir  infusion;  renal  function  should  be
carefully 
monitored. Neutropenia also has been reported. Other reported adverse effects include
anterior uveitis and ocular hypotony; ophthalmologic monitoring for anterior segment
inflammation and intraocular pressure is needed while receiving the drug. 
 Intravitreous injections of ganciclovir, foscarnet, or cidofovir have been used for control
of retinitis but require biweekly intraocular injections. Data are limited in children, and
biweekly injection is impractical for use in most 
children (DIII). Implantation of an intravitreous ganciclovir medication release device in
the  posterior  camber  of  the  eye  also  has  been  used  in  HIV-infected  adults  and
adolescents. Intraocular implants should not be used in children aged <3 
years because of the small size of the eyes in young children 
(EIII).
 Fomivirsen (Vitravene) is an antisense nucleotide that binds to CMV mRNA, has potent
anti-CMV activity, and 
is  available  as  an  aqueous  solution  for  intravitreous  injection.  The  drug  has  been
studied in a controlled trial in HIV-infected adults (278) and is approved for intraocular
use in adults with AIDS who have persistent active CMV retinitis despite other anti-CMV
therapies or who cannot tolerate other treatments 
(AI); no studies have been conducted among pediatric patients 
(CIII).  Complications  of  intraocular  therapy  include  vitreous  hemorrhage,  retinal
detachment, 
and  endophthalmitis.  Intraocular  maintenance  therapy  does  not  prevent  extension  to
the opposite eye or development 
of systemic disease and therefore, when used, should be combined with oral ganciclovir
or oral valganciclovir to 
provide systemic therapy.
 Among HIV-infected children with CMV disease, after initial induction therapy, lifetime
chronic 
suppressive maintenance therapy for CMV (secondary prophylaxis) is required; detailed
recommendations  have  been  published  (4).  Safety  of  discontinuation  of  secondary
prophylaxis  following  immune  reconstitution  with  HAART  in  children  has  not  been
studied extensively.
Herpes simplex Virus 
 
Epidemiology
 HSV  can  be  transmitted  from  an  HSV-infected  mother  to  her  infant  resulting  in
neonatal infection, in addition to 
the  classic  person-to-person  HSV  transmission  observed  amongolder  children  and
adults through direct contact 
with infected oral secretions or lesions. Neonatal HSV infection occurs at a rate of one
case/2,000--5,000  deliveries  (279).  Neonatal  transmission  occurs  primarily  through
exposure of the infant to HSV-infected maternal genital fluids during passage through
the birth canal, by ascending infection, or through use of invasive procedures, such as
fetal 
scalp  monitoring,  that  disrupt  fetal  skin  integrity  during  labor  (280).  Congenital  (in
utero) HSV acquisition is rare but can result in devastating cutaneous, ocular, and CNS
damage. 
 Maternal  HSV  antibody  status  before  delivery  influences  both  the  severity  and  the
likelihood of transmission to 
the infant (280). The risk for neonatal HSV infection is greatest when an infant is born to
a woman with primary 
HSV infection (range: 30%--50%) (279). The risk is much lower (0--5%) for infants born
to women shedding HSV 
caused by reactivated infection (281). Genital shedding of HSV at the time of delivery is
associated with increased risk 
for  transmission,  and  prolonged  rupture  of  membranes  (>6  hours)  also  increases  the
risk for HSV transmission to the 
infant, probably as a result of ascending HSV infection from the cervix 
(279). Cesarean delivery substantially lowers the risk 
for transmission (279,280).
 In  the  United  States,  75%  of  neonatal  infections  are  caused  by  genital  herpes,  HSV
type 2, and HSV type 1. 
HSV-2  seroprevalence  among  the  overall  population  of  childbearing-aged  women  is
approximately 26% 
(281).  HSV-2  infection  rates  might  be  higher  in  HIV-infected  than  HIV-uninfected
women.  Women  infected  with  HIV,  particularly  those  with  low  CD4+  cell  count,  shed
HSV from the vulva and cervix more commonly than women not infected with HIV; 
the majority of this shedding is asymptomatic 
(282,283). Among women who are not infected with HIV, the rate of 
HSV  reactivation  is  about  25%  during  the  last  month  of  pregnancy,  but  only  about
2%--3% will be shedding on the day 
of delivery (284). In comparison, in women who are coinfected with HIV and HSV, an
estimated 10% have 
cervical shedding of HSV on the day of delivery 
(282). The risk for genital HSV reactivation and shedding increases as 
HIV-related immunosuppression progresses. No evidence exists to indicate that in 
utero HSV infection of the infant occurs more frequently in the HIV-infected pregnant
woman; whether infants born to women with HIV/HSV-2 coinfection have an increased
risk for perinatal (intrapartum) HSV infection is unknown.
 Recurrent or persistent HSV infection is the AIDS-indicator condition in approximately
6% of pediatric AIDS 
cases.  As  in  HIV-infected  adults,  HIV-infected  children  might  have  more  frequent  and
severe episodes of HSV reactivation. From 5%--10% of children with AIDS and primary
gingivostomatitis  develop  frequent  recurrences,  which  can  be  associated  with  severe
ulcerative disease and symptoms similar to primary infection 
(285). Children with HIV infection also can have more prolonged shedding of virus with
both primary and reactivation HSV infection than children without HIV infection.
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Neonatal  HSV  can  appear  as  disseminated  multiorgan  disease  (occurring  in
approximately 25% of neonates with 
HSV  infection);  localized  disease  of  the  CNS  (approximately  35%  of  neonates);  or
disease localized to the skin, eyes, 
and mouth (approximately 40% of neonates) 
(279). Infants with disseminated disease usually appear at age 9--11 
days;  encephalitis  occurs  in  60%--75%  of  these  infants.  Vesicular  rash  is  present  in
approximately 80% of children 
with localized skin, eye, or mouth disease, but only in approximately 60% of children
with CNS or disseminated 
disease (279,286). Localized disease usually appears at age 10--11 days, and even with
treatment,  neonates  with  skin  lesions  might  have  cutaneous  recurrences  during  the
first 6 months after treatment 
(279). 
 Outside of the neonatal period, the most common appearance of herpes virus infection
in children is orolabial 
disease.  Fever,  irritability,  tender  submandibular  lymphadenopathy,  and  superficial,
painful  ulcers  in  the  gingival  and  oral  mucosa  and  perioral  area  characterize  primary
HSV gingivostomatitis. HIV-infected children who experience 
primary infection when they are immunocompromised can have severe local lesions or,
more rarely, disseminated HSV 
with  visceral  involvement  and  generalized  skin  lesions  with  primary  infection.  Other
sites of involvement among HIV-infected 
children with severe immunocompromise include the esophagus, CNS, and genitals and
disseminated disease 
involving the liver, adrenals, lung, kidney, spleen, and brain.
 
Diagnosis
 Clinical diagnosis is based on the typical appearance of vesicles and ulcers. The virus
can be isolated in culture and can usually be detected in tissue culture cells within 1--3
days. For the diagnosis of neonatal HSV infection, 
culture  specimens  should  be  obtained  from  blood  and  skin  vesicles,  mouth  or
nasopharynx, eyes, urine, and stool or rectum; positive cultures from any of the latter
sites >48 hours after birth indicates viral replication rather than 
contamination after intrapartum exposure. CSF should be tested for HSV nucleic acid by
amplifying an HSV DNA sequence 
common to both HSV-1 and HSV-2 using PCR assays.
 Direct immunofluorescence for HSV antigen can be conducted on cells collected from
skin, conjunctiva, or 
mucosal lesion scrapings. Giemsa staining (Tzanck preparation) of lesion cell scrapings
might show multinucleated giant cells and eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions, but this
does not differentiate HSV type or HSV from varicella-zoster virus infection and is not
routinely recommended.
 Among children with suspected HSV encephalitis, detection of HSV DNA by PCR in the
CSF has replaced 
brain biopsy as the diagnostic test of choice in such patients 
(287). Cultures of the CSF for HSV usually are 
negative.  Definitive  diagnosis  of  HSV  esophagitis  requires  endoscopy  with  biopsy
(histologic evidence of multinucleated 
giant cells with intranuclear viral inclusion) and culture.
 
Treatment
 Acyclovir  is  the  drug  of  choice  for  treatment  of  HSV  among  infants  and  children,
regardless of HIV-infection 
status.  Both  oral  and  intravenous  preparations  are  available.  Neonatal  HSV  disease
should  be  treated  with  high-dose  intravenous  acyclovir  (20  mg/kg  body  weight/dose
three times daily) administered for 21 days for CNS and disseminated disease and for
14 days for skin, eye, and mouth disease 
(286) (AI). Acyclovir therapy should not be discontinued in neonates with CNS disease
unless a repeat CSF HSV DNA PCR assay is negative at day 19--21 of treatment (BIII).
Although  treatment  has  reduced  morbidity  and  mortality,  infants  with  neonatal  HSV
infection 
remain at risk for neurologic sequelae, with the most severe neurologic sequelae seen
in those with CNS disease. A limited percentage (2%--6%) of infants with localized skin,
eye,  or  mucus  membrane  disease  might  have  later  neurologic  sequelae  after
apparently successful treatment 
(279,288).
 Disseminated  HSV  disease  or  encephalitis  outside  of  the  neonatal  period  should  be
treated with intravenous acyclovir with a dose of 10 mg/kg/dose or 500 
mg/m2/dose three times daily for 21 days 
(AII).  HIV-infected  children  with  symptomatic  HSV  gingivostomatitis  should  be  treated
with intravenous acyclovir (5--10 mg/kg/dose three times 
daily) or oral acyclovir (20 mg/kg/dose three times daily) for 7--14 days 
(AII).  HIV-infected  children  who  have  severe  oral  HSV  recurrences  (more  than  3--6
severe episodes a year) can be considered for secondary suppressive therapy with oral
acyclovir (4) (AI).
 Acyclovir is primarily excreted by the kidney; as a result, dose adjustment based on
creatinine clearance is needed 
in  patients  with  renal  insufficiency  or  renal  failure.  Primary  toxicities  of  acyclovir  are
phlebitis,  renal  toxicity,  nausea,  vomiting,  and  rash.  In  infants  receiving  high-dose
acyclovir for neonatal disease, the major toxicity was neutropenia (absolute neutrophil
count 
<1,000/mm3) (289). Grade 3 or higher nephrotoxicity was observed in 6%.
 Pediatric experience with the oral preparation of acyclovir is limited for children aged
<2  years.  Among  infants  who  received  long-term  oral  acyclovir  suppressive  therapy
(300 
mg/m2 body surface area/dose given 2--3 times 
daily)  following  treatment  for  neonatal  HSV  infection,  a  relatively  high  rate  of
neutropenia (46%) was observed, although in most cases this was self-limited and did
not require dose modification or drug discontinuation 
(290).
 Among  HIV-infected  children  with  acyclovir-resistant  HSV  infection,  intravenous
foscarnet is recommended at a 
dose of 120 mg/kg/day in 2--3 divided doses administered intravenously over 1--2 hours
until  the  infection  resolves  (AI).  The  dose  of  foscarnet  should  be  administered  slowly
over the course of 2 hours (or no faster than 1 mg/kg/minute). Infusing foscarnet with
saline  fluid  loading  can  minimize  renal  toxicity.  Doses  should  be  modified  in  patients
with 
renal  insufficiency.  The  main  toxicity  of  foscarnet  is  decreased  renal  function;  up  to
30% of patients experience an increase in serum creatinine levels. Renal toxicity and
foscarnet binding to divalent metal ions such as calcium leads to 
metabolic abnormalities in approximately one third of patients, and serious electrolyte
imbalances (including abnormalities in 
calcium,  phosphorus,  magnesium,  and  potassium  levels)  and  secondary  seizures,  or
cardiac dysrhythmias can 
occur. Abnormal liver transaminases and CNS symptoms also can occur.
 Valacyclovir is a prodrug of acyclovir with improved 
bioavailability; bioavailabililty is 50%--55% in adults (3--5 
times higher than that of oral acyclovir). Valacyclovir is rapidly converted to acyclovir
after absorption and is not active against acyclovir-resistant HSV strains. It is approved
for use in adults and 
adolescents for treatment of genital herpes at a 
dose  of  1  g  twice  daily  for  7--10  days  (AII).  Dose  adjustment  (based  on  creatinine
clearance) is needed among 
patients  receiving  valacyclovir  who  have  renal  insufficiency  or  renal  failure.  Data  are
limited on valacyclovir in children (291) (CIII). In a study of valacyclovir among children
with  leukemia,  bioavailability  of  acyclovir  was  45%  after  a  median  oral  dose  of  34.1
mg/kg of valacylcovir 
(292). In a second study in 28 immunocompromised children aged 5--12 
years,  children  were  randomized  to  receive  250  mg  (9.4--13.3  mg/kg)  or  500  mg
(13.9--27.0 mg/kg) valacyclovir twice 
daily; the overall estimated acyclovir bioavailability was 48% 
(293). An oral dose of valacylcovir of 30 
mg/kg/dose administered three times a day to a child with normal renal function was
estimated to provide acyclovir 
concentrations  similar  to  those  achieved  with  standard  acyclovir  dosing  of  10
mg/kg/dose intravenously three times daily. Valacylcovir 
is available only in caplet formulation, but a suspension formulation can be prepared in 
Ora-Sweet® or 
Syrpalta® syrups (to yield a final concentration of 50 mg/mL of the hydrochloride salt)
that is stable for 21 days if stored in amber glass bottles (294).
 Adverse effects of valacyclovir are similar to acyclovir; nausea and vomiting are most
common. 
Thrombotic  microangiopathy  (thrombotic  thrombocytopenic  purpura/hemolytic  uremic
syndrome) has been reported in 
HIV-infected  adults  with  advanced  disease  who  received  high-dose  valacyclovir  (8
grams per day) 
(291).  However,  it  was  not  reported  in  other  studies  in  which  valacyclovir  was
adminstered in lower doses (250 mg--1,000 mg/day).  Penciclovir is an acyclic guanine
analog derivative with similar activity and mechanism of action as acyclovir, 
although  penciclovir  has  a  longer  intracellular  half-life.  It  is  not  active  against
acyclovir-resistant HSV strains. It has 
poor  bioavailability  and  is  only  available  as  a  1%  cream  for  topical  application.  It  is
approved for treatment of 
recurrent  herpes  labialis  in  immunocompetent  adults  (applied  every  2  hours  while
awake). No data are available about use of penciclovir treatment in children.
 Famciclovir is the oral prodrug of 
penciclovir; its bioavailability is approximately 75% compared with 5% 
for penciclovir. It is approved for treatment of recurrent mucocutaneous HSV infection
in HIV-infected adults 
and adolescents at a dose of 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days 
(AII). Famciclovir is available only in tablet form, and 
no specific data on children are available (CIII). Dose adjustment (based on creatinine
clearance) is needed among 
patients with renal insufficiency or renal failure. Adverse effects are rare; these include
gastrointestinal disturbances, rash, and CNS complaints (e.g., confusion, hallucinations
and disorientation), neutropenia, and elevated liver transaminases.
Varicella-Zoster Virus
 
Epidemiology
 In  the  United  States,  9%  of  children  aged  <10  years  experienced  varicella  annually
before widespread use of 
varicella  vaccine;  by  adulthood,  >95%  of  persons  have  antibodies  to  varicella-zoster
virus (VZV), implying a past history 
of  primary  infection  (295,296).  Varicella  has  the  potential  to  cause  greater  morbidity
and mortality in 
HIV-infected  immunocompromised  children  than  among  the  general  population  of
children.
 Mother-to-child  transmission  of  VZV  can  occur;  however,  because  most  adults  are
immune, varicella is a 
rare  complication  of  pregnancy.  It  is  unknown  whether  mother-to-child  VZV
transmission occurs more frequently among HIV-infected women with primary varicella.
In  one  study,  13%  of  HIV-infected  pregnant  women  lacked  immunity  to  VZV  (296).
Congenital varicella syndrome occurs in approximately 2% (95% CI = 0--5%) of infants
born to women who have primary varicella during the first trimester 
(297). It is not seen among women who develop herpes 
zoster during pregnancy. Fewer than 100 cases of congenital VZV have been reported.
 VZV can be transmitted to the fetus in later gestation, resulting in neonatal varicella.
When the mother 
develops varicella from 4 days before to 2 days after delivery without passive antibody
prophylaxis,  the  attack  rate  for  infants  is  approximately  20%  and  mortality  is
approximately 30% 
(298). In comparison, if maternal varicella precedes 
delivery 
long enough to allow transfer of VZV IgG antibodies across the placenta, infants might
be born with cutaneous 
varicella lesions or have them in the first 5 days of life, but they are usually not at risk
for serious complications.   Zoster occurs only among children previously infected with
VZV. Zoster is unusual in HIV-infected children who 
had primary varicella infection when their 
CD4+  cell  counts  were  normal  or  mildly  suppressed.  However,  among  HIV-infected
children with low CD4+ cell counts (i.e., CD4+ <15%) at the time of primary varicella,
the rate of subsequent zoster may be as high as 70% 
(299,300). The incidence of zoster among HIV-infected children who had 
primary  varicella  when  they  were  immunocompromised  is  467/1,000  child-years,
substantially higher than the 98/1,000 person-years observed in immunocompromised
HIV-infected adults and the 25/1,000 child-years seen among children with leukemia. As
in adults, current 
CD4+ cell count in children correlates with the frequency of zoster 
recurrences (301).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Congenital infection is characterized by cicatricial skin scarring, limb hypoplasia, and
neurologic 
(microcephaly, cortical atrophy, seizures, and mental retardation), eye (chorioretinitis,
microophthalmia, and cataracts), and 
renal (neurogenic bladder, hydroureter, hydronephrosis) abnormalities and swallowing
dysfunction and aspiration 
pneumonia (298,302,303).
 Initial reports of varicella among HIV-infected children suggested more severe disease
manifestations 
(304), but more recent studies support less complicated courses, particularly in children
receiving antiretroviral therapy or with higher CD4+ cell counts at the time of infection 
(299,300,305,306). However, the duration of disease might be longer, 
and  the  rate  of  complications  is  still  higher  than  in  normal  children  hospitalized  with
varicella 
(306).
 HIV-infected  children  also  might  experience  chronic  infection  with  continued
appearance of new lesions for >1 
month after primary or recurrent VZV infection 
(307). The lesions are characteristically varicelliform at onset but evolve 
into nonhealing ulcers that become necrotic, crusted, and hyperkeratotic. Chronic VZV
is reported in 14% of 
HIV-infected children with VZV, usually in children with low 
CD4+ cell counts (301). Viral isolates might become resistant 
to acyclovir during prolonged therapy (308).
 The classical clinical presentation of varicella (i.e., a generalized pruritic vesicular rash
and fever) is 
diagnostic.  However,  persistent  lesions  might  be  atypical  and  lack  a  vesicular
component.  The  classical  clinical  presentation  of  zoster  (i.e.,  a  frequently  painful
vesicular eruption with a dermatomal distribution) is diagnostic. However, less typical
rashes,  including  those  that  extend  beyond  dermatomal  boundaries  or  that  are
bilaterally distributed or are generalized, 
also  might  represent  zoster  in  HIV-infected  children.  HIV-infected  children  can  have
recurrent episodes of reactivated 
VZV infection that present with a disseminated rash more similar to chickenpox than
zoster but without 
visceral dissemination; they might have multiple episodes of recurrent disease 
(301).
 VZV retinitis is a rare complication of VZV infection among HIV-infected children and
might be confused 
with cytomegalovirus retinitis. Progressive encephalitis caused by VZV in the absence
of a zosteriform rash caan occur (309). VZV should be suspected among children with
unilateral vesicular rashes, retinitis when CMV cannot be implicated, or with progressive
and otherwise unexplained encephalitis and a history previous varicella.
 
Diagnosis
 Clinical diagnosis of varicella and zoster infections is based on the typical appearance
of generalized pruritic 
vesicular  rash  and  fever  in  the  former  and  a  frequently  painful  vesicular  rash  in  a
dermatomal  pattern  in  the  latter.  Direct  immunofluorescence  for  VZV  antigen  can  be
conducted  on  cells  collected  from  skin,  conjunctiva,  or  mucosal  lesion  scrapings.
Giemsa-staining  (Tzanck  preparation)  of  cell  scrapings  from  lesions  is  nonspecific,  as
detection 
of  multinucleated  giant  cells  is  suggestive  of  VZV  but  is  also  observed  with  HSV
infection.  The  optimal  sensitivity  of  these  methods  requires  obtaining  cells  from  the
base of a lesion after unroofing a fresh vesicle. Direct and 
indirect  immunofluorescence  or  immunoperoxidase  methods  also  can  be  used  for
detection of VZV-infected cells in tissue sections of lung, liver, brain, or other organs.
 VZV can be isolated by cell culture from vesicular fluid or ulcer swabs, but is a very
liable  virus.  The  specimen  must  undergo  rapid  processing  or  be  kept  on  dry  ice  or
frozen at 
--70ºC (--94ºF) if storage for more than a few hours 
is  required  (298).  Five  to  seven  days  after  inoculation  to  detect  typical  cytopathic
effects; confirmation by staining 
by  virus-specific  antiserum  is  needed.  Shell  viral  cultures  combine  centrifugation  and
staining with 
fluorescein-conjugated 
monoclonal antibodies to detect synthesis of VZV proteins in infected cells. This allows
results in 1--3 days 
after inoculation before a cytopathic effect is visible. Culture is necessary if testing of
the virus for antiviral susceptibility is needed.
 PCR can be used to detect VZV in samples, is extremely sensitive and specific, and can
differentiate wild-type 
and vaccine VZV, but is available only in research laboratories. Serologic tests can be
used to diagnose VZV infection, 
noting a substantial increase in antibody titer during convalescence (2--3 weeks after
onset  of  illness)  or  the  presence  of  VZV  IgM  antibody.  VZV  reactivation  can  induce
VZV-IgM antibodies in many patients so their presence does 
not differentiate primary from recurrent VZV infections 
(298).
 
Treatment
 On the basis of controlled trials among children with malignancies, acyclovir is the drug
of choice for treatment 
of  VZV  infection  among  HIV-infected  children  (AI).  With  primary  varicella,  acyclovir
should be initiated as soon 
as possible after initial lesions appear. New lesions can continue to appear for 72 hours
after initiation of acyclovir and crusting of all lesions might take 5--7 days.
 Intravenous  acyclovir  is  recommended  for  treatment  of  primary  varicella  among
HIV-infected children with 
moderate or severe immunosuppression or who have high fever or numerous or deep,
necrotic,  or  hemorrhagic  skin  lesions  (AIII).  For  children  aged  <1  year,  the  dose  of
acyclovir is 10 mg/kg body weight/dose adminstered intravenously every 8 hours as a
1-hour infusion. Some health-care providers adminster the same dose for children aged 
>1 year, and others use acyclovir based on body surface area among children aged 
>1 year old (500 mg/m2/dose intravenously every 8 hours as 
a  1-hour  infusion)  (59).  Administration  is  for  7  days  or  until  no  new  lesions  have
appeared for 48 hours. 
Oral  administration  should  be  used  only  for  treatment  of  primary  varicella  among
HIV-infected children with normal or only slightly decreased CD4+ cell counts or 
in children with mild disease (BIII). The dose is 20 mg/kg per dose 
adminstered orally 4 times daily (maximum dose: 800 mg).
 Acyclovir is the treatment of choice for zoster among HIV-infected children 
(AII).  With  zoster,  oral  acyclovir  can  be  adminstered  because  the  chance  for
disseminated, 
life-threatening disease is less with zoster than varicella. 
Initial intravenous administration should be considered for 
HIV-infected children with severe 
immunosuppression,  trigeminal  nerve  involvement,  or  extensive  multidermatomal
zoster 
(AII).
 Acyclovir  is  primarily  excreted  by  the  kidney,  and  dose  adjustment  (based  on
creatinine clearance) is needed 
among patients with renal insufficiency or renal failure. Primary toxicities of acyclovir
are  phlebitis,  renal  toxicity,  nausea,  vomiting,  and  rash.  Among  infants  receiving
high-dose acyclovir for neonatal HSV disease, the major toxicity 
was neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count 
<1,000/mm3),  which  was  observed  in  21%  of  children  (288).  Grade  3  or  higher
nephrotoxicity was observed in 6% of children. 
 Pediatric experience with the oral preparation of acyclovir is limited in children aged
<2 years. In infants who received long-term oral acyclovir suppressive therapy (300 
mg/m2 body surface area/dose administered 2--3 times 
daily)  following  treatment  for  neonatal  HSV  infection,  a  relatively  high  rate  of
neutropenia (46%) was observed, although 
in the majority of cases this was self-limited and did not require dose modification or
drug discontinuation 
(290).
 Children who continue to develop lesions or whose lesions fail to heal might be infected
with acyclovir-resistant 
VZV. HIV-infected children with acyclovir-resistant VZV can be treated with intravenous
foscarnet 
(BII). The dose is 40--60 mg/kg per dose 3 times daily administered intravenously over
1--2 hours for 7 days or until no new lesions have appeared for 48 hours. The dose of
foscarnet should be administered slowly over the course of 2 hours (i.e., no 
faster than 1 mg/kg/minute). Infusing foscarnet with saline fluid loading can minimize
renal toxicity. Doses should be modified among patients with renal insufficiency.
 The  main  toxicity  of  foscarnet  is  decreased  renal  function;  up  to  30%  of  patients
experience an increase in serum creatinine levels. Renal toxicity and foscarnet binding
to divalent metal ions (e.g., calcium) leads to 
metabolic abnormalities in approximately one third of patients, and serious electrolyte
imbalances  (including  abnormalities  in  calcium,  phosphorus,  magnesium,  and
potassium levels) and secondary seizures, cardiac dysrhythmias, abnormal 
liver transaminases, and CNS symptoms can occur.
 Valacyclovir  is  a  prodrug  of  acyclovir  with  improved  bioavailability.  It  is  not  active
against acyclovir-resistant 
VZV strains. It is approved for treatment of zoster among adults at a dose of 1,000 mg
given  orally  3  times  a  day  for  7  days  (AII).  However,  data  are  limited  for  its  use  in
children 
(291) (CIII). Valacyclovir is available only in caplet 
formulation, 
but  a  liquid  formulation  that  is  stable  for  21  days  can  be  prepared  in  Ora-Sweet  and
Syrpalta syrups and stored 
in amber glass bottles (291).
 Adverse effects of valacyclovir are similar to those with acyclovir; nausea and vomiting
are  most  common.  Thrombotic  microangiopathy  (thrombotic  thrombocytopenic
purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome) has been reported among HIV-infected adults with
advanced disease who received high-dose valacyclovir (8 g/day) 
(291).  However,  this  condition  has  not  been  reported  in  other  studies  in  which
valacyclovir was adminstered in lower doses (250--1,000 mg/day).  Famciclovir is the
oral  prodrug  of  penciclovir.  It  is  not  active  against  acyclovir-resistant  VZV  strains.
Famciclovir 
is approved for the treatment of zoster in immunocompetent adults in a dose of 500 mg
orally  every  8  hours  for  7  days  (AII).  It  is  comparable  in  efficacy  to  oral  acyclovir  in
treatment of immunocompromised adults with localized 
zoster, although it has not been approved for this indication. It is available only in tablet
form.  No  specific  data  about  dosing  information  in  children  are  available,  although
immunocompromised persons aged 12--18 years were included in 
a study of famciclovir for localized zoster (291) (CIII).
Human Papillomavirus
 
Epidemiology
 Human  papillomavirus  (HPV)  infects  cutaneous  and  mucosal  squamous  epithelium.
Approximately 100 distinct 
types of HPV exisits, nearly half of which were first identified in the genital epithelium 
(310,311). They can be categorized on the basis of the site they occur (genital versus
cutaneous)  and  also  as  high  or  low  risk  on  the  basis  of  their  potential  to  induce
malignant proliferation (e.g., HPV 16, 18, 31, 33, and 35 are most often associated with 
intraepithelial  neoplasia)  (311).  HPV  types  that  cause  nongenital  warts  are  usually
distinct from those causing genital 
infections;  however,  genital  HPV  types  can  cause  conjunctival,  nasal,  and  oral  and
laryngeal 
warts.  Children  with  compromised  cellular  immunity  might  have  intense  and
widespread appearance of warts.
 Transmission  of  HPV-associated  cutaneous  warts  occurs  by  close  person-to-person
contact and might be facilitated 
by minor trauma to the skin. HPV-associated anogenital warts are transmitted by sexual
contact  but  also  might  be  acquired  at  the  time  of  delivery  or  transmission  from
nongenital sites. Genital warts (condylomata accuminata) in young children might be a
sign of sexual abuse 
(312,313).
 Mother-to-child transmission of HPV can occur. Latent HPV infection has been identified
in 5%--42% of 
pregnant women without HIV infection, with the higher rates among pregnant women
with a history of sexually 
transmitted  diseases  (314--316).  Some  studies  have  demonstrated  an  increased
prevalence of detectable HPV DNA during pregnancy, with a decline in the postpartum
period 
(310,316). Among nonpregnant women, HPV DNA is 
detected  more  frequently  among  HIV-infected  than  uninfected  women,  with  reported
prevalence rates as high as 95%, but 
data  related  to  HPV  prevalence  in  HPV/HIV  co-infected  pregnant  women  are  not
available 
(317). 
 HPV  DNA  has  been  detected  in  cord  blood  peripheral  blood  cells  and  amniotic  fluid,
indicating the potential for 
in utero infection (318--320). Duration of membrane rupture has been associated with
mother-to-child HPV transmission, and some studies have indicated higher infant HPV
infection rates among infants delivered vaginally than by cesarean section (321,322).
Reported rates of HPV detection in nasopharyngeal aspirates, buccal brush swabs, or
genital swabs from infants born to HPV-infected mothers have varied (range: 2%--80%) 
(321--325). In general, no neonatal 
clinical abnormalities have been associated with HPV detection. The presence of HPV
DNA in newborn 
nasopharyngeal  samples  could  represent  contamination  with  infected  maternal  cells;
however, persistence of HPV DNA in oral secretions or buccal swabs has been reported
in 0--80% of infants with initially positive specimens who were followed through age 6
months  (322,323,325--327).  Infant  laryngeal  papillomas  and  juvenile  laryngeal
papillomatosis are thought to 
be secondary to HPV transmitted from mother to child through aspiration of infectious
maternal genital secretions 
during delivery (322--324).
 HPV  can  be  detected  in  the  genital  tract  of  13%--60%  of  sexually  active  adolescent
girls 
(328--332).  In  one  U.S.  study,  cervical  HPV  infection  was  detected  in  77%  of
HIV-infected  girls  compared  with  55%  of  girls  without  HIV  infection  (333).  The
predominant  risk  factors  for  HPV  infection  in  youth  include  number  of  lifetime  and
recent 
partners (330,331,334,335). 
 Although  the  incidence  of  anogenital  HPV  infection  in  sexually  active  youth  is  high,
longitudinal  studies  have  demonstrated  that  40%--80%  of  infections  among  youth
without HIV infection might be transient and spontaneously regress, although recurrent
infections might be observed 
(331,332,336,337). Infection with multiple types or 
high-risk types of HPV (e.g., 16 and 18), older age, and duration of HPV detection for
>12 months were risk factors for persistent infection. Published data are limited about
the rate of persistence among HIV/HPV co-infected youth.  Persistent infection with HPV,
particularly HPV-16, 18, 31, and 33, is associated with a high risk for 
developing cervical and anal intraepithelial neoplasia and risk for cervical, vulvovaginal,
and  anal  carcinoma  in  both  women  and  men.  Adolescent  girls  might  have  biologic
differences from adult women (e.g., cervical squamous metaplasia) that 
might  increase  their  susceptibility  to  either  development  of  persistent  infection  or
disease 
(333).  The  risk  for  HPV-associated  cervical  abnormalities  might  be  increased  among
HIV-infected  youth.  In  one  study,  70%  of  adolescent  HIV-infected  girls  with  HPV
infection had abnormal cytologic findings; neither 
CD4+ cell count nor HIV viral load correlated 
with HPV infection or squamous intraepithelial lesions 
(333).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 HPV causes hyperplastic, papillomatous, and verrucous squamous epithelial lesions on
skin and mucus 
membranes,  including  anal,  genital,  oral,  nasal,  conjunctiva,  gastrointestinal,  and
respiratory tract mucosa. Wart lesions appear as verrucous papules; lesions also can be
smooth  and  flat  or  pedunculated.  They  can  be  soft,  pink  or  white  "cauliflower-like"
sessile  growths  on  moist  mucosal  surfaces  (condylomata  accuminata),  or  keratotic
lesions  on  squamous  epithelium  of  the  skin,  with  a  thick,  horny  layer.  They  might
resemble common papular warts that are flesh-colored 1--4 
mm, dome-shaped papules or flat-topped papules that appear macular to slightly raised
on  either  moist  mucus  membrane  surfaces  or  skin.  Most  frequently  the  hands,  feet,
face, and genitalia are involved.
 
Diagnosis
 Most  cutaneous  and  anogenital  warts  can  be  diagnosed  by  physical  examination.
Diagnosis of laryngeal 
papillomas  requires  laryngoscopy,  and  children  with  suspected  respiratory  tract
papillomas  need  to  be  evaluated  by  a  pediatric  otolaryngologist.  HPV  DNA  can  be
detected using a consensus PCR assay, with typing determined by hybridization assays
or sequencing; alternatives include 
type-specific PCR assays, or 
HybridCaptureTM to determine high- versus 
low-risk  group  HPV  types.  However,  detection  and  typing  of  HPV  is  not  required  for
diagnosis or management of 
anogenital or cutaneous warts or papillomas 
(313).
 
Treatment
 Multiple  treatments  for  HPV-associated  skin  and  external  genital  lesions  exist;
however, no single treatment is ideal for all patients or all lesions (313) (CIII). Standard
topical therapy for HPV-associated lesions among HIV-infected 
children is often ineffective. Treatment can induce wart-free periods, but the underlying
viral infection can persist and result in recurrence. In addition, topical treatments are
seldom effective in patients with large or extensive lesions. 
However, individual lesions can be destroyed using cryotherapy or electrodesiccation.
 Topical  treatments  include  podofilox  solution  and  gel  (0.5%)  (antimitotic  agent),
imiquimod cream (5%) 
(topical immune enhancer that stimulates production of interferon and other cytokines),
trichloroacetic or bichloroacetic 
acid  80%--95%  aqueous  solution  (caustic  agents  that  destroy  warts  by  chemical
coagulation of proteins), and 
podophyllin resin (contains antimitotic compounds and 
mutagens). Podofilox is applied to all lesions twice a day for 3 
consecutive days and can be repeated weekly up to 4 weeks (BIII). Imiquimod is applied
at bedtime and removed with water 
the following morning (BII). It should be applied 3 nonconsecutive nights a week for up
to  16  weeks.  HIV-infected  patients  with  immunosuppression  might  have  a  lower
response rate to imiquimod. 
 Acid cauterization and podophyllin resin require application by a health-care provider.
Acid  cauterization  should  be  discontinued  if  substantial  improvement  is  not  observed
after  three  treatment  sessions  or  complete  clearance  has  not  occurred  after  six
treatments  (BIII).  Podophyllin  resin  is  applied  and  removed  by  washing  a  few  hours
later; applications can be repeated weekly for up to 6 weeks 
(CIII). Systemic absorption can occur if applied to a large area, causing 
nausea,  vomiting,  or  CNS  effects.  Efficacy  of  the  various  topical  agents  in  patients
without  HIV  infection  ranges  from  20%--80%.  Major  toxicity  of  topical  agents  is  local
pain or irritation of adjacent normal skin.
 Cidofovir  topical  gel  (1%)  is  an  experimental  topical  preparation  that  has  been
evaluated in a limited number of 
adults for treatment of anogenital HPV infection in a placebo-controlled trial; a complete
response  was  observed  in  47%  of  cidofovir  recipients  compared  with  none  in  the
placebo group 
(311) (CIII). Successful use of cidofovir gel for 
treatment  of  severe  molluscum  contagiosum  in  children  with  HIV  infection  and
congenital primary immunodeficiency has 
been reported (338,339). Topical cidofovir might have certain systemic absorption and
be associated with renal toxicity 
(340).
 Individual lesions can be removed by using cryotherapy or electrodessication 
(BIII). Cryotherapy (application of liquid nitrogen or dry ice) must be applied until each
lesion  is  thoroughly  frozen.   Treatment  can  be  repeated  every  1--2  weeks  up  to  four
times.  The  major  toxicity  is  local  pain.  Curettage,  electrosurgery,  scissor  excision,  or
laser 
vaporization
 also
 can
 be
 effective.
 Injectable
 therapy
 (e.g.,
 interferon
 or
5-fluorouracil/epinephringel  implant)  has  been  used.   Laryngeal  papillomatosis  is
difficult to manage 
(341). Treatment is directed toward removing lesions obstructing 
the  airway  rather  than  at  the  elimination  of  disease.  Lesions  are  removed  by
debridement or laser. Systemic 
interferon-alfa  therapy  or  intralesional  cidofovir  has  been  used  as  an  investigational
treatment in children with frequent recurrences or extension into the trachea, bronchi,
or lung parenchyma 
(CIII).
 Management of anogenital HPV infection accompanied by cytologic changes indicating
dysplasia/carcinoma 
among  children/adolescents  is  analogous  to  that  for  the  adult  population.  HAART  has
not been consistently associated with 
a reduced risk for HPV-related cervical abnormalities in HIV-infected women. However,
an "immune 
reconstitution"-like  syndrome  related  to  the  occurrence  of  HPV-associated  oral  warts
among HIV-infected adults has been observed in which the occurrence of oral warts was
associated with a decrease in HIV RNA levels with highly active antiretroviral 
therapy (342). Immune reconstitution in response to viral load reduction might result in
a return of marked inflammatory responses against latent oral HPV infection.
Hepatitis C
 
Epidemiology
 The prevalence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection among children aged 1--11 years in
the United States is 
low  (0.1%--0.2%)  (343,344).  The  prevalence  of  HCV  infection  among  HIV-infected
children  might  be  higher.  In  a  serostudy  of  535  HIV-infected  children  followed  at
pediatric HIV clinical trials sites, the prevalence of HCV infection was 1.5% (345).
 With the implementation of blood donor screening for HCV infection, the primary mode
of acquisition of 
HCV  infection  among  children  is  perinatal.  The  overall  risk  for  mother-to-infant
transmission  of  HCV  is  approximately  6%  (346).  The  majority  of  HCV  transmissions
occur predominantly during or near delivery 
(347,348).
 The risk for vertical HCV transmission is increased by the presence of maternal HCV
viremia at delivery. The role of quantitative HCV viral load has not been well defined,
although  data  indicate  that  higher  quantitative  HCV  levels  might  be  associated  with
higher risk for transmission 
(349--356). Only one case of mother-to-infant transmission has 
been  reported  from  a  woman  who  was  negative  for  HCV  RNA;  however,  this  was  an
older study and the PCR assay 
used might have been less sensitive than current 
assays.
 No  association  of  HCV  perinatal  transmission  with  mode  of  delivery  has  been
demonstrated in most 
studies  (346,347,352,357--359).  On  the  basis  of  current  evidence,  routine  Cesarean
delivery is not recommended for women with chronic HCV infection. Although vaginal
delivery  itself  might  not  be  a  risk  factor  for  HCV  transmission,  higher  risk  for
transmission  among  vaginally  delivered  infants  has  been  described  with  higher
maternal HCV quantitative 
viral  load,  intrapartum  exposure  to  virus-contaminated  maternal  blood  by  the
occurrence of perineal or vaginal laceration, or neonatal hypoxia (354).
 Although HCV can be detected in breast milk, studies of infants born to HCV-infected
women have not 
demonstrated  an  increased  risk  for  HCV  transmission  in  infants  who  are  breastfed
compared with those who were 
formula-fed (346,347,349,357,359,360). Therefore, breastfeeding is not contraindicated
on the basis of HCV status alone (361).
 Other reported risk factors for mother-to-infant HCV transmission include intravenous
drug use; overall 
transmission was 11% in drug users compared with 4% in nonusers 
(346). However, this has been an inconsistent finding. 
Available data do not indicate that HCV genotype is related to the risk for perinatal HCV
transmission (358,362).
 The rate of mother-to-infant HCV transmission is increased among women co-infected
with  HIV  (346--348,350,360,363--365).  In  an  analysis  comparing  transmission  rates
from HCV-infected women with and without HIV infection, the crude rate of HCV vertical
transmission was 22% for HIV-infected and 4% for 
HIV-uninfected women (346). In a meta-analysis of 10 studies involving 2,382 infants,
the overall risk for HCV perinatal transmission was 2.8-fold higher (95% CI = 1.8--4.5)
for HCV/HIV-coinfected women compared with HCV-infected 
women without HIV infection (365). In a subanalysis that included only infants born to
HCV-viremic women, the risk 
for perinatal HCV infection remained two-fold higher for HCV viremic mothers who were
co-infected with HIV 
compared with those without HIV infection 
(365). HCV RNA levels are higher among women co-infected with HIV than 
women infected with only HCV. This might, in part, account for the increased risk for
mother-to-child HCV transmission 
from HCV/HIV co-infected women (366).
 Mother-to-infant  transmission  of  HIV  also  might  be  more  frequent  in  HIV-HCV
co-infected mothers; in one 
study, the relative risk for HIV transmission was 1.7 times higher in HIV-HCV co-infected
women than women with 
HIV  alone  (95%  CI  =  1.0--2.7)  (367).  Because  HCV  infection  is  highly  associated  with
injection drug use, it is not known if the increased risk for HIV transmission is a direct
effect of HCV or an effect of drug use, which also has been 
associated with the risk for perinatal HIV transmission. Co-transmission of both HIV and
HCV  can  occur.  Among  children  born  to  HIV-HCV  co-infected  women,  HIV-infected
children  are  more  likely  to  be  HCV-infected  than  children  who  were  HIV-uninfected
(350,362,363).
 Patterns of HCV viremia observed among HCV-infected children without HIV infection
vary widely and 
include  persistent  viremia  (52%),  intermittent  viremia  (42%),  and  lack  of  detectable
viremia despite persistent HCV antibody positivity (6%) (368,369). Compared with with
HCV-infected adults without HIV infection, in which 
2%  demonstrated  a  loss  of  HCV  RNA  over  follow-up  of  3  years,  spontaneous  HCV
clearance  or  transient  viremia  in  infants  has  been  reported  in  17%  of  cases  of
mother-to-child HCV transmission 
(346,368).  However,  whether  this  represents  true  clearance  of  infection  is  unknown
(370);  >40%  of  those  who  become  persistently  HCV  RNA-negative  continue  to
demonstrate biochemical signs of hepatitis 
(368).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Children with HCV infection appear to have a more benign clinical course than persons
who acquire the infection initially as adults, with less frequent and slower progression 
(371--373). In 67 children with transfusion-acquired 
HCV  infection  observed  at  20  years  post  infection,  55%  of  HCV-antibody--positive
children had detectable HCV RNA in their blood; all but one of these viremic children
had normal alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels, and in 17 
children who had liver biopsies at a mean interval of 21 years after infection, only three
had  histologic  evidence  of  progressive  liver  damage  (374).  However,  longer-term
follow-up  of  infected  children  is  needed  to  determine  eventual  late  outcomes  (369).
Older  children  and  adolescents  have  a  higher  rate  of  fibrosis  than  younger  children,
indicating insidious progression of liver disease might occur over the course of years 
(373). In addition, certain children might have a 
more rapidly progressive course of disease 
(375).
 Histopathologic  changes  of  chronic  hepatitis  can  be  present  despite  the  lack  of
symptoms. Histologic findings 
vary; steatosis and portal lymphoid aggregation are most frequent findings and fibrosis,
although rare, can be 
observed.  Children  typically  have  mild-to-moderate  liver  disease  as  determined  by
signs of structural alterations, inflammatory activity, and necrosis 
(368,373,376).  No  direct  correlation  has  been  determined  between  underlying  liver
disease 
and  persistence  of  viremia  or  elevated  ALT  levels,  so  these  are  not  good  prognostic
markers for liver disease.
 No  evidence  exists  to  indicate  that  children  with  HIV-HCV  co-infection  appear
differently from 
HCV-infected  children.  Approximately  90%  of  children  with  vertically-acquired  HCV
infection are asymptomatic and appear to grow normally (368). Serum ALT levels are
high during the first 2 years of life and decline substantially thereafter (368). Among
children, ALT concentrations can fluctuate 
substantially. Among 16% of children, no abnormalities in 
ALT concentration are ever observed. After age 2 years, mean ALT concentrations are
slightly higher among children 
with persistent viremia compared with those with intermittent or no viremia. However,
ALT activity is not a reliable index of ongoing viral replication in HCV-infected children.
 
Diagnosis
 Because of transplacental passage of maternal antibody, anti-HCV antibody positivity is
only considered 
definitive evidence for HCV infection among infants aged >18 months 
(377). Among children aged >18 months and adults 
who  are  anti-HCV  positive  by  a  screening  immunoassay,  a  recombinant  immunoblot
assay (RIBA) is used to confirm HCV infection. Case reports exist of HCV carriers with
undetectable levels of HCV antibody in HIV co-infected 
children  (347,364).  For  children  aged  <18  months,  direct  detection  of  HCV  using  a
nucleic acid test for HCV RNA is required to diagnose HCV infection.
 HCV RNA can be detected by PCR, branched chain DNA (b-DNA) transcription mediated
amplification, or 
other  target  or  signal  amplification  techniques.  Direct  viral  detection  is  required  for
diagnosis  of  infection  in  infants  aged  <18  months;  however,  because  of  passively
transferred maternal HCV RNA, it should not be performed before age 
1--2  months  (377).  Regardless  of  the  result,  the  test  should  be  repeated  because
positive  results  should  be  confirmed  and  a  single  negative  HCV  RNA  result  is  not
conclusive because HCV RNA might only be detected intermittently.
 HCV RNA can be measured qualitatively or quantitatively. Qualitative assays should be
used for 
diagnosis.  Quantitative  assays  are  most  useful  for  monitoring  response  to  antiviral
therapy. However, viral load does not necessarily correlate with the degree of histologic
abnormalities  on  liver  biopsy  and  therefore  is  not  an  accurate  surrogate  for  disease
severity.
 Liver  transaminase  levels  are  not  elevated  in  direct  proportion  to  the  extent  of  liver
disease and correlate only 
loosely  with  biopsy  findings.  Persistent  elevation  indicates  liver  inflammation  and
warrants further evaluation. 
Hepatotoxicity  resulting  from  antiretroviral  therapy  or  from  a  possible  immune
reconstitution syndrome after initiation of HAART also can contribute to an elevation in
liver enzymes 
(378). Liver biopsy is the most specific test for diagnosis and 
assessment  of  hepatic  pathology  and  is  used  to  quantitate  the  amount  of  hepatic
fibrosis  present  and  stage  the  extent  of  disease.  A  liver  biopsy  should  be  strongly
considered before initiating therapy for chronic hepatitis C.
 
Treatment
 Hepatitis A vaccine should be administered to susceptible children aged 
>2 years with chronic viral hepatitis 
(AIII).  Children  with  symptomatic  chronic  hepatitis  C  or  histologically  advanced
pathologic features (bridging necrosis 
or active cirrhosis) should be considered for treatment 
(BI). Patients infected with HCV genotype 1 have a less 
favorable response to therapy than those infected with HCV genotypes 2 or 3 
(372,379,380). In an analysis of published 
trials,  sustained  clearance  of  HCV  RNA  with  interferon  monotherapy  was  26%  in
patients  with  HCV  genotype  1  infection  compared  with  70%  in  patients  with  HCV
genotype 2 or 3 infections 
(380).
 Quantitative  HCV  RNA  levels  are  used  to  assess  treatment  response;  a  sustained
virologic  response  is  defined  as  absence  of  detectable  HCV  RNA  at  the  end  of
treatment. In adults with chronic hepatitis C, HCV RNA levels 
usually  are  assessed  at  baseline  (i.e.,  before  therapy)  and  after  12  and  24  weeks  of
therapy.  Persons  with  undetectable  HCV  RNA  at  completion  of  therapy  should  be
retested 24 weeks after completion of therapy. In HIV-coinfected patients, 
certain health-care providers continue to do serial HCV RNA testing at 6-month intervals
for an additional 1--2 years to exclude later virologic relapse.
 Among  adults  with  HCV  disease,  regardless  of  HIV  infection  status,  combination
therapy  (interferon  plus  ribavirin)  is  the  preferred  initial  therapy  because  of
substantially higher rates of virologic response than with interferon monotherapy (AI).
On  the  basis  of  data  from  adults,  treatment  recommendations  for  children  with  HCV
disease are similar (AI).
 Pegylated  interferon-alfa  requires  once  weekly  administration  and  results  in  more
sustained  interferon  blood  levels  than  with  standard  interferon.  Adult  studies  have
demonstrated increased efficacy with once weekly 
subcutaneous  administration  of  pegylated  interferon-alfa-2B  plus  ribavirin  compared
with  standard  interferon-alfa-2b  plus  ribavirin  (381).  The  combination  of  pegylated
interferon-alfa-2b (1.5 mcg/kg body weight) or --2a (180 mcg) 
administered  subcutaneously  once  weekly  plus  ribavirin  (400  mg  orally  administered
twice  daily)  is  the  preferred  initial  therapy  for  adults  with  HCV  infection  (382)  (AI).
Adults with contraindications to the use of ribavirin have been treated 
with pegylated interferon monotherapy, although the response rate is decreased 
(AII). However, data on the safety and dosing of pegylated interferon-alfa for children
are not available 
(CIII).
 Interferon-alfa-2a or -2b monotherapy is the therapy that has received the most study
among HCV-infected 
children; none of the studies specifically evaluated therapeutic response to interferon
among children coinfected with HIV and 
HCV. In a review of 20 published studies of interferon-alfa monotherapy in HCV-infected
pediatric patients 
without HIV infection, the average end-of-treatment response (negative HCV RNA PCR)
rate was 54% (range: 0--91%) and 
the sustained response rate was 36% (range: 0--73%) 
(380). The youngest child treated in these studies was aged 2 
years. Doses of interferon-alfa used in the pediatric studies have ranged from 1.75 to 5
million units 
(MU)/m2  (maximum  dose:  3--5  MU)  administered  subcutaneously  or  intramuscularly
three  times  weekly  for  4--12  months  (368,372,383--387).  In  one  study,  an  induction
dose of 0.1 MU/kg (maximum dose: 6 MU) was administered subcutaneously once daily
for  2  weeks,  followed  by  the  same  dose  administered  three  times  weekly  for  22
additional weeks 
(384).  In  another  study,  treatment  was  initiated  at  25%--50%  of  the  final  dose  and
advanced to the final dose over the first 1--1½ weeks (379). A commonly used regimen
in children is 3--5 
MU/m2 given subcutaneously three times a week 
(BII). Treatment with interferon-alfa-based therapies is contraindicated in children with
decompensated liver disease, 
significant cytopenias, severe renal or cardiac disorders, and autoimmune disease 
(EII).
 Ribavirin oral solution has been approved for treatment of chronic hepatitis C among
children aged >3 years 
with  compensated  liver  disease  and  for  use  in  combination  with  interferon  alfa-2b,
primarily based on data in adults (388--390) (AII). The dose of interferon-alfa-2b is 3--5 
MU/m2 administered subcutaneously three times a week 
(388,389). Administration of ribavirin in a fixed dose by weight is recommended 
(59). Interferon-alfa monotherapy can be 
used among children with contraindications to ribavirin who cannot receive combination
therapy (e.g., 
unstable cardiopulmonary disease, severe pre-existing anemia, or hemoglobinopathy) 
(BII).
 The ideal length of treatment for HIV-HCV coinfected children is 
unknown.  On  the  basis  of  recommendations  in  HIV-uninfected  adults,  the  duration  of
treatment using interferon-ribavirin combination therapy is 48 weeks for patients with
HCV genotype 1 disease who demonstrate an early virologic response (a decrease of at
least 2 
log10 in HCV viral load as measured by quantitative HCV RNA levels) during the first 12
weeks of treatment 
(AI). Patients with genotype 1 disease who fail to achieve an early virologic response by
week 12 can have treatment discontinued after 12 weeks because they have a limited
chance of achieving a sustained virologic response, regardless of duration of 
therapy, and toxicity outweighs any potential 
benefit (BI). For patients who are not coinfected with HIV who have 
HCV genotype 2 or 3 disease, the recommended treatment duration is 24 weeks 
(BII).  However,  some  health-care  providers  would  treat  HIV-HCV--  coinfected  person
with HCV genotype 2 or 3 disease with 48 weeks of combination therapy (CIII).
 Adverse effects of interferon-alfa in children, although frequent, are usually not severe;
only 5% of children 
require  treatment  discontinuation.  Toxicity  is  dose-related,  with  a  higher  rate  of  side
effects with doses of 10 
MU//m2 (391). The incidence of the majority of adverse effects decreases substantially
during the first 4 months of 
therapy. Premedication with acetaminophen might reduce the incidence of side effects 
(BIII). The most common adverse effect of interferon-alfa is an influenza-like syndrome
that  can  consist  of  fever,  chills,  headache,  myalgia,  and  arthralgia,  abdominal  pain,
nausea,  and  vomiting.  Fever  appears  within  2--6  hours  after  interferon  injection,  and
febrile 
seizures have occurred; influenza-like symptoms are most severe during the first month
of treatment 
(391). Relapsing cases of epistaxis not associated with thrombocytopenia or prolonged
prothrombin time have been reported among 
certain children and occurred more frequently in the first months of treatment. Certain
children experience loss of appetite 
and  a  transient  weight  loss  and  impairment  in  height  growth,  which  resolves  after
completion of therapy 
(392). Transient mild alopecia, usually first occurring after 2--3 months of therapy, also
has been reported. Subtle personality 
changes  have  been  reported  in  42%  of  children;  they  resolve  when  therapy  is
discontinued 
(393).  Neutropenia,  which  resolves  upon  discontinuation  of  therapy,  is  the  most
common  laboratory  abnormality;  anemia  and  thrombocytopenia  are  less  common.
Certain children have experienced antinuclear autoantibodies.
 Periodic  monitoring  of  a  complete  blood  count  is  recommended  among  children
receiving interferon-alfa 
therapy.  Abnormalities  in  thyroid  function  (hypo-  or  hyper-thyroidism)  have  been
reported with interferon-alfa therapy; 
periodic monitoring of TSH is recommended.
 Interferon should be permanently discontinued if a life-threatening toxicity occurs 
(AII).  For  severe  but  nonlife-threatening  reactions,  the  drug  can  be  temporarily
discontinued and reinstated when the reaction has resolved in 
a stepwise fashion beginning with a maximum of 50% of the last administered dose; for
moderate reactions, the dose 
can be reduced by 50% and then increased stepwise by 0.5 or 1 
MU/m2 up to the full dose after the adverse effect 
has resolved (BIII).
 Side  effects  of  ribavirin  include  those  observed  with  interferon  alone  (e.g.,
influenza-like syndrome and 
neutropenia); adverse effects more specific to ribavirin include hemolytic anemia and
lymphopenia.  Depression  and  suicidal  ideation  have  also  been  observed  with  this
combination.  The  hemolytic  anemia  that  occurs  with  the  use  of  ribavirin  is
dose-dependent, might cause a substantial decrease in hemoglobin, and usually occurs
within 1--2 weeks of 
therapy initiation. Therefore, hemoglobin or hemocrit should be obtained pretreatment
and at week 2 and week 4 of therapy, or more frequently if clinically indicated.   
 Ribavirin  inhibits  intracellular  phosphorylation  of  pyrimidine  nucleoside  analogues
(zidovudine, 
stavudine, zalcitabine) in vitro, but the clinical significance of this interaction in 
vivo is unclear. Ribavirin enhances 
intracellular  phosphorylation  of  didanosine;  case  reports  have  indicated  a  potential
increased risk for pancreatitis and mitochondrial toxicity with concomitant use, and this
combination should be used with caution.
Hepatitis B 
 
Epidemiology
 An  important  mode  of  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  acquisition  by  children  is  perinatal  or
mother-to-infant 
transmission. All pregnant women, including HIV-infected women, should be tested for
hepatitis B surface antigen  (HBsAg) during  an  early  prenatal  visit in  each  pregnancy.
Testing should be repeated in late pregnancy for HBsAg-negative women 
at high risk for HBV infection (e.g., injection-drug users, those with intercurrent sexually
transmitted diseases, and those with multiple sexual partners).
 Whether HIV-HBV coinfected women are more likely to transmit HBV to their infants
than women with HBV 
who  are  not  infected  with  HIV  is  unknown.  All  infants  born  to  HIV-HBV  coinfected
women should receive hepatitis 
B vaccine and hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) within 12 hours of birth, the second
dose  of  vaccine  at  age  1--2  months,  and  the  third  dose  at  age  6  months.
Postvaccination  testing  for  antibody  to  HBsAg  (anti-HBs)  and  HBsAg  should  be
performed  at  age  9--15  months,  and  infants  determined  to  be  anti-HBs  and  HBsAg
negative should be revaccinated (59).
 HIV-infected  children  also  might  be  at  risk  for  HBV  infection  through  exposure  to
HBV-infected household 
contacts.  Horizontal  transmission  might  occur  secondary  to  frequent  interpersonal
contact  of  nonintact  skin  or  mucus  membranes  to  blood  or  body  fluids  that  contain
blood (e.g., saliva) from sharing inanimate objects such as toothbrushes. All infants and
previously unvaccinated children should receive the 3-dose hepatitis B vaccine as part
of the 
recommended childhood vaccination schedule.
 HIV-infected adolescents are at increased risk for HBV infection through sexual activity
or injection-drug use. In 
a  study  of  HIV-infected  youth  at  43  Pediatric  AIDS  Clinical  Trials  Group  centers,  19%
were determined to be 
co-infected with HBV; the rate of HBV infection in HIV-infected females was twice the
U.S. population-based rates, and for males, approximately seven times higher 
(394). Similarly, in a study of youth in Toronto, Canada, 16% were determined to 
be  HIV-HBV  co-infected  (395).  Risk  for  HIV-HBV  coinfection  was  related  to  substance
abuse and sexual 
activity,  particularly  among  men  who  have  sex  with  men.  All  HBV-susceptible
adolescents should be vaccinated against hepatitis B.
 Risk for experiencing chronic HBV infection after acute infection in children without HIV
infection is related 
inversely  with  age  at  the  time  of  infection.  In  children  without  HIV  infection,  chronic
HBV infection develops in up to 90% of infants, 30% of children aged 1--5 years, and
6% of older children and adolescents who become infected with HBV. 
In  HIV-HBV  co-infected  adults,  clearance  rates  of  HBsAg  and  HBeAg  are  decreased
compared with HBV-infected 
adults  without  HIV  infection,  and  the  risk  for  chronic  HBV  infection  and  cirrhosis  is
increased  when  HIV  infection  preceded  the  HBV  infection  (396--398);  whether  this  is
true for HIV-infected children is unknown.
 Chronic  HBV  infection  can  lead  to  chronic  hepatitis,  cirrhosis,  and  primary
hepatocellular carcinoma. Among 
persons without HIV infection who are infected with HBV at birth, the lifetime risk for
hepatocellular carcinoma is 50% for men and 20% for women (399); whether this risk is
higher in HIV-HBV coinfected persons is unknown.
 Humoral response to hepatitis B vaccination is reduced in children with HIV infection. In
multiple 
studies,  approximately  25%--35%  of  HIV-infected  children  vaccinated  with  hepatitis  B
vaccine  have  protective  antibody  titers  (400,401).  Younger  children  and  those  with
higher 
CD4+ cell counts are more likely to respond to vaccination 
than 
older,  symptomatic,  and  immunodeficient  HIV-infected  children.  Booster  doses  might
increase response rates 
(402). HIV-infected infants, children, and adolescents should be tested for anti-HBs 1--2
months after completing the vaccination series, and if anti-HBs negative, revaccinated 
(59).
 
Clinical Manifestations
 The  majority  of  HBV  infections  in  children  are  asymptomatic.  Children  with  HIV-HBV
co-infection might have 
a mild acute illness followed by a smoldering, persistent chronic infection. Symptoms of
lethargy, malaise, fatigue, 
and anorexia can occur. Jaundice might be present and, less commonly, hepatomegaly
and splenomegaly.
 Young  children  might  experience  a  serum  sickness-like  prodrome  marked  by
symmetrical arthropathy and skin 
lesions.  Gianotti-Crosti  (papular  acrodermatitis),  urticarial,  or  purpuric  lesions  can
occur. Extrahepatic conditions associated with circulating immune complexes that have
been  reported  with  children  with  HBV  infection  include  aplastic  anemia,  polyarteritis
nodosa, and glomerulonephritis.
 
Diagnosis
 HBsAg  is  the  first  marker  detectable  in  serum;  it  precedes  the  elevation  of  serum
aminotransferases and the onset 
of  symptoms.  Antibody  to  hepatitis  B  core  antigen  (anti-HBc)  appears  2  weeks  after
HBsAg and persists for life. 
Passively  transferred  maternal  anti-HBc  can  be  detectable  in  the  infant  up  to  age  12
months. IgM anti-HBc is highly specific for acute infection but might not be observed in
perinatally acquired infection.
 In  self-limited  infections,  HBsAg  is  eliminated  in  1--2  months,  and  anti-HBs  develop
during convalescence. 
Anti-HBs  indicate  immunity  from  HBV  infection.  After  recovery  from  natural  infection,
both anti-HBs and anti-HBc are 
usually present; only anti-HBs develop in response to the hepatitis B vaccine. In persons
who  become  chronically  infected  (i.e.,  persistently  positive  for  HBsAg  [and  anti-HBc]
beyond 24 weeks), anti-HBs is not detectable. Hepatitis B e 
antigen  (HBeAg)  correlates  with  viral  replication,  DNA  polymerase  activity,  increased
infectivity, and increased severity of liver disease. With clearance of HBeAg, antibody to
HBeAg might be detectable. HBV DNA can be detected in serum 
and peripheral blood mononuclear cells by PCR or branched chain DNA amplification.
Quantitative DNA assays can 
be helpful in evaluating response to therapy.
 
Treatment
 Hepatitis A vaccine should be administered to susceptible children aged 
>2 years with chronic viral hepatitis 
(AIII). Early treatment, if started before integration of viral DNA in the majority of host
hepatocytes  nuclear  DNA,  might  provide  improved  long-term  outcome;  however,
whether treatment of acute HBV infection offers additional benefit over treatment after
infection is known to be chronic is not known and requires further study 
(403,404).
 Indications  for  treatment  of  chronic  HBV  infection  in  HIV-coinfected  children  are  the
same as in 
HBV-infected  children  without  HIV  infection  and  include  1)  evidence  of  ongoing  viral
replication, as indicated by the presence of detectable serum HBV DNA, with or without
HBeAg positivity, for at least 6 months; 2) persistent elevation of 
serum  transaminases  (at  least  twice  the  upper  limit  of  normal);  and  3)  evidence  of
chronic hepatitis on liver biopsy (BII). Patients without necroinflammation usually do not
warrant antiviral therapy.
 The correlates of successful therapy are not well defined, but markers of improvement
would  include  improved  liver  histology  on  biopsy,  normalization  of  hepatic
transaminases, substantial decrease in HBV viral load (HBV DNA levels), and loss of e
antigen with development of e antibody in patients who are HBeAg positive 
(398).  Although  a  decline  in  viral  load  correlates  with  response,  no  target  HBV  DNA
level has been established as representing a successful virologic response. Monitoring
for virologic response of therapy should include regular determination of serum levels
of 
HBV DNA, HBsAg, HBeAg, anti-HBe antibody, and serum transaminases 
(AIII).
 Three therapies have been approved for chronic hepatitis B in adults: interferon-alfa,
lamivudine (3TC), and 
adefovir. Interferon-alfa and 3TC are also approved for treatment of chronic hepatitis B
in children. For treatment of 
chronic  hepatitis  B  in  HIV-HBV  coinfected  adults,  some  specialists  recommend  that
interferon-alfa is the therapy of choice in persons who do not yet require antiretroviral
therapy for HIV infection to preserve use of 3TC and tenofovir for 
later  treatment  of  HIV  infection  (CIII).  For  HIV-HBV  coinfected  adults  who  are
antiretroviral-naïve and require both 
HBV  and  HIV  treatment,  3TC  is  considered  by  some  specialists  to  be  the  therapy  of
choice for HBV, administered in 
HIV-
suppressive doses and in combination with other antiretroviral drugs for treatment of
HIV infection 
(BIII). Considerations would be similar for HIV-HBV co-infected children.
 Interferon-alfa-2a  or  -2b  is  the  therapy  that  has  received  the  most  study  in
HBV-infected 
children  and  is  recommended  for  the  treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  with
compensated  liver  disease  in  patients  aged  >2  years  who  warrant  treatment  (BII).
Interferon-alfa  therapy  is  contraindicated  for  children  with  decompensated  liver
disease,  substantial  cytopenias,  severe  renal  or  cardiac  disorders,  and  autoimmune
disease 
(405) (EII).
 None  of  the  clinical  studies  of  interferon-alfa  therapy  of  chronic  hepatitis  B  have
specifically studied children 
with  HIV-HBV  co-infection.  Certain  studies  of  interferon-alfa  therapy  in  HBV-HIV
co-infected  adults  indicate  that  response  to  therapy  might  be  less  than  in  adults  not
infected by HIV 
(398).
 In  a  review  of  six  randomized  clinical  trials  in  240  HBV-infected  children  aged  >1.5
years, interferon-alfa therapy resulted in HBV DNA clearance in 35% of treated children,
HBeAg clearance in 10%, and normalization of serum transaminases in 39% at the end
of therapy 
(406).  Six to 18 months after therapy discontinuation, 29% of 
children  had  persistent  HBV  DNA  clearance,  and  23%  HBeAg  clearance.  Interferon
alfa-2a or --2b doses ranged from 3 
MU/m2 to 10 MU/m2 administered subcutaneously three times weekly for 3--12 months.
A commonly used regimen in children is 5 MU/m2 three times weekly for 6 months 
(393,406) (BII). In adults with chronic hepatitis who 
are HBeAg-negative, longer therapy (minimum: 12 months) is recommended because
response to interferon therapy 
is lower than in HBeAg-positive patients (BIII).
 More prolonged interferon-alfa therapy is associated with better virologic response in
children 
(405,407,408). Long-term response is also better in children with higher (approximately
twice  the  upper  limit  of  normal)  serum  transaminase  levels  and  lower  HBV  DNA  at
baseline. Studies have indicated improved virologic response with higher dose (i.e., 
10 MU/m2 three times weekly) interferon therapy as initial therapy or for retreatment of
children who have failed before lower dose interferon therapy 
(409,410) (CII). Data from pediatric trials that initiated interferon therapy 
with  prednisone  priming  had  results  comparable  to  those  observed  with  interferon
alone; therefore, prednisone 
administration is not recommended (411--413) 
(DII).
 Adverse  effects  of  interferon-alfa  in  children,  while  frequent,  are  usually  not  severe;
approximately 5% of 
children require treatment discontinuation. Toxicity is dose-related with a higher rate of
side effects with doses of 10 MU/m2 (391). Incidence of the majority of adverse effects
decreases  substantially  dduring  the  first  4  months  of  therapy.  Premedication  with
acetaminophen might reduce the incidence of side effects. 
(BIII)
 The most common adverse effect of interferon-alfa is an influenza-like syndrome that
can consist of fever, 
chills,  headache,  myalgia,  arthralgia,  abdominal  pain,  nausea,  and  vomiting.  Fever
usually appears within 2--6 hours after interferon injection, and rarely febrile seizures
have occurred; the influenza-like symptoms are most severe during the first month of
treatment (391). Relapsing cases of epistaxis (not associated with thrombocytopenia or
prolonged prothrombin time) have been reported in certain children and occurred more
frequently in the first months 
of treatment. Certain children experience loss of appetite and a transient weight loss
and impairment in height growth, which resolves after completion of therapy 
(392). Transient mild alopecia, usually first occurring after 2--3 months 
of therapy, also has been reported. Subtle personality changes have been reported in
42%  of  children  that  resolve  when  therapy  is  discontinued  (393).  Neutropenia,  which
resolves after discontinuation of therapy, is the most common laboratory abnormality;
anemia  and  thrombocytopenia  are  less  common.  Certain  children  have  experienced
antinuclear  autoantibodies.  Periodic  monitoring  of  a  complete  blood  count  is
recommended in children receiving interferon-alfa therapy.
 Abnormalities in thyroid function (hypo- or hyper-thyroidism) have been reported with
interferon-alfa 
therapy; periodic monitoring of TSH is recommended. Interferon should be permanently
discontinued if a 
life-threatening  toxicity  occurs  (AII).  For  severe  but  nonlife-threatening  reactions,  the
drug can be temporarily discontinued, and after the reaction has resolved, treatment
can be reinstated in a stepwise fashion, beginning with a maximum of 50% of 
the last administered dose. For moderate reactions, the dose can be reduced by 50%
and then increased stepwise by 0.5 or 
1 MU/m2 up to the full dose after the adverse effect has resolved 
(BIII).
 Pegylated interferon alfa, which can be administered once weekly, is being studied in
adults with 
HIV-HBV  coinfection.  The  drug  has  been  studied  in  a  limited  number  of  HIV-infected
children for treatment of HIV, but data 
are not yet available (CIII).
 For children who have not responded to interferon-alfa, treatment with interferon-beta
(5 
MU/m2  intramuscularly  three  times  a  week  for  6  months),  which  shares  common
biologic functions with interferon-alfa but is antigenically different, can be considered
(CIII). In a limited number of children, therapy was well tolerated with a low-grade 
fever the most common side effect. At 18 months after completion of therapy, 45% of
children were HBV DNA 
negative,  32%  became  anti-HBe  antibody  positive,  and  50%  normalized  serum
transaminase  levels.  Liver  histopathology  had  substantial  improvement  in  those
children who responded to therapy 
(413,414).
 3TC  is  approved  for  children  and  adults  for  the  treatment  of  compensated  chronic
hepatitis  B  associated  with  evidence  of  HBV  replication  and  active  liver  inflammation
and would be the preferred therapy (as part of a fully suppressive HAART regimen) for
chronic hepatitis B in HIV-infected children who require HIV therapy 
(BIII). 3TC treatment results in a rapid decline in HBV DNA levels and is well tolerated in
HBV-infected children who are not 
HIV-infected,  although  persistent  virologic  response  rates  with  3TC  monotherapy  are
low 
(415,416). In a study of children with HBV infection who were not HIV coinfected, 23%
of 191 children who received 52 weeks of treatment with 3TC had a virologic response
(i.e., the absence of HBe antigen and serum HBV DNA) compared with 13% of 91 who 
received placebo (417). 3TC has been used both as primary therapy and as secondary
therapy for children without HIV 
infection who have not responded to interferon-alfa treatment 
(415--418). Reports of clinical and laboratory exacerbations 
of hepatitis after discontinuation of 3TC treatment have occurred among children with
HBV infection who are 
not infected with HIV. The optimal duration of therapy is not known.
 Extended treatment with 3TC can lead to the development of 3TC-resistant HBV, with
base pair substitutions at the YMDD locus of DNA polymerase. In one pediatric study,
19% of HBV-infected patients treated with 3TC for 1 year had emergence of the YMDD
HBV-variant; a more recent study reported mutant variants in 65% of 3TC 
treated children unresponsive to interferon 
(419), compared with 16%--32% in HBV-infected adults treated with 3TC for 
1  year,  and  49%  after  3  years  (418,420).  However,  the  emergence  of  variants
containing the YMDD motif mutation 
did  not  prevent  HBeAg  seroconversion  or  result  in  substantial  worsening  of  liver
histology 
(420). 3TC resistance should be suspected if HBV replication (as measured by HBV DNA
levels)  increases  or  recurs  while  receiving  treatment.   Among  children  with  HIV-HBV
coinfection, 3TC should not be administered as monotherapy because resistance 
of HIV to 3TC develops (EI). The dose of 3TC approved to treat HBV infection (3 mg/kg
body weight once daily) 
is lower than that required to treat HIV (4 mg/kg twice daily, maximum dose 150 mg
twice daily). If 3TC is 
administered  to  HIV-HBV  co-infected  children  at  the  lower  dose,  the  resulting
subtherapeutic blood levels of 3TC will result in the development of 3TC-resistant HIV;
emergence of the M184V 3TC resistance mutation is observed after only 1--2 
weeks of single drug therapy. In contrast, the dose of 3TC used to threat HIV as part of
combination antiretroviral therapy 
is adequate to treat HBV. Thus, among HIV-HBV coinfected children, if 3TC is used to
treat chronic hepatitis B, 
3TC  should  be  administered  at  the  dose  of  4  mg/kg  twice  daily  in  the  context  of  a
potent combination antiretroviral 
regimen (BIII).
 To  reduce  the  development  of  resistance,  some  specialists  in  adult  HIV  infection
recommend use of adefovir 
or  tenofovir  in  addition  to  3TC  as  part  of  a  fully  suppressive  HAART  regimen  among
HIV-infected  adults  who  require  treatment  for  both  HIV  and  chronic  hepatitis  B,
although  data  to  support  this  approach  are  limited  (CIII).  No  data  are  available  on
appropriate dosing and safety of adefovir or tenofovir in children. 
 Because  clinical  and  laboratory  exacerbations  of  hepatitis  might  occur  if  3TC  is
discontinued among children who are responding to therapy, after anti-HBV-HIV therapy
has  begun,  it  should  be  continued  unless  contraindicated  or  until  the  child  has  been
treated  for  >6  months  after  HBeAg  seroconversion  and  can  be  closely  monitored  on
discontinuation (BIII). If 3TC is discontinued, careful monitoring of serum transaminases
and  HBV  DNA  is  important.   Combination  with  3TC  and  interferon-alfa  has  not  been
demonstrated to be more effective than treatment 
with  interferon  alone  in  adult  patients.  Combined  treatment  with  3TC  and
interferon-alfa
 (10
 MU/m²
 administered
 subcutaneously
 three
 times
 weekly)
administered for 6 to 12 months has been studied in 57 HBV-infected 
children  aged  >2  years  (421).  Sustained  complete  responses  (clearance  of  HBeAg,
HBeAb  seroconversion,  and  normalization  of  serum  transaminases)  was  observed  6
months after completion of therapy in 20% of those receiving 6 months and 
37%  of  those  receiving  12  months  of  therapy.  However,  use  of  this  combination  in
pediatric patients is not 
recommended until more data are available (DII).
 Adefovir dipivoxil (10 mg once daily) is a nucleotide analogue drug active against HBV.
Adefovir at a dose of 10 mg daily, although active against HBV, has minimal anti-HIV
activity,  and  HIV  resistance  has  not  been  observed  to  develop  in  patients  receiving
adefovir at this dose for 48 weeks 
(422). Adefovir is now FDA approved for adults who 
require treatment for chronic hepatitis B but do not yet require treatment for their HIV
infection 
(CIII). Adefovir can cause renal tubular disease when administered in high dosage, but
this is less common at the 10 mg/day dose for treatment of chronic hepatitis B (398).
Safety and effectiveness of adefovir in pediatric patients has not yet been established.
 Tenofovir, a nucleotide analogue similar to adefovir, has in vitro activity against HBV,
but data is limited in 
subjects with HIV-HBV coinfection. It has been administered in certain adult patients at
a dose used for treatment of 
HIV (tenofovir adminstered as 300 mg once daily). Similar to 3TC, tenofovir, when used
for treatment of chronic hepatitis 
B  among  HIV-infected  patients,  should  be  administered  as  part  of  a  fully  suppressive
HAART regimen and not 
as  monotherapy  (CIII).  No  data  are  available  on  safety  and  appropriate  dosing  of
tenofovir among 
children.
 References
 Working  Group  on  Antiretroviral  Therapy  and  Medical  Management  of  HIV-Infected
Children
 Members who assisted in developing this report: Elaine Abrams, M.D., Harlem Hospital
Center, New York, New York; Michael Brady, M.D., 
Columbus  Children's  Hospital,  Columbus,  Ohio;  Carolyn  Burr,  Ed.D.,  Francois-Xavier
Bagnoud  Center,  University  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry  of  New  Jersey,  Newark,  New
Jersey;  Joseph  Cervia,  M.D.,  Long  Island  Jewish  Medical  Center,  New  Hyde  Park,  New
York; Diana Clarke, Pharm.D., Boston Medical 
Center,  Boston,  Massachusetts;  Marilyn  Crain,  M.D.,  University  of  Alabama  at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; Barry Dashefsky, M.D., 
Francois-Xavier  Bagnoud  Center,  University  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry  of  New  Jersey,
Newark,  New  Jersey;  Brian  Feit,  M.D.,  Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration,
Rockville, Maryland; Mary Glenn Fowler, M.D., CDC, Atlanta, Georgia; Samuel Grubman,
M.D., St. Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York, New York; Peter Havens,
M.D., Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Nancy Hutton, M.D., Johns
Hopkins School 
of  Medicine,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  George  Johnson,  M.D.,  Medical  University  of  South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina; Andrea Kovacs, M.D., LAC USC Medical Center, Los
Angeles,  California;  Linda  Lewis,  M.D.,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,
Maryland; Kathleen McGann, M.D. 
, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; James McNamara, M.D.,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland;. 
George  McSherry,  M.D.,  University  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry  of  New  Jersey,  Newark,
New  Jersey;  Mark  Mintz,  M.D.,  Bancroft  NeuroHealth,  Cherry  Hill,  New  Jersey;  Charles
Mitchell,  M.D.,  University  of  Miami  School  of  Medicine,  Miami,  Florida;  Lynne  M.
Mofenson, M.D., National Institutes of 
Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;.  John  Moye,  Jr.,  M.D.,  National  Institutes  of  Health,
Bethesda,  Maryland;.  Sharon  Nachman,  M.D.,  State  University  of  New  York  Health
Science Center at Stony Brook, New York, New York; James Oleske, M.D., University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, 
New Jersey; Savita Pahwa, M.D., North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, New York;
Paul Palumbo, M.D., University of Medicine and Dentistry of 
New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Mary Paul, M.D., Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas;  David  Pugatch,  M.D.,  Hasbro  Children's  Hospital,  Providence,  Rhode  Island;
Tamara  Rakusan,  M.D.,  Children's  Hospital,  Washington,  DC.  Pamela  Rothplez-Puglia,
M.D.,  University  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry  of  New  Jersey,  Newark,  New  Jersey;
Gwendolyn  Scott,  M.D.,  University  of  Miami  School  of  Medicine,  Miami,  Florida;  Leslie
Serchuck, M.D., 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland;. William Shearer, M.D., Baylor College
of  Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;  Stephen  Spector,  M.D.,  University  of  California  at  San
Diego, La Jolla, California; Deborah Storm, Ph.D., University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Russell Van Dyke, M.D., Tulane University School of
Medicine,  New  Orleans,  Loisiana;  Geoffrey  Weinberg,  M.D.,  University  of  Rochester
School of 
Medicine, Rochester, New York; Harland Winter, M.D., Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts; Andrew Wiznia, M.D., Jacobi Medical Center, Bronx, New York;
and Ram Yogev, M.D., Children's Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois.
      
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 11/23/2004 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 11/23/2004
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5314a1.htm
