Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / November 3, 2023 / 72(44);1183–1189 Elise Caruso,
MPH1; Joan M. Mangan, PhD1; Allison Maiuri, MPH1; Beth Bouwkamp, MPH1,2; Nickolas
DeLuca,  PhD1  (View  author  affiliations)  What  is  already  known  about  this  topic?  CDC
recommends testing persons at increased risk for tuberculosis (TB) infection as part of
routine health care using TB blood tests, when possible, and if a diagnosis of latent TB
infection  (LTBI)  is  made,  prescribing  a  short-course  treatment  regimen.  In  2022,
approximately three quarters of reported U.S. TB cases occurred among non–U.S.-born
persons.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  Among  3,647  health  care  providers,
approximately one half (53%) reported routinely testing non–U.S.-born patients for TB.
More  than  one  half  (59%)  reported  prescribing  any  LTBI  treatment;  33%  reported
prescribing  short-course  regimens.  In  addition,  41%  referred  patients  to  a  health
department  for  treatment.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?
Identifying  and  overcoming  barriers  to  recommended  testing  and  treatment  is
important  to  prevent  disease  and  achieve  TB  elimination  goals.  Views  equals  page
views plus PDF downloads Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 CDC recommends testing persons at
increased  risk  for  tuberculosis  (TB)  infection  as  part  of  routine  health  care,  using  TB
blood  tests,  when  possible,  and,  if  a  diagnosis  of  latent  TB  infection  (LTBI)  is  made,
prescribing  a  rifamycin-based,  3-  or  4-month  treatment  regimen  (short-course)  to
prevent the development of TB disease. In 2022, approximately three quarters (73%) of
reported  TB  cases  in  the  United  States  occurred  among  non–U.S.-born  persons.  To
assess TB-related practices among health care providers (HCPs) in the United States,
CDC
 analyzed
 data
 from
 the
 2020–2022
 Porter
 Novelli
 DocStyles
 surveys.
Approximately  one  half  (53.3%)  of  HCPs  reported  routinely  testing  non–U.S.-born
patients for TB, and of those who did, 35.7% exclusively ordered recommended blood
tests, 44.2% exclusively ordered skin tests, and 20.2% ordered TB skin tests and blood
tests. One third (33.0%) of HCPs reported prescribing recommended short-course LTBI
treatment regimens, and 4.0% reported doing none of the treatment practices available
for patients with LTBI (i.e., prescribing short-course regimens, longer course regimens,
or referring patients to a health department). Further efforts are needed to identify and
overcome  barriers  for  providers  to  test  for  and  treat  persons  at  risk  for  TB.  Top  CDC
estimates  that  up  to  13  million  persons  in  the  United  States  have  latent  tuberculosis
infection (LTBI) (1). Approximately 5%–10% of persons with LTBI in the United States
who  remain  untreated  will  develop  tuberculosis  (TB)  disease  at  some  point  in  their
lifetime.  TB  disease  is  infectious  and  can  be  fatal.  In  2022,  approximately  three
quarters (73%) of reported TB cases in the United States occurred among non–U.S.-born
persons (2). The most common countries of birth among non–U.S.-born persons with TB
have been China India, Mexico, Philippines, and Vietnam.* Efforts to eliminate TB in the
United  States  include  finding  and  treating  persons  with  TB  disease,  expanding  LTBI
testing and treatment to prevent progression to TB disease, and addressing disparities
among  groups  disproportionately  experiencing  impacts  of  TB.  Since  1992,  TB  cases
have  generally  decreased  in  the  United  States;  however,  ongoing  TB  prevention  and
control  efforts  are  needed  to  continue  this  trend  and  achieve  TB  elimination  in  the
United  States  (<1  case  per  million  persons  annually)  (2).  Persons  who  were  born  in
countries  where  TB  disease  is  common  are  at  increased  risk  for  TB  infection  (3).  In
addition,  many  persons  born  outside  the  United  States  have  received  the  Bacille
Calmette-Guérin  (BCG)  TB  vaccine.  This  vaccine  is  often  given  to  infants  and  small
children  in  countries  where  TB  is  common  to  decrease  the  risk  for  childhood  TB
meningitis and disseminated disease; however, it is not thought to prevent pulmonary
TB  disease  in  adolescents  and  adults,  and  protection  wanes  over  time  (4).  Having
previously  received  the  BCG  vaccine  can  cause  a  false-positive  reaction  to  TB  skin
tests, leading to falsely diagnosing TB infection or conversely, misattributing a positive
TB  test  result  to  childhood  BCG  vaccination,  even  though  the  patient  does  have  TB
infection  (5).  TB  blood  tests  are  not  affected  by  previous  BCG  vaccination.  When
possible, CDC recommends that health care providers (HCPs) test persons at risk for TB
using  TB  blood  tests  (interferon-gamma  release  assays),  and  if  a  diagnosis  of  LTBI  is
made, prescribe a short-course LTBI treatment regimen in preference to longer course
6-  or  9-month  isoniazid  monotherapy  (2,6).  Persons  at  increased  risk  for  TB  infection
should be tested for TB infection as part of routine health care (6). TB-related questions
were added to the Porter Novelli DocStyles survey to assess HCP testing and treatment
practices. Top Porter Novelli conducts online surveys of U.S. HCPs. TB questions were
included in the 2020, 2021, and 2022 DocStyles annual fall surveys. Each year Porter
Novelli  sets  quotas  to  collect  completed  surveys  from  1,000  primary  care  physicians
(i.e.,  family  practitioners  and  internists)  and  250  each  of  obstetricians/gynecologists,
pediatricians,  and  nurse  practitioners  or  physician  assistants.  Respondents  must
practice  in  the  United  States;  actively  see  patients;  work  in  an  individual,  group,  or
inpatient or hospital practice; and have been practicing for ≥3 years. Respondents were
asked,  “Do  you  routinely  test  non–U.S.-born  patients  for  tuberculosis  (TB)?”  and
instructed to select one of the following response options: “Yes, with a TB blood test,”
“Yes,  with  a  TB  skin  test,”  “Yes,  with  a  TB  blood  test  and  skin  test,”  “No,  I  do  not
regularly  test  for  TB,”  “I  refer  patients  to  the  health  department,”  and  “Prefer  not  to
answer.”  Respondents  were  also  asked  to  select  all  of  the  following  LTBI  treatment
regimens  they  prescribe:  “Isoniazid  &  Rifapentine  –  3  months  (3HP),”  “Rifampin  –  4
months  (4R),”  “Isoniazid  &  Rifampin  –  3  months  (3HR),”  “Isoniazid  –  6  months  (6H),”
“Isoniazid – 9 months (9H),” “I refer patients to the health department,” and “None of
these.” Additional information on methods and response rates is available on the Porter
Novelli  website.†  Data  from  the  three  survey  years  were  combined  by  retaining
variables that were consistent among the years and, for respondents who participated
in  more  than  1  year,  respondents’  most  recent  survey  participation  year  of  data.
DocStyles  respondents  who  responded  “prefer  not  to  answer”  to  either  TB  question
were excluded (47), and obstetricians/gynecologists were excluded because they were
not  asked  questions  about  TB  (563).  Data  from  3,647  DocStyles  respondents  for
2020–2022 were retained and analyzed. Percentages were calculated for demographic
characteristics and TB-related variables. Pearson’s chi-square and Fisher’s exact tests
were  performed  to  examine  associations  between  demographic  characteristics  and
responses  to  TB  questions.  Associations  were  considered  statistically  significant  if
p-values  were  <0.05.  For  significant  chi-square  associations,  post-hoc  calculations  of
adjusted standardized residuals were performed. Bonferroni corrections were applied to
chi-square  p-values  and  adjusted  standardized  residual  critical  values  to  reduce  the
likelihood of type I error (7). Analyses were conducted using SPSS software (version 27;
IBM).  This  activity  was  reviewed  by  CDC,  deemed  not  research,  and  was  conducted
consistent with applicable federal law and CDC policy.§ Top Among 3,647 respondents,
approximately one half (1,945; 53.3%) reported routinely testing non–U.S.-born patients
for TB. A total of 1,446 (39.6%) reported not regularly testing non–U.S.-born patients for
TB,  and  256  (7.0%)  reported  referring  non–U.S.-born  patients  to  a  health  department
for  TB  testing  (Table  1).  The  groups  with  the  highest  proportion  reporting  that  they
routinely test non–U.S.-born patients for TB were pediatricians (63.1%), providers aged
>55  years  (60.3%),  those  in  practice  for  >25  years  (60.4%),  and  those  practicing  in
group outpatient settings (56.7%). The HCPs with the highest percentage reporting that
they did not regularly test non–U.S.-born patients for TB (50.2%) were those working in
inpatient or hospital practices. The HCP groups with the highest percentage reporting
referring  non–U.S.-born  patients  to  a  health  department  for  TB  testing  were  nurse
practitioners  (14.1%)  and  those  working  in  rural  settings  (12.8%).  Among  the  1,945
providers  who  reported  regularly  testing  non–U.S.-born  patients  for  TB,  859  (44.2%)
reported  using  TB  skin  tests,  694  (35.7%)  reported  using  TB  blood  tests,  and  392
(20.2%)  reported  using  TB  skin  tests  and  blood  tests  (Table  2).  Among  the  859
respondents who reported using a TB skin test, this practice was more prevalent among
those who worked in rural settings (59.6% of respondents practicing in rural settings).
Among  all  3,647  respondents,  one  third  (1,203;  33.0%)  reported  prescribing
recommended short-course regimens to treat LTBI, 1,349 (37.0%) reported prescribing
longer  course  treatments,  and  1,490  (40.9%)  reported  referring  patients  to  a  health
department for LTBI treatment (Table 3) (responses were not mutually exclusive). More
than  one  half  (59.1%)  reported  prescribing  any  LTBI  treatment  (either  short-  or
long-course  regimens).  By  provider  group  characteristic,  those  who  most  commonly
prescribed  short-course  treatment  regimens  included  internists  (41.1%),  those
practicing in urban settings (39.4%), and in inpatient or hospital practices (39.7%). The
highest  percentages  of  providers  who  reported  referring  patients  to  a  health
department  for  LTBI  treatment  were  nurse  practitioners  (64.3%),  physician  assistants
(60.7%), and those working in rural settings (56.4%). Among providers across all U.S.
Census  Bureau  regions,  those  in  the  West  reported  the  lowest  prevalence  of  health
department  referrals  for  LTBI  treatment  (32.0%),  but  when  offering  treatment,  these
providers  most  often  reported  prescribing  longer-course  LTBI  treatment  regimens
(43.6%).  Overall,  9.6%  of  physician  assistants  reported  doing  “none  of  these”  LTBI
treatment  practices,  the  highest  prevalence  among  all  specialty  groups  (2.2%  family
practitioner, 3.9% internist, 6.2% nurse practitioner, and  3.2% pediatrician). Top  CDC
and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommend testing persons at increased
risk for TB infection as part of routine health care (3). HCPs are encouraged to use TB
blood tests to test for TB infection; however, blood tests might not be available to all
HCPs (3). It is not generally recommended to use both a TB skin test and a TB blood
test to test the same person (3). Although recommended short-course LTBI treatment
regimens  are  effective,  safe,  and  associated  with  higher  completion  rates  than  are
longer regimens (8), more HCPs indicated that they prescribe longer regimens or refer
patients to a health department, with only one third reporting prescribing short-course
regimens. The reasons for this were not identified in the survey; however, because of
limited  supplies  of  recommended  drugs  and  intermittent  shortages  (9),  short-course
regimens  might  not  be  available  at  all  times  for  all  HCPs.  Because  not  all  health
departments  provide  LTBI  treatment  or  have  the  capacity  to  manage  LTBI  patients,
future  work  is  needed  to  identify  barriers  and  implement  interventions  to  facilitate
prescribing  LTBI  treatment  and  managing  LTBI  patients  by  primary  care  providers.
Overall, U.S. TB case rates have declined during the past 2 decades (2); however, this
trend  could  stagnate  if  actions  to  prevent  TB  are  not  implemented  by  HCPs  serving
groups  experiencing  disproportionate  risk  for  TB  and  progressing  from  LTBI  to  TB
disease. Because of gaps in provider knowledge and practice identified in this analysis
of  DocStyles  results,  priorities  include  continuing  medical  education  about  TB  testing
and  LTBI  treatment,  especially  among  physician  assistants  and  nurse  practitioners;
implementing interventions to improve HCP adherence to recommended practices (e.g.,
electronic  medical  record  prompts);  and  identifying  provider  groups  that  might  need
resources  to  overcome  barriers  to  implementing  recommended  TB  testing  and  LTBI
treatment.  The  findings  in  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  four  limitations.  First,
surveys relied on self-reported data, which are subject to recall and social desirability
biases.  Second,  because  participant  characteristics  might  differ  from  the  overall  U.S.
HCP population, results are not generalizable. Third, closed-ended survey questions did
not allow for nuance in response. Finally, HCPs’ reasons for LTBI testing and treatment
practices  were  not  collected.  Despite  these  limitations,  DocStyles  surveys  provide
valuable insights and can help guide outreach, education, and training efforts. CDC and
partners  provide  resources¶  for  providers  on  recommended  practices  for  testing  and
treating TB and LTBI. To eliminate TB in the United States, further efforts are needed to
address barriers for providers to test for and treat persons at risk for TB. Top Deanne
Weber,  Porter  Novelli  Public  Services;  Fred  Fridinger,  Office  of  Communications,  CDC.
Top  Corresponding  author:  Elise  Caruso,  ecaruso@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of
Tuberculosis  Elimination,  National  Center  for  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB
Prevention,  CDC;  2Oak  Ridge  Institute  for  Science  and  Education,  Oak  Ridge,
Tennessee. Top All authors have completed and submitted the International Committee
of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No
potential
 conflicts
 of
 interest
 were
 disclosed.
 Top
 *
https://www.cdc.gov/tb/statistics/reports/2021/table11.htm
 †
https://styles.porternovelli.com/docstyles  §  45  C.F.R.  part  46,  21  C.F.R.  part  56;  42
U.S.C.  Sect.  241(d);  5  U.S.C.  Sect.  552a;  44  U.S.C.  Sect.  3501  et  seq.  ¶
https://www.cdc.gov/tb/education/provider_edmaterials.htm
 Top
 Top
 Abbreviation:
TB = tuberculosis.
* Respondents were asked to select one response to the question “Do you routinely test
non–U.S.-born  patients  for  tuberculosis  (TB)?”  Those  who  selected  “Prefer  not  to
answer” were removed from the DocStyles sample (47). Percentages might not sum to
100 because of rounding.
† Responses of “TB skin test,” “TB blood test,” or “TB skin test and blood test” were
grouped into the category of “Any type of TB test” for analysis.
§ Associations between provider characteristics and responses to TB testing questions
were  calculated  using  Pearson’s  chi-square  tests  with  Bonferroni-corrected  p-values
unless otherwise indicated, in which case Fisher’s exact test was used.
¶ Value is statistically significant at p<0.05.
** Adjusted standardized residual ≤−3.6, indicating significantly less than expected cell
value.
†† Adjusted standardized residual ≥3.6, indicating significantly greater than expected
cell value.
§§ The “Other” option for gender was not available in the 2020 survey.
¶¶  Because  of  small  cell  sizes,  significance  was  calculated  using  the  Monte  Carlo
approximation  for  Fisher’s  exact  test  (based  on  10,000  sampled  tables  at  a  99%  CI).
Adjusted standardized residuals were not calculated.
*** https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/maps-data/maps/reference/us_regdiv.pdf
††† Determined by the question, “How would you describe the community where you
primarily work?” Top Abbreviation: TB = tuberculosis.
* Respondents were asked to select one response to the question “Do you routinely test
non–U.S.-born  patients  for  tuberculosis  (TB)?”  Those  who  selected  “Prefer  not  to
answer” were removed from the DocStyles sample (47). Percentages might not sum to
100 because of rounding.
† Associations between provider characteristics and responses to TB testing questions
were  calculated  using  Pearson’s  chi-square  tests  with  Bonferroni-corrected  p-values
unless otherwise indicated, in which case Fisher’s exact test was used.
§ The “Other” option for gender was not available in the 2020 survey.
¶  Because  of  small  cell  sizes,  significance  was  calculated  using  the  Monte  Carlo
approximation  for  Fisher’s  exact  test  (based  on  10,000  sampled  tables  at  a  99%  CI).
Adjusted standardized residuals were not calculated.
** https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/maps-data/maps/reference/us_regdiv.pdf
†† Based on responses to the question, “How would you describe the community where
you primarily work?”
§§ Adjusted standardized residual ≤−3.6, indicating significantly less than expected cell
value.
¶¶ Adjusted standardized residual ≥3.6, indicating significantly greater than expected
cell value.
***  Value  is  statistically  significant  at  p<0.05.  Top  Abbreviations:  3HP  =  3  months  of
once-weekly isoniazid plus rifapentine; 3HR = 3 months of daily isoniazid plus rifampin;
4R  =  4  months  of  daily  rifampin;  6H  =  6  months  of  daily  or  twice  weekly  isoniazid;
9H = 9 months of daily or twice weekly isoniazid; LTBI = latent tuberculosis infection.
* Respondents could select more than one response. Respondents were asked to select
one  response  to  the  question,  “Do  you  routinely  test  non–U.S.-born  patients  for
tuberculosis (TB)?” Those who selected “Prefer not to answer” were removed from the
DocStyles sample (47). Percentages might not sum to 100 because of rounding.
†  Associations  between  provider  characteristics  and  selection  or  nonselection  of
response  options  for  LTBI  testing  variable  were  calculated  using  Pearson’s  chi-square
tests  with  Bonferroni-corrected  p-values  unless  otherwise  indicated,  in  which  case
Fisher’s exact test was used.
§ Value is statistically significant at p<0.05.
¶ Adjusted standardized residual ≤−3.6, indicating significantly less than expected cell
value.
** Adjusted standardized residual ≥3.6, indicating significantly greater than expected
cell value.
†† The “Other” option for gender was not available in the 2020 survey.
§§  Because  of  small  cell  sizes,  significance  was  calculated  using  the  Monte  Carlo
approximation  for  Fisher’s  exact  test  (based  on  10,000  sampled  tables  at  a  99%  CI).
Adjusted standardized residuals were not calculated.
¶¶ https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/maps-data/maps/reference/us_regdiv.pdf
*** Determined by the question, “How would you describe the community where you
primarily work?” Top Suggested citation for this article: Caruso E, Mangan JM, Maiuri A,
Bouwkamp  B,  DeLuca  N.  Tuberculosis  Testing  and  Latent  Tuberculosis  Infection
Treatment Practices Among Health Care Providers — United States, 2020–2022. MMWR
Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2023;72:1183–1189.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7244a2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7244a2.htm
