Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Vaccines  are  one  of  the  greatest  success  stories  in  public
health.  Through  use  of  vaccines,  we  have  eradicated  smallpox  and  nearly  eliminated
wild  polio  virus.  The  number  of  people  who  experience  the  devastating  effects  of
preventable infectious diseases like measles, diphtheria, and whooping cough is at an
all-time  low.  To  ensure  the  continued  success  of  vaccines  in  the  United  States,  it’s
crucial to make sure that vaccines are safe. Before vaccines are approved by the Food
and  Drug  Administration  (FDA),  scientists  test  them  extensively  to  ensure  they  are
effective and safe. Vaccines are the best defense we have against infectious diseases,
but no vaccine is actually 100% safe or effective for everyone because each person’s
body  reacts  to  vaccines  differently.  [1,  2,  3]  As  infectious  diseases  become  less
common,  we  hear  less  about  the  serious  consequences  of  preventable  illnesses  like
diphtheria and tetanus and more about the risks associated with vaccines. It’s good to
be  informed  about  health  choices,  but  the  reality  is  that  Americans  have  never  been
healthier than we are today and vaccines have never been safer than they are today.
The benefits of vaccines far outweigh  the risks.  As science continues to  advance,  we
strive  to  develop  safer  vaccines  and  improve  delivery  to  protect  ourselves  against
disease more effectively. This overview focuses on vaccine research, how vaccines are
licensed,  and  how  we  make  sure  vaccines  are  safe.  [1,  2,  3].  During  the  mid-1970s,
there was an increased focus on personal health and more people became concerned
about  vaccine  safety.  Several  lawsuits  were  filed  against  vaccine  manufacturers  and
healthcare providers by people who believed they had been injured by the diphtheria,
pertussis,  tetanus  (DPT)  vaccine.  [4]  Damages  were  awarded  despite  the  lack  of
scientific evidence to support vaccine injury claims. [4] As a result of these decisions,
liability  and  prices  soared,  and  several  vaccine  manufacturers  halted  production.  A
vaccine  shortage  resulted  and  public  health  officials  became  concerned  about  the
return of epidemic disease. To reduce liability and respond to public health concerns,
Congress  passed  the  National  Childhood  Vaccine  Injury  Act  (NCVIA)  in  1986.  This  act
was influential in many ways. [4, 5]. Significant progress has been made over the past
few  years  to  monitor  side  effects  and  conduct  research  relevant  to  vaccine  safety.
Before vaccines are licensed by the FDA, they are tested extensively in the laboratory
and  with  human  subjects  to  ensure  their  safety.  First,  researchers  use  computers  to
predict how the vaccine will interact with the human immune system. Then researchers
test the vaccine on animals including mice, guinea pigs, rabbits, and monkeys. Vaccine
development  and  approval  follows  the  same  general  pathway  as  for  drugs  and  other
biologics. A sponsor who wishes to begin clinical trials with a vaccine must submit an
Investigational New Drug application (IND) to FDA. The IND describes the vaccine, its
method  of  manufacture,  and  quality  control  tests  for  release.  Also  included  are
information  about  the  vaccine’s  safety  and  ability  to  elicit  a  protective  immune
response (immunogenicity) in animal testing, as well as a proposed plan for testing the
drug on humans. [9] FDA reviews the IND to ensure a vaccine’s use in clinical studies
does not place human subjects at unreasonable risk of harm, and adequate informed
consent  and  human  subject  protections  are  in  place.  Participation  in  these  studies  is
completely voluntary. Many individuals choose to contribute their time and energy for
the advancement of science. Before they participate in research, all participants must
demonstrate  that  they  understand  the  purpose  of  the  study  and  its  potential  risks.
Volunteers agree to receive the vaccine and undergo any medical testing necessary to
assess its safety and efficacy. [7]. Learn more about how vaccine safety works in the
United States.   Download vaccine life cycle fact sheet [PDF – 1 page] Vaccine licensing
is a lengthy process that can take 10 years or longer. The FDA requires that vaccines
undergo three phases of clinical trials with human subjects before they can be licensed
for use in the general public: If the clinical trials demonstrate that the vaccine is safe
and  effective,  the  manufacturer  submits  a  Biologics  License  Application  (BLA)  to  FDA
requesting  two  licenses:  one  for  the  vaccine  (product  license),  and  one  for  the
production  plant  (establishment  license).  During  the  application  process,  the  FDA
reviews  the  clinical  trial  data  and  proposed  product  labeling.  In  addition,  the  FDA
inspects  the  plant  and  goes  over  manufacturing  protocols  to  ensure  vaccines  are
produced  in  a  safe  and  consistent  manner.  Only  after  the  FDA  is  satisfied  that  the
vaccine is safe is it licensed for use in the general population. [8] Once FDA licenses a
vaccine,  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  develops
recommendations on how to use vaccines to control disease in the United States. ACIP
is a group of medical and public health experts. Members of the American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) and American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) are among some of
the  groups  that  also  bring  related  immunization  expertise  to  the  committee.  The
Committee’s recommendations are forwarded to CDC’s Director for approval. Once the
ACIP recommendations have been reviewed and approved by the CDC Director and the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, they are published in CDC’s Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). The MMWR publication represents the final and
official  CDC  recommendations  for  immunization  of  the  U.S.  population.  [10]  Phase  4
safety monitoring and research begins after a vaccine is licensed and recommended for
public use. ACIP continues to monitor vaccine safety and effectiveness data even after
the vaccine’s routine use and may change or update recommendations based on that
data.  Also,  FDA  requires  all  manufacturers  to  submit  samples  from  each  vaccine  lot
prior  to  its  release.  Manufacturers  must  provide  the  FDA  with  their  test  results  for
vaccine  safety,  potency,  and  purity.  Each  lot  must  be  tested  because  vaccines  are
sensitive  to  environmental  factors  like  temperature,  and  can  be  contaminated  during
production. The FDA rarely has recalled vaccine lots, for concerns such as mislabeling,
contamination during production, and potential manufacturing problems at a production
plant. [8, 10] While clinical trials provide important information on vaccine safety, the
data  are  somewhat  limited  because  of  the  relatively  small  number  (hundreds  to
thousands) of study participants. Rare side effects and delayed reactions might not be
evident  until  the  vaccine  is  administered  to  millions  of  people.  Therefore,  the  federal
government  established  the  Vaccine  Adverse  Event  Reporting  System  (VAERS),  a
surveillance  system  to  monitor  adverse  events  following  vaccination.  In  addition,
large-linked  databases  containing  information  on  millions  of  individuals,  such  as  the
Vaccine  Safety  Datalink  (VSD),  have  been  created  to  study  rare  vaccine  adverse
events. [1, 3] CDC and FDA monitor the safety of vaccines after they are approved or
authorized.  If  a  problem  is  found  with  a  vaccine,  CDC  and  FDA  will  inform  health
officials, health care providers, and the public. CDC uses 3 systems to monitor vaccine
safety:  In  very  rare  cases,  a  vaccine  can  cause  a  serious  problem,  such  as  a  severe
allergic  reaction.  In  these  instances,  the  VICP  may  provide  financial  compensation  to
individuals  who  file  a  petition  and  are  found  to  have  been  injured  by  a  VICP-covered
vaccine.  Even  in  cases  in  which  such  a  finding  is  not  made,  petitioners  may  receive
compensation through a settlement. In the last decades, numerous changes in vaccine
production and administration have reduced the number of side effects and resulted in
safer vaccines. The importance of vaccine safety will continue to grow throughout the
21st century. The development and licensure of new vaccines will add to the already
robust immunization schedule. Scientists could also perfect new ways of administering
immunizations, including edible vaccines and needleless injections. However they are
formulated  or  delivered,  vaccines  will  remain  the  most  effective  tool  we  possess  for
preventing disease and improving public health in the future. To receive email updates
about this page, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/ensuringsafety/history/index.html
