Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. The Influenza Division at CDC collects, compiles, and analyzes
information  on  influenza  activity  year-round  in  the  United  States.  FluView,  a  weekly
influenza surveillance report, and FluView Interactive, an online application that allows
for  more  in-depth  exploration  of  influenza  surveillance  data,  are  updated  each
week. The data presented each week are preliminary and may change as more data are
received. The U.S. influenza surveillance system is a collaborative effort between CDC
and its many partners in state, local, and territorial health departments, public health
and clinical laboratories, vital statistics offices, health care providers, hospitals, clinics,
emergency departments, and long-term care facilities. Information in five categories is
collected  from  nine  data  sources  in  order  to:    It  is  important  to  maintain  a
comprehensive system for influenza surveillance for the following reasons: 1. Virologic
Surveillance  U.S.  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  Collaborating  Laboratories
System and the National Respiratory and Enteric Virus Surveillance System (NREVSS)
– Approximately 100 public health and approximately 300 clinical laboratories located
throughout all 50 states, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the District of Columbia participate in
virologic  surveillance  for  influenza  through  either  the  U.S.  WHO  Collaborating
Laboratories System or NREVSS. Influenza testing practices differ between public health
and clinical laboratories, and each network provides valuable information for monitoring
influenza  activity.  Clinical  laboratories  primarily  test  respiratory  specimens  for
diagnostic purposes, and data from these laboratories provide useful information on the
timing  and  intensity  of  influenza  activity.  Public  health  laboratories  primarily  test
specimens  for  surveillance  purposes  to  understand  what  influenza  virus  types,
subtypes,  and  lineages  are  circulating  and  the  ages  of  people  that  are  infected.  All
public  health  and  clinical  laboratories  report  each  week  to  CDC  the  total  number  of
respiratory  specimens  tested  for  influenza  and  the  number  positive  for  influenza
viruses, along with age or age group of the person, if available. CDC presents data from
clinical  laboratories  that  include  the  weekly  total  number  of  specimens  tested  for
influenza, the number of positive influenza tests, and the percent positive by influenza
virus  type.  For  public  health  laboratories,  CDC  presents  the  weekly  total  number  of
specimens tested and the number positive by influenza virus type and subtype/lineage.
In  order  to  obtain  specimens  in  an  efficient  manner,  public  health  laboratories  often
receive samples that have already tested positive for influenza at a clinical laboratory.
As  a  result,  monitoring  the  percent  of  specimens  testing  positive  for  influenza  in  a
public  health  laboratory  is  less  useful  (i.e.,  we  expect  a  higher  percent  positive  than
what  is  actually  occurring  in  the  community).  In  order  to  use  each  data  source  most
appropriately  and  to  avoid  duplication,  reports  from  public  health  and  clinical
laboratories are presented separately in both FluView and FluView Interactive. The age
distribution of people who have tested positive for influenza reported from public health
laboratories  can  be  visualized  in  FluView  Interactive.  The  number  and  proportion  of
influenza virus-positive specimens by influenza A subtype and influenza B lineage are
presented by age group (0-4 years, 5-24 years, 25-64 years, and ≥65 years) each week
and  cumulative  totals  are  provided  for  the  season.  Additional  laboratory  data  for
current and past seasons and by geographic level (national, Department of Health and
Human  Services  (HHS)  region,  and  state)  are  available  on  FluView  Interactive.  Virus
Characterization  –  This  includes  genetic  and  antigenic  characterization.  Most  viruses
submitted  for  virus  characterization  in  the  United  States  come  from  state  and  local
public health laboratories. Due to Right Size considerations, public health laboratories
are  asked  to  submit  to  CDC  the  following  specimens,  if  available,  every  other  week
during  the  2023-2024  season:  4  influenza  A(H1N1)pdm09,  6  influenza  A(H3N2),  4
influenza  B/Victoria-lineage,  and  all  influenza  B/Yamagata-lineage  viruses.  Therefore,
the number of viruses characterized will not reflect the actual proportion of circulating
viruses. The goals of genetic and antigenic characterization are to assess how similar
the  currently  circulating  influenza  viruses  are  to  viruses  used  to  produce  current
influenza  vaccines  and  to  monitor  evolutionary  changes  that  continually  occur  in
influenza  viruses  circulating  in  humans.  Specimens  received  from  public  health
laboratories for virus characterization also serve as an important source of viruses to
create
 candidate
 vaccine
 viruses
 for
 use
 in
 future
 influenza
 seasons.
For genetic characterization, all influenza-positive surveillance samples received at CDC
undergo next-generation sequencing to determine their genetic identity.  This analysis
identifies circulating influenza viruses and helps monitor the evolutionary trajectory of
viruses  circulating  in  the  human  population.  Sequences  of  virus  gene  segments  are
used  for  phylogenetic  analysis,  which  allows  categorization  of  viruses  by  genetic
clades/subclades  based  on  the  similarity  of  the  hemagglutinin  gene  segment  and
changes  in  the  protein  sequence.  However,  genetic  changes  that  classify  the
clades/subclades do not always result in antigenic changes. Antigenic characterization
is performed on a subset of viruses representing the genetic diversity in the population.
Analysis includes hemagglutination inhibition and/or neutralization assays to compare
antigenic properties of circulating viruses to those of cell culture- and egg-propagated
reference  viruses  that  represent  viruses  used  in  the  current  influenza  vaccines.  This
allows for the detection of “antigenic drift”, a term that describes the gradual antigenic
change  that  occurs  as  viruses  evolve  to  escape  host  immune  pressure.  CDC  also
analyzes  influenza  viruses  collected  by  public  health  laboratories  for  susceptibility  to
influenza  antivirals,  including  neuraminidase  inhibitors  (oseltamivir,  zanamivir,  and
peramivir) and a PA cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor (baloxavir). Susceptibility to
the  neuraminidase  inhibitors  is  assessed  using  next-generation  sequencing  analysis.
Neuraminidase sequences of viruses are inspected to detect the presence of amino acid
substitutions previously associated with reduced or highly reduced inhibition by any of
the  three  neuraminidase  inhibitors.  In  addition,  a  subset  of  viruses  is  tested  using  a
neuraminidase  inhibition  assay.  The  level  of  neuraminidase  activity  inhibition  is
reported using the thresholds recommended by the WHO Expert Working Group of the
Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS).  Susceptibility to baloxavir
is  assessed  using  next-generation  sequencing  analysis  to  identify  amino  acid
substitutions in the PA protein previously associated with reduced susceptibility to this
antiviral.  A  subset  of  representative  viruses  is  also  tested  phenotypically  using  a  cell
culture-based assay (e.g., influenza replication inhibition neuraminidase-based assay –
IRINA).  For  surveillance  purposes,  antiviral  susceptibility  is  typically  conducted  on
viruses that are collected from patients not treated with influenza antivirals or before
initiation  of  treatment.  Results  of  genetic  and  antigenic  characterization  and  antiviral
susceptibility testing are presented in the virus characterization and antiviral resistance
sections  of  the  FluView  report.  Surveillance  for  Novel  Influenza  A  Viruses  –  In  2007,
human infection with a novel influenza A virus became a nationally notifiable condition
in the United States. Novel influenza A virus infections include all human infections with
influenza  A  viruses  that  are  different  from  currently  circulating  human  seasonal
influenza  H1  and  H3  viruses.  These  viruses  include  those  that  are  subtyped  as
nonhuman  in  origin  and  those  that  cannot  be  subtyped  with  standard  laboratory
methods and reagents. Rapid detection and reporting of human infections with novel
influenza  A  viruses  –  viruses  against  which  there  is  often  little  to  no  pre-existing
immunity  in  the  population  –  is  important  to  facilitate  prompt  awareness  and
characterization  of  influenza  A  viruses  with  pandemic  potential  and  accelerate  the
implementation of public health responses to limit the transmission and impact of these
viruses. Newly identified cases of human infections with novel influenza A viruses in the
United States are reported in FluView and additional information, including case counts
by  geographic  location,  virus  subtype,  and  calendar  year  or  season,  are  available
on  FluView  Interactive.  2.  Outpatient  Illness  Surveillance  Information  on  outpatient
visits to health care providers for respiratory illness referred to as influenza-like illness
[ILI) is collected through the U.S. Outpatient Influenza-like Illness Surveillance Network
(ILINet). ILINet consists of outpatient healthcare providers in all 50 states, Puerto Rico,
the District of Columbia, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. More than 110 million patient visits
were  reported  during  the  2022-23  season.  Each  week,  more  than  3,400  outpatient
health care providers around the country report to CDC the number of patient visits for
ILI by age group (0-4 years, 5-24 years, 25-49 years, 50-64 years, and ≥65 years) and
the total number of visits for any reason. A subset of providers also reports total visits
by age group. For this system, ILI is defined as fever (temperature of 100°F [37.8°C] or
greater)  and  a  cough  and/or  a  sore  throat.  Since  the  2021-22  season,  the  case
definition no longer includes “without a known cause other than influenza”. Since ILINet
monitors  visits  for  ILI  and  not  laboratory-confirmed  respiratory  viruses,  it  will  capture
visits due to any respiratory pathogen that presents with the symptoms of fever plus
cough  or  sore  throat.  These  data  should  be  evaluated  in  the  context  of  other
surveillance  data  to  obtain  a  complete  and  accurate  picture  of  influenza  activity.
Additional data on medically attended visits for ILI for current and past seasons and by
geographic level (national, HHS region, and state) are available on FluView Interactive.
The national percentage of patient visits to healthcare providers for ILI reported each
week is calculated by combining state-specific data weighted by state population. This
percentage is compared each week with to the national baseline, which is 2.9% for the
2023-2024  influenza  season.  The  baseline  is  developed  by  calculating  the  mean
percentage of patient visits for ILI during non-influenza weeks for the most recent two
seasons  and  adding  two  standard  deviations  (2021-2022  and  2022-2023).  A
non-influenza  time  period  (e.g.,  a  “non-influenza  week”)  is  defined  as  two  or  more
consecutive weeks in which each week accounted for less than 2% of the season’s total
number  of  specimens  that  tested  positive  for  influenza  in  public  health  laboratories.
Region-specific baselines are calculated using the same methodology. Due to the wide
variability in regional level data, it is not appropriate to apply the national baseline to
regional  data.  Regional  baselines  for  the  2023-2024  influenza  season  are:  Region
1 —1.9%
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont Region
2 — 4.2%
New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands Region 3 — 2.4%
Delaware,  District  of  Columbia,  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia
Region 4 — 3.3%
Alabama,  Florida,  Georgia,  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  and
Tennessee Region 5 — 2.3%
Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin Region 6 — 3.7%
Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas Region 7 — 2.0%
Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska Region 8 — 3.2%
Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming Region 9 — 3.6%
Arizona, California, Hawaii, and Nevada Region 10 — 1.9%
Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington   ILI Activity Indicator Map: — Activity levels in a
jurisdiction  are  based  on  the  percent  of  outpatient  visits  due  to  ILI  compared  to  the
average  percent  of  ILI  visits  that  occur  during  weeks  with  little  or  no  influenza  virus
circulation (non-influenza weeks) in that jurisdiction. The number of sites reporting each
week  is  variable;  therefore,  baselines  are  adjusted  each  week  based  on  which  sites
within  each  jurisdiction  provide  data.  To  perform  this  adjustment,  provider  level
baseline ILI ratios are calculated for providers that have a sufficient reporting history.
Providers that do not have the required reporting history to calculate a provider-specific
baseline  are  assigned  the  baseline  ratio  for  their  practice  type.  The  jurisdiction  level
baseline  is  then  calculated  using  a  weighted  sum  of  the  baseline  ratios  for  each
contributing provider. The activity levels compare the mean reported percent of visits
due  to  ILI  during  the  current  week  to  the  mean  reported  percent  of  visits  due  to  ILI
during  non-influenza  weeks.  The  13  activity  levels  correspond  to  the  number  of
standard deviations below, at, or above the mean for the current week compared to the
mean during non-influenza weeks. Activity levels are classified as minimal (levels 1-3),
low (levels 4-5), moderate (levels 6-7), high (levels 8-10), and very high (levels 11-13).
An  activity  level  of  1  corresponds  to  an  ILI  percentage  below  the  mean,  level  2
corresponds to an ILI percentage less than 1 standard deviation above the mean, level
3  corresponds  to  an  ILI  percentage  more  than  1  but  less  than  2  standard  deviations
above  the  mean,  and  so  on,  with  an  activity  level  of  10  corresponding  to  an  ILI
percentage  8  to  11  standard  deviations  above  the  mean.  The  very  high  levels
correspond to an ILI percentage 12 to 15 standard deviations above the mean for level
11, 16 to 19 standard deviations above the mean for level 12, and 20 or more standard
deviations  above  the  mean  for  level  13.  The  ILI  Activity  Indicator  map  reflects  the
intensity of ILI activity, not the extent of geographic spread of ILI, within a jurisdiction.
Therefore,  outbreaks  occurring  in  a  single  area  could  cause  the  entire  jurisdiction  to
display  high  or  very  high  activity  levels.  In  addition,  data  collected  in  ILINet  may
disproportionally represent certain populations within a jurisdiction, and therefore, may
not  accurately  depict  the  full  picture  of  respiratory  illness  activity  for  the  entire
jurisdiction. Differences in the data presented here by CDC and independently by some
health  departments  likely  represent  differing  levels  of  data  completeness  with  data
presented  by  the  health  department  likely  being  more  complete.  The  ILI  Activity
Indicator  Map  displays  state-specific  and  core-based  statistical  area  (CBSA)  specific
activity  levels  by  week  for  multiple  seasons  and  allows  a  visual  representation  of
relative  levels  of  ILI  activity  from  state  to  state.  More  information  is  available
on
 FluView
 Interactive.
 3.
 Hospitalization
 Surveillance
 FluSurv-NET
Laboratory-confirmed  influenza-associated  hospitalizations  are  monitored  through  the
Influenza
 Hospitalization
 Surveillance
 Network
 (FluSurv-NET).
 FluSurv-NET
 has
conducted  population-based  surveillance  for  laboratory-confirmed  influenza-related
hospitalizations in children younger than 18 years of age since the 2003-2004 influenza
season and in adults since the 2005-2006 influenza season. The current network covers
over  90  counties  or  county  equivalents  in  the  10  Emerging  Infections  Program  (EIP)
states (CA, CO, CT, GA, MD, MN, NM, NY, OR, and TN) and four additional states through
the  Influenza  Hospitalization  Surveillance  Project  (MI,  NC,  OH,  and  UT).  The  network
represents approximately 9% of US population (~30 million people). A full description of
this system is available at Influenza Hospitalization Surveillance Network (FluSurv-NET).
FluSurv-NET data including hospitalization rates for multiple seasons and different age
groups  and  data  on  patient  characteristics  (such  as  virus  type,  demographic,  and
clinical information) are available on FluView Interactive.   National Healthcare Safety
Network  (NHSN)  Hospitalization  Surveillance  During  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  all
hospitals registered with CMS and non-CMS hospitals were required to report COVID-19
and  influenza  information  on  laboratory  testing,  capacity  and  utilization,  and  patient
flows to facilitate the public health response to the 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic. As of December 15, 2022, these data are required to be reported to CDC’s
NHSN, which monitors national and local trends in healthcare system stress, capacity,
and community disease levels for approximately 6,000 hospitals in the United States.
The detailed list of reported data elements are provided here. More information on the
transition
 to
 the
 NHSN
 system
 can
 be
 found
 here:
 https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/covid19/transition.html.  Influenza  data  elements  include:
The  numbers  of  new  hospital  admissions  with  laboratory-confirmed  influenza  virus
infection  reported  to  NHSN  are  aggregated  by  week  at  the  national  and  HHS  region
level.  New  hospital  admissions  are  defined  as  patients  who  were  admitted  to  an
inpatient  bed  on  the  previous  calendar  day  and  had  a  positive  influenza  test  at
admission  or  during  the  14  days  prior.  Laboratory  confirmation  includes  detection  of
influenza  virus  infection  through  molecular  tests  (e.g.,  polymerase  chain  reaction,
nucleic  acid  amplification),  antigen  detection  tests,  immunofluorescence  tests,  and
virus  culture.  For  hospital  reporting,  laboratory-confirmed  influenza  is  categorized  as
influenza
 A
 or
 B.
 These
 datafiles
 are
 available
 to
 the
 public
 at
https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/Respiratory-Virus-Response-RVR-United-
States-Hospi/9t9r-e5a3.  Number  of  hospital  admissions,  ICU  hospitalizations,  and
hospital  admissions  rates  for  the  current  season  and  the  2022-2023  season  by
geographic  level  (national  and  HHS  region)  are  available  on  FluView  Interactive  4.
Mortality Surveillance National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Mortality Surveillance
Data  –  NCHS  collects  death  certificate  data  from  state  vital  statistics  offices  for  all
deaths  occurring  in  the  United  States.  Deaths  included  in  this  component  of  the  U.S.
Influenza Surveillance System are those which are classified based on ICD-10 multiple
cause of death codes as associated with influenza, COVID-19, or pneumonia. Data are
aggregated by the week of death occurrence. NCHS surveillance data are included in
FluView  one  week  after  the  week  of  death  and  percentages  for  earlier  weeks  are
continually revised and may increase or decrease as new and updated death certificate
data  are  received  by  NCHS.  Three  measures  have  been  used  to  monitor  influenza
mortality:  pneumonia  and/or  influenza  (P&I);  pneumonia,  influenza,  and/or  COVID-19
(PIC); and influenza (I). Prior to the 2020-2021 influenza season, the NCHS surveillance
data  were  used  to  calculate  the  percent  of  all  deaths  occurring  each  week  that  had
pneumonia  and/or  influenza  (P&I)  listed  as  a  cause  of  death.  Since  many  influenza
deaths and many COVID-19 deaths have pneumonia included on the death certificate,
P&I does not measure the impact of influenza in the same way that it had prior to the
COVID-19  pandemic.  This  is  because  the  proportion  of  pneumonia  deaths  associated
with  influenza  is  now  influenced  by  COVID-19-related  pneumonia.  Beginning  in  the
2020-2021 influenza season, COVID-19 coded deaths were added to P&I to create the
PIC (pneumonia, influenza, and/or COVID-19) classification. PIC includes all deaths with
pneumonia, influenza, and/or COVID-19 listed on the death certificate. Starting with the
2023-2024 influenza season, the percent of deaths with influenza listed on the death
certificate will be displayed in FluView. P&I no longer measures the impact of influenza
in the same way it had prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the PIC measure is largely
being  driven  COVID-19  activity  making  it  difficult  to  monitor  the  impact  of  influenza
using
 that
 measure.
 Although
 monitoring
 influenza-only
 coded
 deaths
 will
underestimate  the  full  impact  of  influenza  mortality,  this  measure  allows  for  tracking
trends in the impact of influenza on mortality and is not as influenced by COVID-19 as
the  other  two  measures.  Additionally,  influenza  burden  estimates  are  calculated  that
account for underreporting of influenza on death certificates. All three measures will be
available on FluView Interactive, including baselines and thresholds for P&I and PIC. The
PIC  and  P&I  percentages  are  compared  to  a  seasonal  baseline  of  P&I  deaths  that  is
calculated  using  a  periodic  regression  model  incorporating  a  robust  regression
procedure applied to data from the four years prior to the COVID-19 pandemic (2015
week  10  through  2020  week  9)  and  the  2022-2023  influenza  season.  An  increase  of
1.645 standard deviations above the seasonal baseline of P&I deaths is considered the
“epidemic  threshold,”  (i.e.,  the  point  at  which  the  observed  proportion  of  deaths
attributed to pneumonia, influenza, or COVID-19 was significantly higher than would be
expected  at  that  time  of  the  year  in  the  absence  of  substantial  influenza-  or
COVID-19-related mortality). Additional influenza, P&I and PIC mortality data for current
and  past  seasons  and  by  geographic  level  (national,  HHS  region,  and  state)  are
available  on  FluView  Interactive.  Data  displayed  on  the  regional  and  state-level  are
aggregated  by  the  state  of  residence  of  the  decedent.  Influenza-Associated  Pediatric
Mortality  Surveillance  System  —  Influenza-associated  pediatric  mortality  became  a
nationally
 notifiable
 condition
 in
 2004.
 For
 surveillance
 purposes,
 an
influenza-associated pediatric death is defined as a death in a person less than 18 years
of age, resulting from a clinically compatible illness that was confirmed to be influenza
by  an  appropriate  laboratory  diagnostic  test.  There  should  be  no  period  of  complete
recovery  between  the  illness  and  death.  Demographic  and  clinical  information  is
collected  on  each  case  and  reported  to  CDC.  Information  on  influenza-associated
pediatric deaths including basic demographics, underlying medical conditions, bacterial
co-infections, and place of death, is available on FluView Interactive for the current and
past seasons. 5. Long-term Care Facilities The NHSN Long-term Care Facility influenza
surveillance was reported during the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 influenza seasons. This
component  was  discontinued  in  2023.  Data  from  previous  seasons  influenza  seasons
will remain available in past weekly surveillance reports. It is important to remember
the following about influenza surveillance in the United States. To receive weekly email
updates about Seasonal Flu, enter your email address:
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/overview.htm
