 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Lindane* is an organochlorine
pesticide found in certain prescription-only shampoos and topical lotions used to treat 
pediculosis (i.e., lice infestation) and scabies; lindane has been associated with human
neurologic toxicity 
(1,2). In 2004, CDC was alerted to cases of illness caused by unintentional ingestion of
lindane  by  persons  mistaking  the  product  for  a  liquid  oral  medication  (e.g.,  cough
syrup). To assess the extent of illness from ingestion of lindane, CDC, with assistance
from the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and state health departments,
collected case reports and analyzed data from the Sentinel Event Notification System
for Occupational Risks-Pesticides (SENSOR-Pesticides) program and the Toxic 
Exposure  Surveillance  System  (TESS).  This  report  summarizes  the  results  of  that
analysis, which identified 870 cases of unintentional 
lindane ingestion during 1998--2003, and describes two examples of lindane ingestions.
To reduce the risk of 
lindane  ingestion,  public  health  authorities  should  alert  clinicians  to  the  hazards  of
lindane and the importance of following FDA usage guidelines, which include dispensing
lindane in manufacturer-produced, 1- or 2-ounce single-use containers. 
Case Reports 
 Case 1. In November 2004, the Washington State Department of Health reported that a
boy aged 3 years 
ingested  approximately  1  teaspoon  of  1%  lindane  shampoo  from  a  previously  used
2-ounce bottle. Subsequently, the mother 
induced vomiting in the boy twice; 1 hour later the boy collapsed and experienced a
tonic-clonic seizure lasting 4--5 minutes. After 
3 hours, the child was discharged from the emergency department in stable condition. 
 Case 2. In December 2003, a man aged 47 years in Texas mistakenly ingested 1 ounce
of lindane (percentage 
concentration unknown) from a bottle he believed to be cough syrup. The man vomited;
he contacted the poison control center 
the following morning. He did not seek clinical evaluation.
Surveillance Data
 Data were analyzed from pesticide poisoning surveillance systems participating in the
SENSOR-Pesticides 
program†  to  identify  symptomatic  cases  involving  unintentional  topical  lindane
ingestions during 1998--2003. Cases were classified as definite, probable, possible, or
suspicious  based  on  the  clinical  interpretation  of  signs  or  symptoms  reported  by  a
physician 
or  patient,  and  evidence  of  lindane  ingestion  (3,4).  Cases  were  also  obtained  from
TESS§,  which  is  maintained  by  the  American  Association  of  Poison  Control  Centers;
poison 
information specialists determined which cases had signs and 
symptoms  consistent  with  lindane  exposure.  Illness  severity  was  categorized  for  all
cases. Excluded were cases involving ingestion of veterinary and agricultural pesticide
products that contained lindane. 
 During  1998--2003,  TESS  reported  857  symptomatic  cases  of  unintentional  lindane
ingestion (Figure); none of the 
cases  were  reported  as  resulting  in  death.  Severity  was  low  in  778  cases  (91%),
moderate in 71 cases (8%), and high in eight 
cases (1%) (4). Among 823 patients with known ages, 
median age was 13 years (range: <1--86 years); 53% were 
female.  Signs  and  symptoms  included  vomiting  (59%),  nausea  (18%),  oral  irritation
(19%), abdominal cramping (4%), cough (4%), 
and seizure (3%).
 During  1998--2003,  SENSOR-Pesticides  identified  a  total  of  13  symptomatic  cases  of
unintentional lindane ingestion. 
Four  cases  (31%)  were  classified  as  definite,  two  (15%)  as  probable,  six  (46%)  as
possible, and one (8%) as suspicious. Severity 
was low in eight cases (62%), moderate in three cases (23%), and high in two cases
(15%) 
(3).  Median  age  was  7  years  (range:  <1--58  years),  and  69%  were  male.  Signs  and
symptoms  included  vomiting  (69%),  nausea  (46%),  headache  (23%),  seizure  (23%),
abdominal  cramping  (8%),  and  confusion  (8%).  Six  (46%)  cases  in  children  and  four
(31%) cases in adults were the result 
of mistaking lindane for cough syrup; two (15%) cases were in unsupervised children
who drank lindane, and one (8%) case was the result of pharmacy error (i.e., lindane
was recovered from a bottle labeled albuterol).
 In addition to lindane, FDA-approved treatments for 
pediculosis include two over-the-counter medications 
(pyrethrin/piperonyl  butoxide  and  permethrin)  and  malathion,  a  prescription-only
therapy.  During  1998--2003,  TESS  identified  523  symptomatic  cases  of  unintentional
ingestion  of  these  alternative  medications  (Figure).  Median  age  was  9  years  (range:
<1--67 years). Among TESS reports, unintentional lindane ingestions were more likely
to produce illness (857 illnesses of 1,463 
ingestions [58%]) than unintentional ingestions of each of three other medications, and
more  likely  to  produce  illness  than  all  three  of  those  medications  combined  (523
illnesses  of  1,691  ingestions  [31%];  odds  ratio  =  3.16,  95%  confidence  interval  =
2.72--3.67). 
 Reported by: J Sievert, Texas Dept of State Health Svcs. M Lackovic, MPH, Louisiana
Dept of Health and Hospitals. A Becker, PhD, Florida Dept of Health. DH Lew, Oregon
Dept  of  Human  Svcs.  B  Morrissey,  Washington  State  Dept  of  Health.  J  Blondell,  PhD,
Office  of  Pesticide  Programs,  US  Environmental  Protection  Agency.  LY  Kim-Jung,
PharmD, MR Pitts, PharmD, CA Holquist RPh, Food and Drug Admin. AM Petersen, MPH,
JS Alonso-Katzowitz, GM Calvert, MD, Div of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations, and Field
Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, CDC.
Editorial Note:
  Pediculosis  and  scabies  are  common  human  parasitic  infestations.  This  report
indicates that when lindane, 
a treatment for pediculosis and scabies, is unintentionally 
ingested, illness can occur, including vomiting and seizures. In 
1995,  lindane  was  changed  to  a  second-line  therapy  for  pediculosis  because  safer
alternatives existed (5). Lindane also had the slowest pediculicidal and least effective
ovicidal 
activity compared with three other approved pediculicides (i.e., 1% permethrin, 
0.3% pyrethrin, and 0.5% malathion) (6). In 2003, in light of continued postmarketing
surveillance 
reports  of  toxicity,  FDA  revised  product  labeling  guidelines  to  limit  the  amount  of
lindane  dispensed  to  1-  or  2-ounce  single-use  containers  and  to  require  providing
patients with a Medication Guide warning of risks from inappropriate use. In addition,
FDA issued a Public 
Health Advisory with these changes (7). The new advisory, along with a substantial 
increase in retail price for lindane, appear to 
have resulted in a declining number of cases of lindane ingestion (Figure). This decline
is similar to the 67% decrease in lindane prescriptions from 1998 to 2003 (8).
 Before  the  advisory,  bottles  of  bulk  lindane  were  sometimes  repackaged  by
pharmacies into smaller bottles resembling 
those used for liquid oral medications (e.g., cough syrup). This 
resemblance likely contributed to many unintentional 
ingestions.  Subsequent  to  the  advisory,  bottles  of  bulk  lindane  still  in  use  were  not
recalled  from  pharmacies.  Therefore,  some  repackaging  might  still  occur.  In  addition,
consumers might have repackaged lindane in their homes. 
 In September 2004, the North American Task Force on Lindane drafted an action plan
for future use. On January 1, 
2005,  Canada  withdrew  registration  of  lindane  for  agricultural  pest  control;  Mexico  is
working  on  a  plan  to  phase  out  all  uses  of  lindane.  However,  with  the  exception  of
California, which banned lindane for medicinal use on January 1, 2002, 
U.S. representatives to the North American Commission for Environmental Cooperation
announced that the United States 
will continue to allow use of lindane as both a pesticide and pharmaceutical 
(9).
 The findings in this report are subject to at least three limitations. First, because of the
passive surveillance methodology of TESS and SENSOR, the number of reported cases
is likely fewer than the number of actual cases. Second, certain 
eligible  cases  might  have  been  inadvertently  excluded  because  of  erroneous
information that suggested exposure to lindane in 
a veterinary or agricultural product. Finally, although all cases were symptomatic, the
possibility  of  false  positives  cannot  be  excluded.  Because  clinical  findings  of  lindane
poisoning  are  nonspecific  and  no  standard  diagnostic  test  exists,  certain  illnesses
related temporally to lindane exposure might not have been caused by the exposure. 
 Lindane use in shampoos and lotions for treatment of 
pediculosis and scabies is declining. However, because of the 
toxicity of lindane and the potential for illness from unintentional ingestion, health-care
providers should be 
educated  regarding  appropriate  use  and  packaging.  Lindane  is  a  second-line  therapy
for both scabies and lice and should not be tried unless other treatments have failed or
are intolerable; use of lindane also should be avoided for persons weighing less than
110 pounds (50 kg). Because of the risk for toxicity, treatment should not be repeated,
even if itching persists; itching can occur, even after successful treatment (especially
for  scabies)  and  can  be  treated  symptomatically.  In  addition,  pharmacists  should  not
transfer
 lindane
 to
 other
 containers
 and
 should
 only
 dispense
 lindane
 in
manufacturer-provided 1- or 2-ounce 
containers.  Finally,  periodic  educational  outreach  programs  can  help  increase
awareness among health-care providers of the new lindane use guidelines.
References 
 * Lindane is also referred to as gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane. 
 † SENSOR-Pesticides is a surveillance program coordinated by the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) at CDC and conducted by health departments
in  nine  states.  Most  participating  states  collect  information  on  both  nonoccupational
and occupational pesticide poisonings from 
various sources (e.g., poison control centers, workers' compensation agencies, or state
departments of agriculture). However, priority is given to occupational cases; therefore,
the number of nonoccupational poisoning cases is limited.
 § TESS receives reports from nearly all poison control centers nationwide. 
 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Date last reviewed: 6/2/2005
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5421a2.htm
