Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / February 12, 2016 / 65(05);122–127 On February 5,
2016, this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. Please note: Updated
guidance has been published. To view the update, please click here. Titilope Oduyebo,
MD1,2; Emily E. Petersen, MD2; Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD3; Paul S. Mead, MD4; Dana
Meaney-Delman, MD5; Christina M. Renquist, MPH6; Sascha R. Ellington, MSPH2; Marc
Fischer, MD4; J. Erin Staples, MD, PhD4; Ann M. Powers, PhD4; Julie Villanueva, PhD4;
Romeo  R.  Galang,  MD1,7;  Ada  Dieke,  DrPH1,2;  Jorge  L.  Muñoz,  PhD4;  Margaret  A.
Honein,  PhD6;  Denise  J.  Jamieson,  MD2  (View  author  affiliations)  Views  equals  page
views plus PDF downloads Figure 1 Figure 2 CDC has updated its interim guidelines for
U.S. health care providers caring for pregnant women during a Zika virus outbreak (1).
Updated  guidelines  include  a  new  recommendation  to  offer  serologic  testing  to
asymptomatic  pregnant  women  (women  who  do  not  report  clinical  illness  consistent
with  Zika  virus  disease)  who  have  traveled  to  areas  with  ongoing  Zika  virus
transmission.  Testing  can  be  offered  2–12  weeks  after  pregnant  women  return  from
travel. This update also expands guidance to women who reside in areas with ongoing
Zika  virus  transmission,  and  includes  recommendations  for  screening,  testing,  and
management  of  pregnant  women  and  recommendations  for  counseling  women  of
reproductive age (15–44 years). Pregnant women who reside in areas with ongoing Zika
virus  transmission  have  an  ongoing  risk  for  infection  throughout  their  pregnancy.  For
pregnant  women  with  clinical  illness  consistent  with  Zika  virus  disease,*  testing  is
recommended  during  the  first  week  of  illness.  For  asymptomatic  pregnant  women
residing in areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission, testing is recommended at the
initiation  of  prenatal  care  with  follow-up  testing  mid-second  trimester.  Local  health
officials should determine when to implement testing of asymptomatic pregnant women
based on information about levels of Zika virus transmission and laboratory capacity.
Health  care  providers  should  discuss  reproductive  life  plans,  including  pregnancy
intention  and  timing,  with  women  of  reproductive  age  in  the  context  of  the  potential
risks associated with Zika virus infection. Zika virus is primarily transmitted by Aedes
aegypti mosquitoes, which are found throughout much of the region of the Americas,
including parts of the United States (2,3). These mosquitoes can also transmit dengue
and  chikungunya  viruses  (4).  The  Zika  virus  outbreak  continues  to  spread
(http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/index.html), with ongoing Zika virus transmission recently
reported in U.S. territories. Evidence suggesting an association of Zika virus infection
with an increased risk for congenital microcephaly and other abnormalities of the brain
and eye (5) prompted the World Health Organization to declare the Zika virus outbreak
a  Public  Health  Emergency  of  International  Concern  on  February  1,  2016
(http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2016/1st-emergency-committee-zika
/en/).  There  is  currently  no  vaccine  or  medication  to  prevent  Zika  virus  infection.  All
travelers  to  or  residents  of  areas  with  ongoing  Zika  virus  transmission  should  be
advised  to  strictly  follow  steps  to  avoid  mosquito  bites  because  of  the  potential  for
exposure to Zika, dengue, and chikungunya viruses (6). Aedes vector mosquitoes bite
mostly  during  daylight  hours;  thus,  protection  from  mosquito  bites  is  required
throughout  the  day  (7).  Prevention  of  mosquito  bites  includes  wearing  long-sleeved
shirts,  pants,  permethrin-treated  clothing,  and  using  United  States  Environmental
Protection  Agency  (EPA)-registered  insect  repellents.  Insect  repellents  containing
ingredients such as DEET, picaridin, and IR3535 are safe for use during pregnancy when
used in accordance with the product label (6). To prevent human-to-mosquito-to-human
transmission, persons infected with Zika, dengue, or chikungunya virus should protect
themselves  from  mosquito  exposure  during  the  first  week  of  illness.  The  number  of
mosquitoes  in  and  around  homes  can  be  reduced  by  emptying  standing  water  from
containers,  installing  or  repairing  screens  on  windows  and  doors,  and  using  air
conditioning if available. Further information on preventing mosquito bites is available
online
 (http://www.cdc.gov/features/stopmosquitoes/).
 Antiviral
 treatment
 is
 not
currently  available  for  Zika  virus  disease;  treatment  is  supportive  and  includes  rest,
fluids,  and  analgesic  and  antipyretic  medications.  Aspirin  and  other  nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory  medications  should  be  avoided  until  dengue  virus  infection  can  be
ruled  out  (8).  Dengue  virus  infection  can  cause  serious  complications,  including
hemorrhage and death, which might be substantially reduced by early recognition and
supportive  treatment  (4,8).  Pregnant  women  with  fever  should  be  treated  with
acetaminophen  (9).  Top  Recommendations  for  Zika  virus  testing  of  pregnant  women
who have a clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease during or within 2 weeks of
travel  to  areas  with  ongoing  Zika  virus  transmission  are  unchanged  from  CDC
recommendations released January 19, 2016 (1). Zika virus testing of maternal serum
includes  reverse  transcription-polymerase  chain  reaction  (RT-PCR)  testing  for
symptomatic
 patients
 with
 onset
 of
 symptoms
 during
 the
 previous
 week;
immunoglobulin M (IgM) and plaque-reduction neutralizing antibody testing should be
performed on specimens collected ≥4 days after onset of symptoms (Figure 1) (1,10).
Serologic testing for Zika virus can be offered to asymptomatic pregnant women who
traveled  to  an  area  with  ongoing  Zika  virus  transmission  (Figure  1);  however,
interpretation  of  results  is  complex.  Because  of  cross-reactivity  among  related
flaviviruses, such as dengue, yellow fever, and West Nile viruses, a positive IgM result
can  be  difficult  to  interpret.  Plaque-reduction  neutralization  testing  (PRNT)  can  be
performed  to  measure  virus-specific  neutralizing  antibodies  to  Zika  virus  and  other
flaviviruses.  The  levels  of  neutralizing  antibodies  can  then  be  compared  between
flaviviruses,  but  these  tests  might  also  be  difficult  to  interpret  in  persons  who  were
previously  infected  with  or  vaccinated  against  flaviviruses.  However,  a  negative  IgM
result obtained 2–12 weeks after travel would suggest that a recent infection did not
occur and could obviate the need for serial ultrasounds. Based on experience with other
flaviviruses, IgM antibodies will be expected to be present at least 2 weeks after virus
exposure and persist for up to 12 weeks (11–14). Information about the performance of
serologic  testing  of  asymptomatic  persons  is  limited;  a  negative  serologic  test  result
obtained 2–12 weeks after travel cannot definitively rule out Zika virus infection. Given
these  challenges  in  interpreting  serologic  test  results,  health  care  providers  should
contact their state, local, or territorial health department for assistance with arranging
testing  and  interpreting  results.  CDC  is  working  with  health  departments  and  other
organizations to rapidly increase the availability of testing for Zika virus. Top Pregnant
women who reside in areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission should be evaluated
for  symptoms  of  Zika  virus  disease.  For  women  who  report  clinical  illness  consistent
with  Zika  virus  disease,  testing  by  RT-PCR  should  be  performed  on  serum  collected
within  7  days  of  symptom  onset.  Because  viremia  decreases  over  time,  a  negative
RT-PCR  result  from  serum  collected  5–7  days  after  symptom  onset  does  not  exclude
Zika
 virus
 infection,
 and
 serologic
 testing
 should
 be
 performed.
(http://www.aphl.org/Materials/CDCMemo_Zika_Chik_Deng_Testing_011916.pdf). A false
positive  IgM  result  is  more  likely  among  women  residing  in  areas  with  ongoing  Zika
virus  transmission  than  among  travelers  because  of  a  higher  likelihood  of  previous
exposure  to  a  related  flavivirus.  Pregnant  women  who  do  not  report  clinical  illness
consistent with Zika virus disease can be offered IgM testing upon initiation of prenatal
care; among women with negative IgM results, repeat testing can be considered in the
mid-second trimester because of the ongoing risk for Zika virus exposure and infection
throughout pregnancy (Figure 2). Pregnant women with negative Zika virus IgM testing
should receive routine prenatal care, including an assessment of pregnancy dating and
an ultrasound at 18–20 weeks of gestation to assess fetal anatomy (15). The ultrasound
should  include  careful  evaluation  of  the  fetus  for  brain  anomalies,  including
microcephaly and intracranial calcifications. Because fetal microcephaly is most easily
detected in the late second and early third trimesters of pregnancy (16), and because
of  ongoing  potential  exposure  to  Zika  virus,  health  care  providers  might  consider  an
additional  fetal  ultrasound  later  in  pregnancy.  Findings  of  fetal  microcephaly  or
intracranial calcifications on prenatal ultrasound should prompt health care providers to
repeat maternal IgM testing and consider amniocentesis, depending on gestational age.
Zika  virus  testing  can  be  performed  on  amniotic  fluid  using  RT-PCR  to  inform  clinical
management  (5).  Based  on  experience  with  other  congenital  infections  and  a  small
number of prenatally-diagnosed fetal Zika virus infections (5,17), amniocentesis can be
used  to  diagnose  intrauterine  infections  (18).  However,  the  performance  of  RT-PCR
testing of amniotic fluid for Zika virus infection has not been evaluated. Furthermore,
the  risk  for  microcephaly  or  other  anomalies  when  Zika  virus  RNA  is  detected  in
amniotic  fluid  is  not  known.  Serial  fetal  ultrasounds  should  be  considered  to  monitor
fetal  anatomy  and  growth  every  3–4  weeks  in  pregnant  women  with  positive  or
inconclusive Zika virus test results, and referral to a maternal-fetal medicine specialist
is  recommended.  Testing  is  recommended  at  the  time  of  delivery,  including
histopathologic  examination  of  the  placenta  and  umbilical  cord,  testing  of  frozen
placental tissue and cord tissue for Zika virus RNA, and testing of cord serum (1,19).
Guidelines  for  infants  whose  mothers  have  possible  Zika  virus  infection  are  available
(19). If a pregnant woman with Zika virus disease experiences a fetal loss, Zika virus
RT-PCR  and  immunohistochemical  staining  should  be  performed  on  fetal  tissues,
including umbilical cord and placenta (1). Sexual transmission of Zika virus can occur,
although there is limited data about the risk (20). The risk for sexual transmission of
Zika virus can be eliminated by abstinence and reduced by correct and consistent use
of  condoms  (21).  Given  the  potential  risks  of  maternal  Zika  virus  infection,  pregnant
women whose male partners have or are at risk for Zika virus infection should consider
using  condoms  or  abstaining  from  sexual  intercourse  (21).  Additional  studies  are
needed to characterize the risk for sexual transmission of Zika virus; recommendations
will  be  updated  as  more  information  becomes  available.  Top  CDC  recommends  that
health  care  providers  discuss  pregnancy  intention  and  reproductive  options  with
women of reproductive age. Decisions regarding the timing of pregnancies are personal
and complex; reproductive life plans can assist in making these decisions (22). Patient
age, fertility, reproductive and medical history, as well as the values and preferences of
the  woman  and  her  partner  should  be  considered  during  discussions  regarding
pregnancy intentions and timing. In the context of the ongoing Zika virus transmission,
preconception  care  should  include  a  discussion  of  the  signs  and  symptoms  and  the
potential risks associated with Zika virus infection. Health care providers should discuss
strategies to prevent unintended pregnancy with women who do not want to become
pregnant;  these  strategies  should  include  counseling  on  family  planning  and  use  of
contraceptive methods. Safety, effectiveness, availability, and acceptability should be
considered  when  selecting  a  contraceptive  method  (23).  Approximately  half  of  U.S.
pregnancies  each  year  are  unintended  (24);  patients  should  be  counseled  to  use  the
most effective contraceptive method that can be used correctly and consistently. For
women  desiring  highly  effective  contraception,  long  acting  reversible  contraception,
including  contraceptive  implants  and  intrauterine  devices,  might  be  the  best  choice
(http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/UnintendedPregnancy/PDF/Contraceptive_meth
ods_508.pdf). When choosing a contraceptive method, the risk for sexually transmitted
infections  should  also  be  considered;  correct  and  consistent  use  of  condoms  reduces
the risk for sexually transmitted infections. Strategies to prevent mosquito bites should
be  emphasized  for  women  living  in  areas  with  ongoing  Zika  virus  transmission  who
want to become pregnant. These strategies, including wearing pants and long-sleeved
shirts,  using  FDA-approved  insect  repellents,  ensuring  that  windows  and  doors  have
screens, and staying inside air conditioned spaces when possible, can reduce the risk
for  Zika  virus  infection  and  other  vector-borne  diseases.  During  preconception
counseling visits, the potential risks of Zika virus infection acquired during pregnancy
should  be  discussed.  Women  of  reproductive  age  with  current  or  previous
laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection should be counseled that there is no evidence
that  prior  Zika  virus  infection  poses  a  risk  for  birth  defects  in  future  pregnancies  (7).
This is because the viremia is expected to last approximately 1 week in patients with
clinical  illness  (2,25).  There  is  no  current  evidence  to  suggest  that  a  fetus  conceived
after  maternal  viremia  has  resolved  would  be  at  risk  for  fetal  infection  (7).  Top
Corresponding  author:  Denise  Jamieson,  eocbirthdef@cdc.gov,  770-488-6377.  Top
1Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 2Division of Reproductive Health, National Center
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 3Division of Public Health
Information  Dissemination,  Center  for  Surveillance,  Epidemiology,  and  Laboratory
Services, CDC; 4Arboviral Diseases Branch, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  5Office  of  the  Director,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and
Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  6Division  of  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental
Disabilities,  National  Center  on  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental  Disabilities,  CDC;
7Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and
Tuberculosis  Prevention,  CDC.  Top  Top  *  Clinical  illness  consistent  with  Zika  virus
disease is defined as two or more of the following signs or symptoms: acute onset of
fever, maculopapular rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis. Top * Testing is recommended
for  pregnant  women  with  clinical  illness  consistent  with  Zika  virus  disease,  which
includes  two  or  more  of  the  following  signs  or  symptoms:  acute  onset  of  fever,
maculopapular  rash,  arthralgia,  or  conjunctivitis  during  or  within  2  weeks  of  travel.
Testing  includes  Zika  virus  reverse  transcription-polymerase  chain  reaction  (RT-PCR),
and Zika virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) and neutralizing antibodies on serum specimens
(http://www.aphl.org/Materials/CDCMemo_Zika_Chik_Deng_Testing_011916.pdf).
Because of the overlap of symptoms and areas where other viral illnesses are endemic,
evaluation  for  dengue  or  chikungunya  virus  infection  is  also  recommended.  †  Testing
can  be  offered  to  pregnant  women  without  clinical  illness  consistent  with  Zika  virus
disease.  If  performed,  testing  should  include  Zika  virus  IgM,  and  if  IgM  test  result  is
positive or indeterminate, neutralizing antibodies on serum specimens. Testing should
be  performed  2–12  weeks  after  travel.  §  Laboratory  evidence  of  maternal  Zika  virus
infection: 1) Zika virus RNA detected by RT-PCR in any clinical specimen; or 2) positive
Zika  virus  IgM  with  confirmatory  neutralizing  antibody  titers  that  are  =4-fold  higher
than  dengue  virus  neutralizing  antibody  titers  in  serum.  Testing  is  considered
inconclusive  if  Zika  virus  neutralizing  antibody  titers  are  <4-fold  higher  than  dengue
virus neutralizing antibody titers. ¶ Fetal ultrasounds might not detect microcephaly or
intracranial calcifications until the late second or early third trimester of pregnancy. **
Amniocentesis  is  not  recommended  until  after  15  weeks  of  gestation.  Amniotic  fluid
should be tested for Zika virus RNA by RT-PCR. The sensitivity and specificity of RT-PCR
testing on amniotic fluid are not known. Top * Tests for pregnant women with clinical
illness
 consistent
 with
 Zika
 virus
 disease
 include
 Zika
 virus
 reverse
transcription-polymerase  chain  reaction  (RT-PCR),  and  Zika  virus  immunoglobulin  M
(IgM)
 and
 neutralizing
 antibodies
 on
 serum
 specimens
(http://www.aphl.org/Materials/CDCMemo_Zika_Chik_Deng_Testing_011916.pdf).
Because of the overlap of symptoms and areas where other viral illnesses are endemic,
evaluation  for  dengue  or  chikungunya  virus  infection  is  also  recommended.  If
chikungunya  or  dengue  virus  RNA  is  detected,  treat  in  accordance  with  existing
guidelines. Timely recognition and supportive treatment for dengue virus infections can
substantially  lower  the  risk  of  medical  complications  and  death.  Repeat  Zika  virus
testing  during  pregnancy  is  warranted  if  clinical  illness  consistent  with  Zika  virus
disease  develops  later  in  pregnancy.  †  Testing  can  be  offered  to  pregnant  women
without clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease. If performed, testing should
include Zika virus IgM, and if IgM test result is positive or indeterminate, neutralizing
antibodies  on  serum  specimens.  Results  from  serologic  testing  are  challenging  to
interpret  in  areas  where  residents  have  had  previous  exposure  to  other  flaviviruses
(e.g., dengue, yellow fever). § Laboratory evidence of maternal Zika virus infection: 1)
Zika virus RNA detected by RT-PCR in any clinical specimen; or 2) positive Zika virus
IgM with confirmatory neutralizing antibody titers that are =4-fold higher than dengue
virus  neutralizing  antibody  titers  in  serum.  Testing  is  considered  inconclusive  if  Zika
virus  neutralizing  antibody  titers  are  <4-fold  higher  than  dengue  virus  neutralizing
antibody  titer.  ¶  Amniocentesis  is  not  recommended  until  after  15  weeks  gestation.
Amniotic  fluid  should  be  tested  for  Zika  virus  RNA  by  RT-PCR.  The  sensitivity  and
specificity of RT-PCR testing on amniotic fluid are not known. ** Fetal ultrasounds might
not detect microcephaly or intracranial calcifications until the late second or early third
trimester of pregnancy. †† Local health officials should determine when to implement
testing  of  asymptomatic  pregnant  women  based  on  information  about  levels  of  Zika
virus transmission and laboratory capacity. §§ Clinical illness consistent with Zika virus
disease is defined as two or more of the following signs or symptoms: acute onset of
fever, maculopapular rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis. Top Suggested citation for this
article:  Oduyebo  T,  Petersen  EE,  Rasmussen  SA,  et  al.  Update:  Interim  Guidelines  for
Health  Care  Providers  Caring  for  Pregnant  Women  and  Women  of  Reproductive  Age
with Possible Zika Virus Exposure — United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2016;65:122–127. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6505e2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6505e2.htm
