  To view updated information on availability of Varizig, please click here. Persons using
assistive  technology  might  not  be  able  to  fully  access  information  in  this  file.  For
assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation and the
title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. In December 2012, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved VariZIG, a varicella zoster immune globulin preparation
(Cangene Corporation, Winnipeg, Canada) for use in the United States for postexposure
prophylaxis of varicella for persons at high risk for severe disease who lack evidence of
immunity to varicella* and for whom varicella vaccine is contraindicated (1). Previously
available under an investigational new drug (IND) expanded access protocol, VariZIG, a
purified immune globulin preparation made from human plasma containing high levels
of anti–varicella-zoster virus antibodies (immunoglobulin G), is the only varicella zoster
immune  globulin  preparation  currently  available  in  the  United  States.  VariZIG  is  now
approved  for  administration  as  soon  as  possible  following  varicella-zoster  virus
exposure,  ideally  within  96  hours  (4  days)  for  greatest  effectiveness  (2).  CDC
recommends  administration  of  VariZIG  as  soon  as  possible  after  exposure  to  the
varicella-zoster  virus  and  within  10  days.  CDC  also  has  revised  the  patient  groups
recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) to receive
VariZIG  by  extending  the  period  of  eligibility  for  previously  recommended  premature
infants from exposures to varicella-zoster virus during the neonatal period to exposures
that  occur  during  the  entire  period  for  which  they  require  hospital  care  for  their
prematurity. The CDC recommendations for VariZIG use are now harmonized with the
American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP)  recommendations  (3).  This  report  summarizes
data on the timing of administration of varicella zoster immune globulin in relation to
exposure to varicella-zoster virus and provides the CDC updated recommendations for
use  of  VariZIG  that  replace  the  2007  ACIP  recommendations.  Background  Studies
conducted  in  the  late  1960s  indicated  that  clinical  varicella  was  prevented  in
susceptible,  healthy  children  by  administration  of  zoster  immune  globulin  (ZIG)
(prepared  from  patients  recovering  from  herpes  zoster)  within  72  hours  of  household
exposure  (4).  ZIG  also  lowered  attack  rates  and  modified  disease  severity  among
susceptible  immunocompromised  children  when  administered  within  72  hours  after
household exposure (5,6). The definitions for susceptible children varied across studies
and included children with negative or unknown history of varicella or those who were
seronegative  for  varicella-zoster  antibodies.  The  first  commercial  varicella  zoster
immune globulin preparation available in the United States, VZIG, was prepared from
plasma obtained from healthy, volunteer blood donors identified by routine screening to
have high antibody titers to varicella-zoster virus, and became available in 1978. Both
serologic  and  clinical  evaluations  demonstrated  that  VZIG  was  equivalent  to  ZIG  in
preventing or modifying clinical illness in susceptible, immunocompromised children if
administered  within  96  hours  of  exposure  to  varicella  (7,8).  In  a  study  of
immunocompromised  children  who  were  administered  VZIG  within  96  hours  of
exposure, approximately one in five exposed children developed clinical varicella, and
one in 20 developed subclinical disease compared with 65%–85% attack rates among
historical controls (8). Among those in the study who became ill, the severity of clinical
varicella (evaluated by percentage of patients with >100 lesions or with complications)
was  lower  than  expected  on  the  basis  of  historic  controls.  The  effectiveness  of  VZIG
when administered >96 hours after initial exposure was not evaluated. Based on these
findings and the licensure indications of the VZIG available in the United States, ACIP
recommended VZIG for use within 96 hours of exposure (9). In February 2006, the VZIG
supply was discontinued and a new product, VariZIG, became available under an IND
protocol  for  administration  within  96  hours  of  exposure  (9,10).  Methods  These
recommendations  reflect  the  ACIP  work  group  discussions  and  review  of  scientific
evidence  related  to  use  of  varicella  zoster  immune  globulin  conducted  during  the
development of the ACIP statements on prevention of varicella as well as a review of
published
 literature
 to
 include
 reports
 with
 immune
 globulins
 with
 high
anti–varicella-zoster  virus  antibodies  used  outside  the  United  States  >4  days  after
exposure  to  varicella-zoster  virus.  When  data  were  not  available,  expert  opinion  was
considered.  Summary  of  Rationale  for  VariZIG  Recommendations  Timing  of  VariZIG
administration.  In  May  2011,  the  FDA  approved  amendment  of  the  IND  protocol  to
extend the period for administration of VariZIG after exposure to varicella-zoster virus
from 4 days (96 hours) to 10 days. Subsequently, in 2012, CDC published notification of
FDA agreement with administration of investigational VariZIG as soon as possible after
exposure and within 10 days (11). Limited experience from outside the United States
with  use  of  other  immune  globulin  products  with  high  levels  of  anti–varicella-zoster
virus antibodies suggested that, compared with administration of the immune globulins
within  4  days  of  exposure,  administration  >4  days  (up  to  10  days)  after  exposure
resulted in comparable incidence of varicella and attenuation of disease (12–15). One
study  indicated  an  increase  in  varicella  incidence  with  increasing  time  between
exposure  and  administration  of  ZIG,  but  disease  was  attenuated  in  all  cases  (16).
Considering  these  data,  CDC  recommends  that  VariZIG  be  administered  as  soon  as
possible  after  exposure  and  within  10  days.  AAP  also  recommends  administration  of
VariZIG  within  10  days  of  exposure  (3).  Patient  groups  for  whom  VariZIG  is
recommended. In anticipation of availability of a licensed product for which the supply
is  projected  to  be  adequate  and  to  harmonize  with  recommendations  from  AAP,  CDC
revised  the  patient  groups  previously  recommended  by  ACIP  for  use  of  VariZIG.  The
change  refers  to  extending  the  period  of  eligibility  for  VariZIG  administration  for
previously  recommended  premature  infants  from  exposures  to  varicella-zoster  virus
during  the  neonatal  period  to  exposures  that  occurred  during  the  entire  period  for
which  they  require  hospital  care  for  their  prematurity.  The  risk  for  complications  of
postnatally  acquired  varicella  in  premature  infants  is  unknown.  Because  the  immune
systems of premature infants (some of whom might be extremely low birthweight and
spend  months  in  neonatal  intensive  care  units)  might  be  compromised,  they  are
considered,  on  the  basis  of  expert  opinion,  at  high  risk  for  severe  varicella;  this
increased  risk  is  likely  continued  for  as  long  as  these  infants  remain  hospitalized.
Patients receiving monthly high-dose (≥400 mg/kg) immune globulin intravenous (IGIV)
are likely to be protected and probably do not require VariZIG if the most recent dose of
IGIV was administered ≤3 weeks before exposure (9). CDC Recommendations for Use of
VariZIG  The  decision  to  administer  VariZIG  depends  on  three  factors:  1)  whether  the
patient  lacks  evidence  of  immunity  to  varicella,  2)  whether  the  exposure  is  likely  to
result  in  infection,  and  3)  whether  the  patient  is  at  greater  risk  for  varicella
complications than the general population. For high-risk patients who have additional
exposures  to  varicella-zoster  virus  ≥3  weeks  after  initial  VariZIG  administration,
another dose of VariZIG should be considered.  Timing of VariZIG administration. CDC
recommends  administration  of  VariZIG  as  soon  as  possible  after  exposure  to
varicella-zoster  virus  and  within  10  days.  Patient  groups  for  whom  VariZIG  is
recommended. Patients without evidence of immunity to varicella who are at high risk
for severe varicella and complications, who have been exposed to varicella or herpes
zoster,  and  for  whom  varicella  vaccine  is  contraindicated,  should  receive  VariZIG.
Patient groups recommended by CDC to receive VariZIG include the following: VariZIG
Administration  VariZIG  is  supplied  in  125-IU  vials  and  should  be  administered
intramuscularly as directed by the manufacturer. The recommended dose is 125 IU/10
kg of body weight, up to a maximum of 625 IU (five vials). The minimum dose is 62.5 IU
(0.5  vial)  for  patients  weighing  ≤2.0  kg  and  125  IU  (one  vial)  for  patients  weighing
2.1–10.0  kg  (2).   Unchanged  from  previous  recommendations  (9),  for  patients  who
become  eligible  for  vaccination,  varicella  vaccine  should  be  administered  ≥5  months
after  VariZIG  administration.  Because  varicella  zoster  immune  globulin  might  prolong
the  incubation  period  by  ≥1  week,  any  patient  who  receives  VariZIG  should  be
observed  closely  for  signs  and  symptoms  of  varicella  for  28  days  after  exposure.
Antiviral  therapy  should  be  instituted  immediately  if  signs  or  symptoms  of  varicella
occur.  Most  common  adverse  reactions  following  VariZIG  administration  were  pain  at
injection site (2%) and headache (2%) (2). Contraindications for VariZIG administration
include  a  history  of  anaphylactic  or  severe  systemic  reactions  to  human  immune
globulins  and  IgA-deficient  patients  with  antibodies  against  IgA  and  a  history  of
hypersensitivity (2). How to Obtain VariZIG VariZIG can be ordered from the exclusive
U.S.  distributor,  FFF  Enterprises  (Temecula,  California)  (telephone,  800-843-7477;
online  at  http://www.fffenterprises.com).   Comment  The  demand  for  VariZIG  has
declined  significantly,  commensurate  with  declining  incidence  of  varicella  (9).
Nevertheless,  exposures  from  varicella  and  from  herpes  zoster  might  still  occur.
Extending the time window for administration of VariZIG should increase availability of
postexposure  prophylaxis  with  VariZIG  for  persons  at  high  risk  for  severe  varicella.
However,  physicians  are  reminded  that  VariZIG  should  be  administered  as  soon  as
possible  following  exposure.  CDC  recommendations  for  use  of  this  product  are  now
harmonized  with  those  of  AAP  (3).  Mona  Marin,  MD,  Stephanie  R.  Bialek,  MD,  Jane  F.
Seward, MBBS, Div of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases,
 CDC.
 Corresponding
 contributor:
 Mona
 Marin,
 mmarin@cdc.gov,
404–639–8791.  *Evidence  of  immunity  to  varicella  includes  1)  documentation  of
age-appropriate vaccination with varicella vaccine, 2) laboratory evidence of immunity
or laboratory confirmation of disease, 3) birth in the United States before 1980 (except
for health-care personnel, pregnant women, and immunocompromised persons), or 4)
health-care provider diagnosis or verification of a history of varicella or herpes zoster.
For  immunocompromised  children  aged  12  months  to  6  years,  2  doses  of  varicella
vaccine  are  considered  age-appropriate  vaccination.  Use  of  trade  names  and
commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply  endorsement  by  the
U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6228a4.htm
