 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Please note: An update has been
published for this report. To view the update, please click here.
 Prepared by
Adelisa L. Panlilio, MD1
Denise M. Cardo, MD1
Lisa A. Grohskopf, MD2
Walid Heneine, PhD2
Clara Sue Ross, MD3
1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases
2Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV, STD, and TB Prevention
3Division  of  Surveillance,  Hazard  Evaluations,  and  Field  Studies,  National  Institute  for
Occupational Safety and Health
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,
Anne Schuchat, MD, Acting Director; Division of Healthcare 
Quality Promotion, Denise M. Cardo, MD, Director.
 Corresponding  preparer:  Adelisa  L.  Panlilio,  MD,  MPH,  Division  of  Healthcare  Quality
Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases, CDC, 
1600  Clifton  Rd.,  NE,  MS  E-68,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  Telephone:  404-498-1265;  Fax:
404-498-1244; E-mail: 
alp4@cdc.gov. 
Summary
 This report updates U.S. Public Health Service recommendations for the management
of health-care personnel (HCP) 
who  have  occupational  exposure  to  blood  and  other  body  fluids  that  might  contain
human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV).  Although  the  principles  of  exposure  management  remain  unchanged,
recommended HIV postexposure prophylaxis 
(PEP) regimens have been changed. This report emphasizes adherence to HIV PEP when
it is indicated for an exposure, 
expert  consultation  in  management  of  exposures,  follow-up  of  exposed  workers  to
improve adherence to PEP, and monitoring 
for  adverse  events,  including  seroconversion.  To  ensure  timely  postexposure
management and administration of HIV 
PEP, clinicians should consider occupational exposures as urgent medical concerns.
Introduction
 Although  preventing  exposures  to  blood  and  body  fluids  is  the  primary  means  of
preventing occupationally acquired 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, appropriate postexposure management
is an important element of workplace 
safety. In 1996, the first U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) recommendations for the use
of postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) 
after occupational exposure to HIV were published; these recommendations have been
updated twice 
(1--3). Since publication of the most recent guidelines in 2001, new antiretroviral agents
have been approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), and additional information has 
become available regarding the use and safety of HIV PEP. In August 2003, 
CDC  convened  a  meeting  of  a  PHS  interagency  working  group*  and  consultants  to
assess use of HIV PEP. On the basis of 
this discussion, the PHS working group decided that updated recommendations for the
management of occupational exposure 
to HIV were warranted.
 This  report  modifies  and  expands  the  list  of  antiretroviral  medications  that  can  be
considered for use as PEP. This report 
also emphasizes prompt management of occupational exposures, selection of tolerable
regimens, attention to potential 
drug interactions involving drugs that could be included in HIV PEP regimens and other
medications, consultation with 
experts  for  postexposure  management  strategies  (especially  determining  whether  an
exposure has actually occurred) and selection 
of HIV PEP regimens, use of HIV rapid testing, and counseling and follow-up of exposed
personnel.
 Recommendations on the management of occupational 
exposures to hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus have 
been published previously (3) and are not included in this report. Recommendations for
nonoccupational (e.g., sexual, 
pediatric, and perinatal) HIV exposures also have been published previously 
(4--6).
Definition of Health-Care Personnel and Exposure
 The  definitions  of  health-care  personnel  (HCP)  and  occupational  exposures  are
unchanged from those used in 2001 
(3). The term HCP refers to all paid and unpaid persons working in health-care settings
who have the potential for exposure 
to  infectious  materials  (e.g.,  blood,  tissue,  and  specific  body  fluids  and  medical
supplies, equipment, or environmental 
surfaces contaminated with these substances). HCP might include, but are not limited
to, emergency medical service personnel, 
dental personnel, laboratory personnel, autopsy personnel, nurses, nursing assistants,
physicians, technicians, therapists, 
pharmacists, students and trainees, contractual staff not employed by the health-care
facility, and persons not 
directly involved in patient care but potentially exposed to blood and body fluids (e.g.,
clerical, dietary, housekeeping, maintenance, and 
volunteer personnel). The same principles of exposure management could be applied to
other workers who have potential 
for occupational exposure to blood and body fluids in other settings.
 An exposure that might place HCP at risk for HIV infection is defined as a percutaneous
injury (e.g., a needlestick or 
cut  with  a  sharp  object)  or  contact  of  mucous  membrane  or  nonintact  skin  (e.g.,
exposed skin that is chapped, abraded, 
or afflicted with dermatitis) with blood, tissue, or other body fluids that are potentially
infectious. In addition to blood 
and  visibly  bloody  body  fluids,  semen  and  vaginal  secretions  also  are  considered
potentially infectious. Although semen and 
vaginal secretions have been implicated in the sexual transmission of HIV, they have
not been implicated in occupational 
transmission from patients to HCP. The following fluids also are considered potentially
infectious: cerebrospinal fluid, synovial 
fluid,  pleural  fluid,  peritoneal  fluid,  pericardial  fluid,  and  amniotic  fluid.  The  risk  for
transmission of HIV infection from 
these fluids is unknown; the potential risk to HCP from occupational exposures has not
been assessed by epidemiologic studies 
in health-care settings. Feces, nasal secretions, saliva, sputum, sweat, tears, urine, and
vomitus are not considered 
potentially  infectious  unless  they  are  visibly  bloody;  the  risk  for  transmission  of  HIV
infection from these fluids and materials is low 
(7).
 Any direct contact (i.e., contact without barrier protection) to concentrated virus in a
research laboratory or 
production facility requires clinical evaluation. For human bites, clinical evaluation must
include the possibility that both the 
person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  were  exposed  to  bloodborne
pathogens. Transmission of HIV infection by 
this route has been reported rarely, but not after an occupational exposure 
(8--12).
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HIV
  The risks for occupational transmission of HIV have been described; risks vary with the
type and severity of 
exposure (2,3,7). In prospective studies of HCP, the average risk for HIV transmission
after a percutaneous exposure to 
HIV-infected  blood  has  been  estimated  to  be  approximately  0.3%  (95%  confidence
interval [CI] = 0.2%--0.5%) 
(7) and after a mucous membrane exposure, approximately 0.09% 
(CI = 0.006%--0.5%) (3). Although episodes of HIV transmission 
after nonintact skin exposure have been documented, the average risk for transmission
by this route has not been 
precisely  quantified  but  is  estimated  to  be  less  than  the  risk  for  mucous  membrane
exposures. The risk for transmission after 
exposure to fluids or tissues other than HIV-infected blood also has not been quantified
but is probably considerably lower than 
for blood exposures.
 Epidemiologic and laboratory studies suggest that multiple factors might affect the risk
for HIV transmission after 
an  occupational  exposure  (3).  In  a  retrospective  case-control  study  of  HCP  who  had
percutaneous exposure to HIV, 
increased  risk  for  HIV  infection  was  associated  with  exposure  to  a  larger  quantity  of
blood from the source person as indicated by 1) 
a device (e.g., a needle) visibly contaminated with the patient's blood, 2) a procedure
that involved a needle being 
placed directly in a vein or artery, or 3) a deep injury. The risk also was increased for
exposure to blood from source persons 
with terminal illness, possibly reflecting either the higher titer of HIV in blood late in the
course of acquired 
immunodeficiency
 syndrome
 (AIDS)
 or
 other
 factors
 (e.g.,
 the
 presence
 of
syncytia-inducing strains of HIV). A laboratory study 
that  demonstrated  that  more  blood  is  transferred  by  deeper  injuries  and  hollow-bore
needles lends further support for the 
observed variation in risk related to blood quantity 
(3).
 The use of source-person viral load as a surrogate measure of viral titer for assessing
transmission risk has not yet 
been  established.  Plasma  viral  load  (e.g.,  HIV  RNA)  reflects  only  the  level  of  cell-free
virus in the peripheral blood; 
latently  infected  cells  might  transmit  infection  in  the  absence  of  viremia.  Although  a
lower viral load (e.g., <1,500 RNA copies/mL) 
or one that is below the limits of detection probably 
indicates a lower titer exposure, it does not rule out the possibility 
of transmission.
Antiretroviral Agents for PEP
 Antiretroviral  agents  from  five  classes  of  drugs  are  currently  available  to  treat  HIV
infection 
(13,14).  These  include  the  nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors  (NRTIs),
nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NtRTIs), nonnucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), protease inhibitors (PIs), and a single fusion
inhibitor. Only antiretroviral agents 
approved by FDA for treatment of HIV infection are included in these guidelines. The
recommendations in this report 
provide guidance for two- or-more drug PEP regimens on the basis of the level of risk
for HIV transmission represented by 
the exposure (Tables 1 and 2; 
      Appendix).
 
Toxicity and Drug Interactions of Antiretroviral Agents
 Persons receiving PEP should complete a full 4-week regimen 
(3). However, as a result of toxicity and side effects 
among  HCP,  a  substantial  proportion  of  HCP  have  been  unable  to  complete  a  full
4-week course of HIV PEP 
(15--20). Because all antiretroviral agents have been associated with side effects (Table
3), the toxicity profile of these agents, including 
the  frequency,  severity,  duration,  and  reversibility  of  side  effects,  is  an  important
consideration in selection of an HIV 
PEP  regimen.  The  majority  of  data  concerning  adverse  events  have  been  reported
primarily for persons with established 
HIV infection receiving prolonged antiretroviral therapy and therefore might not reflect
the experience of uninfected persons 
who take PEP. Anecdotal evidence from clinicians knowledgeable about HIV treatment
indicates that antiretroviral agents 
are tolerated more poorly among HCP taking HIV PEP than among HIV-infected patients
on antiretroviral medications.
 Side effects have been reported frequently by persons taking antiretroviral agents as
PEP 
(15--23).  In  multiple  instances,  a  substantial  (range:  17%--47%)  proportion  of  HCP
taking PEP after occupational exposures to HIV-positive sources did 
not complete a full 4-week course of therapy because of inability to tolerate the drugs 
(15--17,19,20).  Data  from  the  National  Surveillance  System  for  Health  Care  Workers
(NaSH), CDC's occupational surveillance system for occupational exposures 
and infections in hospitals, for June 1995--December 2004 indicate that 401 (46.9%) of
921 HCP with at least one 
follow-up  visit  after  starting  PEP  experienced  one  or  more  symptoms.  The  symptom
reported most frequently was nausea 
(26.5%),  followed  by  malaise  and  fatigue  (22.8%)  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2005).  Of
503 HCP who stopped HIV PEP 
prematurely (<28 days), 361 (24.0%) did so because 
of adverse effects of the drugs. Similar data have been reported from the 
Italian Registry of Antiretroviral Postexposure Prophylaxis, which includes data primarily
on HCP taking PEP but also collects 
data on those taking PEP after nonoccupational exposures 
(18). In multivariate analysis, those taking regimens that include PI 
were  more  likely  to  experience  PEP-associated  side  effects  and  to  discontinue  PEP
prematurely (<28 days). Because side effects 
are  frequent  and  particularly  because  they  are  cited  as  a  major  reason  for  not
completing PEP regimens as prescribed, the 
selection of regimens should be heavily influenced toward those that are tolerable for
short-term use.
 In  addition,  all  approved  antiretroviral  agents  might  have  potentially  serious  drug
interactions when used with certain 
other  drugs,  requiring  careful  evaluation  of  concomitant  medications,  including
over-the-counter medications and 
supplements  (e.g.,  herbals),  used  by  an  exposed  person  before  prescribing  PEP  and
close monitoring for toxicity of anyone receiving 
these  drugs  (24--33)  (Tables  3--5).  PIs  and  NNRTIs  have  the  greatest  potential  for
interactions with other drugs. 
Information regarding potential drug interactions has been published 
(13,24--33). Additional information is included in 
the manufacturers' package inserts. Because of interactions, certain drugs should not
be administered concomitantly with PIs 
or  with  efavirenz  (EFV)  (Tables  4  and  5).  Consultation  with  a  pharmacist  might  be
considered.
 
Selection of HIV PEP Regimens
 Determining  which  agents  and  how  many  to  use  or  when  to  alter  a  PEP  regimen  is
primarily empiric 
(34).  Guidelines  for  treating  HIV  infection,  a  condition  typically  involving  a  high  total
body burden of HIV, recommend use of three or 
more  drugs  (13,14);  however,  the  applicability  of  these  recommendations  to  PEP  is
unknown. Among HIV-infected 
patients,  combination  regimens  with  three  or  more  antiretroviral  agents  have  proved
superior to monotherapy and 
dual-therapy  regimens  in  reducing  HIV  viral  load,  reducing  incidence  of  opportunistic
infections and death, and delaying onset of 
drug  resistance  (13,14).  In  theory,  a  combination  of  drugs  with  activity  at  different
stages in the viral replication cycle 
(e.g., nucleoside analogues with a PI) might offer an additive preventive effect in PEP,
particularly for occupational exposures 
that  pose  an  increased  risk  for  transmission  or  for  transmission  of  a  resistant  virus.
Although use of a three- (or more) drug 
regimen might be justified for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission,
whether the potential added toxicity of a third 
or fourth drug is justified for lower-risk exposures is uncertain, especially in the absence
of data supporting increased efficacy 
of 
more drugs in the context of occupational PEP. Offering a two-drug regimen is a viable
option, primarily because the 
benefit of completing a full course of this regimen exceeds the benefit of adding the
third agent and risking noncompletion 
(35).  In  addition,  the  total  body  burden  of  HIV  is  substantially  lower  among  exposed
HCP than among persons with established 
HIV infection. For these reasons, the recommendations in this report provide guidance
for two- and three- (or more) drug 
PEP regimens on the basis of the level of risk for HIV transmission represented by the
exposure (Tables 1 and 
2; Appendix).
 
Resistance to Antiretroviral Agents
 Known or suspected resistance of the source virus to antiretroviral agents, particularly
those that might be included in a 
PEP regimen, is a concern for persons making decisions about PEP 
(36). Drug resistance to all available antiretroviral agents 
has been reported, and cross-resistance within drug classes is frequent 
(37). Although occupational transmission of 
drug-resistant  HIV  strains  has  been  reported  despite  PEP  with  combination  drug
regimens 
(36,38--40), the effect of exposure to a 
resistant virus on transmission and transmissibility is not well understood.
 Since publication of the previous guidelines, an additional report of an occupational HIV
seroconversion 
despite combination HIV PEP has been published (Table 6) 
(38), bringing the total number of reports worldwide to six. 
The exposure was a percutaneous injury sustained by a nurse performing a phlebotomy
on a heavily treatment-experienced 
patient.  At  the  time  of  the  exposure,  the  source  patient  was  failing  treatment  with
stavudine (d4T), lamivudine (3TC), 
ritonavir  (RTV),  and  saquinavir  (SQV)  and  had  a  history  of  previous  treatment  with
zidovudine (ZDV) and zalcitabine 
(ddC).  Genotypic  resistance  testing  performed  within  1  month  of  the  exposure
suggested resistance to ZDV and 3TC. 
Phenotypic testing confirmed resistance to 3TC but demonstrated relative susceptibility
to ZDV and d4T. The source virus 
demonstrated no evidence of resistance to nevirapine (NVP) or other NNRTIs. The initial
HIV PEP regimen started within 95 minutes 
of  the  exposure  was  ZDV,  3TC,  and  indinavir.  The  worker  was  referred  to  a  hospital
where the regimen was changed within 
6  hours  of  the  exposure  to  didanosine  (ddI),  d4T,  and  NVP  because  of  concerns
regarding possible drug resistance to certain 
or all of the components of the initial PEP regimen. The exposed worker stopped ddI 
after 8 days because of symptoms but continued to take d4T and NVP, stopping at day
24 because of a generalized macular pruritic rash and 
mild thrombocytopenia. Seroconversion was documented at 3 months. Sequencing of
viruses from the source and exposed 
worker demonstrated their close relatedness. Virus 
from the worker demonstrated the same resistance patterns as those in the 
source patient. In addition, the worker's virus had a mutation suggesting resistance to
the NNRTI class 
(38).
 Empiric  decisions  regarding  the  presence  of  antiretroviral  drug  resistance  are  often
difficult because patients frequently 
take  more  than  one  antiretroviral  agent.  Resistance  should  be  suspected  in  a  source
patient when clinical progression of disease or 
a  persistently  increasing  viral  load  or  decline  in  CD4+  T-cell  count  occurs  despite
therapy, or when no virologic 
response to therapy occurs. However, resistance testing of the source virus at the time
of an exposure is impractical because the results 
will not be available in time to influence the choice of the initial PEP regimen. No data
suggest that modification of a 
PEP  regimen  after  resistance  testing  results  become  available  (usually  1--2  weeks)
improves efficacy of PEP 
(41).
Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy
 Data regarding the potential effects of antiretroviral drugs on the developing fetus or
neonate are limited 
(3). Carcinogenicity and mutagenicity are evident in certain in vitro screening tests for
ZDV and all other FDA-licensed 
NRTIs.  The  relevance  of  animal  data  to  humans  is  unknown;  however,  because
teratogenic effects were reported among primates 
at drug exposures similar to those representing human therapeutic exposure, pregnant
women should not use efavirenz 
(EFV). Indinavir (IDV) is associated with infrequent side 
effects in adults (i.e., hyperbilirubinemia and renal stones) that could 
be  problematic  for  a  newborn.  Because  the  half-life  of  IDV  in  adults  is  short,  these
concerns might be relevant only if the drug 
is  administered  shortly  before  delivery.  Other  concerns  regarding  use  of  PEP  during
pregnancy have been raised by reports 
of mitochondrial dysfunction leading to neurologic disease and death among uninfected
children whose mothers had 
taken  antiretroviral  drugs  to  prevent  perinatal  HIV  transmission  and  of  fatal  and
nonfatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women 
treated throughout gestation with a combination of d4T and ddI 
(3).
Management of Occupational Exposure by Emergency Physicians
 Although PHS guidelines for the management of occupational exposures to HIV were
first published in 1985 
(42), HCP often are not familiar with these guidelines. Focus groups conducted among
emergency department (ED) physicians in 
2002 indicated that of 71 participants, >95% had not read the 2001 guidelines before
being invited to participate 
(43).  All  physicians  participating  in  these  focus  groups  had  managed  occupational
exposures to blood or body fluids. They cited 
three challenges in exposure management most frequently: evaluation of an unknown
source patient or a source patient who 
refused testing, inexperience in managing occupational HIV exposures, and counseling
of exposed workers in busy EDs.
Occupational HIV Exposure Management and PEP Use in U.S. Hospitals
 Analysis of NaSH data for June 1995--December 2004 provides information regarding
the management of 
occupational exposure to HIV in a convenience sample of 95 U.S. hospitals. These data
indicate improved adherence to 
PHS recommendations concerning use of HIV PEP after occupational exposures. A total
of 28,010 exposures to blood and 
body  fluids  were  reported  by  these  hospitals  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2005).  For  all
25,510 exposures with known sources, 
1,350 (5.3%) were to HIV-positive sources, 15,301 (60.0%) to HIV-negative sources, and
8,859 (34.7%) to sources of 
unknown  HIV  status.  Of  1,350  HCP  exposed  to  a  known  HIV-positive  source,  788
(58.4%) started PEP, and 317 (49%) of 647 
for whom follow-up information was available took PEP for 
>21 days. The overall median duration of HIV PEP after exposure 
to an HIV-positive source was 27 days, increasing from 10 days in 1995 to 26.5 days in
2004; the overall median duration 
of HIV PEP after exposure to an HIV-negative source was 2 days, decreasing from 7.5
days in 1995 to 1 day in 2004. The use 
of rapid HIV tests for evaluation of source patients has increased; during 1995--1997,
none of 25 NaSH facilities used 
rapid  HIV  tests,  whereas  in  2004,  a  total  of  21  (84%  )  did  (CDC,  unpublished  data,
2005). Rapid HIV tests could result 
in decreased use of PEP and spare personnel both undue anxiety and adverse effects of
antiretroviral PEP 
(44--47). The annual median time to initiation of PEP was 
consistent (2 hours). Of 1,350 HCP with exposures to HIV-positive sources, 
909 (67.1%) had at least one follow-up serologic test recorded, but only 289 (31.8%)
had tests recorded at 4--6 months 
(CDC, unpublished data, 2005).
 In 1996, of 24 HCP taking PEP after exposure to HIV-positive sources, 10 (42%) took a
three-drug PEP regimen 
 compared with 30 (76.9%) of 39 in 2004 (CDC, unpublished data, 2005). 
After 227 HIV exposures for which only a two-drug PEP regimen was recommended (i.e.,
the exposure was to mucous membranes or skin or was a superficial 
percutaneous injury and the source person did not have end-stage AIDS or acute HIV
illness), 104 (45.8%) HCP initiated a 
three-drug HIV PEP regimen. The National Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline 
(PEPline)† reports similar findings. 
PEPline staff recommended changing or discontinuing PEP regimens for 45 (38%) of 118
exposures involving source patients 
with known viral load or CD4 cell count concerning which they were consulted during
April 2002--March 2003 
(48; R. Goldschmidt, PEPline, personal communication, 2004). For 14 (11.9%) HCP, the
recommendation was to decrease 
the number of drugs in the PEP regimens; for 22 (18.7%) HCP, the recommendation was
to increase the number of drugs; 
and for nine (7.6%), the recommendation was to change the PEP regimen, keeping the
same number of drugs.
Recommendations for the Management of HCP Potentially Exposed to HIV
 Exposure prevention remains the primary strategy for 
reducing occupational bloodborne pathogen infections. 
However,  occupational  exposures  will  continue  to  occur,  and  PEP  will  remain  an
important element of exposure management.
HIV PEP
 The recommendations provided in this report (Tables 1 and 
2; Appendix) apply to situations in which HCP have 
been  exposed  to  a  source  person  who  either  has  or  is  considered  likely  to  have  HIV
infection. These recommendations are based 
on  the  risk  for  HIV  infection  after  different  types  of  exposure  and  on  limited  data
regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. If PEP 
is offered and taken and the source is later determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should
be discontinued. Although 
concerns  have  been  expressed  regarding  HIV-negative  sources  being  in  the  window
period for seroconversion, no case of 
transmission involving an exposure source during the window period has been reported
in the United 
States (39). Rapid HIV testing of source patients can facilitate making timely decisions
regarding use of HIV PEP after occupational exposures to sources 
of 
unknown HIV status. Because the majority of occupational HIV exposures do not result
in transmission of HIV, 
potential toxicity must be considered when prescribing PEP. Because of the complexity
of selecting HIV PEP regimens, when 
possible, these recommendations should be implemented in consultation with persons
having expertise in antiretroviral therapy 
and  HIV  transmission.  Reevaluation  of  exposed  HCP  should  be  strongly  encouraged
within 
72  hours  postexposure,  especially  as  additional  information  about  the  exposure  or
source person becomes available.
 
Timing and Duration of PEP
 PEP should be initiated as soon as possible, preferably within hours rather than days of
exposure. If a question 
exists  concerning  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use,  or  whether  to  use  a  basic  or
expanded regimen, the basic regimen should 
be started immediately rather than delay PEP administration. The optimal duration of
PEP is unknown. Because 4 weeks 
of  ZDV  appeared  protective  in  occupational  and  animal  studies,  PEP  should  be
administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated 
(49--52).
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
 The selection of a drug regimen for HIV PEP must balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicities of 
the agent(s) used. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures
that pose a negligible risk for 
transmission  (Tables  1  and  2).  The  initial  HIV  PEP  regimens  recommended  in  these
guidelines should be viewed as suggestions that can 
be changed if additional information is obtained concerning 
the source of the occupational exposure (e.g., possible 
treatment history or antiretroviral drug resistance) or if expert consultation is provided.
Given the complexity of choosing 
and administering HIV PEP, whenever possible, consultation 
with an infectious diseases consultant or another physician who 
has  experience  with  antiretroviral  agents  is  recommended,  but  it  should  not  delay
timely initiation of PEP.
 Consideration  should  be  given  to  the  comparative  risk  represented  by  the  exposure
and information regarding the 
exposure source, including history of and response to antiretroviral therapy based on
clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts, viral 
load  measurements,  and  current  disease  stage.  When  the  source  person's  virus  is
known or suspected to be resistant to one or 
more of the drugs considered for the PEP regimen, the 
selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is 
unlikely  to  be  resistant  is  recommended;  expert  consultation  is  advised.  If  this
information is not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if 
indicated, should not be delayed; changes in the regimen can be made after PEP has
started, as appropriate. For HCP who initiate 
PEP, re-evaluation of the exposed person should occur within 72 hours postexposure,
especially if additional information about 
the exposure or source person becomes available.
 PHS continues to recommend stratification of HIV PEP regimens based on the severity
of exposure and 
other  considerations  (e.g.,  concern  for  antiretroviral  drug  resistance  in  the  exposure
source). The majority of HIV exposures 
will warrant a two-drug regimen, using two NRTIs or one NRTI and one NtRTI (Tables 1
and 
2; Appendix). Combinations 
that  can  be  considered  for  PEP  include  ZDV  and  3TC  or  emtricitabine  (FTC);  d4T  and
3TC or FTC; and tenofovir (TDF) 
and  3TC  or  FTC.  In  the  previous  PHS  guidelines,  a  combination  of  d4T  and  ddI  was
considered one of the first-choice 
PEP regimens; however, this regimen is no longer recommended because of concerns
about toxicity (especially neuropathy 
and pancreatitis) and the availability of more tolerable 
alternative regimens (3).
 The addition of a third (or even a fourth) drug should be considered for exposures that
pose an increased risk 
for transmission or that involve a source in whom antiretroviral drug resistance is likely.
The addition of a third drug for PEP 
after  a  high-risk  exposure  is  based  on  demonstrated  effectiveness  in  reducing  viral
burden in HIV-infected persons. However, 
no  definitive  data  exist  that  demonstrate  increased  efficacy  of  three-  compared  with
two-drug HIV PEP regimens. 
Previously,  IDV,  nelfinavir  (NFV),  EFV,  or  abacavir  (ABC)  were  recommended  as
first-choice agents for inclusion in an 
expanded PEP regimen (3).
 PHS now recommends that expanded PEP regimens be PI-based. The PI preferred for
use in expanded PEP regimens 
is lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/RTV). Other PIs acceptable for use in expanded PEP regimens
include atazanavir, 
fosamprenavir, RTV-boosted IDV, RTV-boosted SQV, or NFV (Appendix). Although side
effects are common with NNRTIs, EFV may 
be  considered  for  expanded  PEP  regimens,  especially  when  resistance  to  PIs  in  the
source person's virus is known or 
suspected. Caution is advised when EFV is used in women of childbearing age because
of the risk of 
teratogenicity.
 Drugs  that  may  be  considered  as  alternatives  to  the  expanded  regimens,  with
warnings about side effects and other 
adverse events, are EFV or PIs as noted in the Appendix in combination with ddl and
either 3TC or FTC. The fusion 
inhibitor enfuvirtide (T20) has theoretic benefits for use in PEP 
because its activity occurs before viral-host cell integration; however, 
it 
is  not  recommended  for  routine  HIV  PEP  because  of  the  mode  of  administration
(subcutaneous injection twice 
daily). Furthermore, use of T20 has the potential for production of anti-T20 antibodies
that cross react with HIV gp41. This 
could  result  in  a  false-positive,  enzyme  immunoassay  (EIA)  HIV  antibody  test  among
HIV-uninfected patients. A 
confirmatory  Western  blot  test  would  be  expected  to  be  negative  in  such  cases.  T20
should only be used with expert consultation.
 Antiviral drugs not recommended for use as PEP, primarily because of the higher risk
for potentially serious or 
life-threatening  adverse  events,  include  ABC,  delavirdine,  ddC,  and,  as  noted
previously, the combination of ddI and d4T. 
NVP should not be included in PEP regimens except with expert consultation because of
serious reported side effects, 
including  hepatotoxicty  (with  one  instance  of  fulminant  liver  failure  requiring  liver
transplantation), rhabdomyolysis, 
and hypersensitivity syndrome (53--55).
 Because of the complexity of selection of HIV PEP regimens, consultation with persons
having expertise in 
antiretroviral  therapy  and  HIV  transmission  is  strongly  recommended.  Certain
institutions have required consultation with a 
hospital  epidemiologist  or  infectious  diseases  consultant  when  HIV  PEP  use  is  under
consideration. This can be especially important 
in  management  of  a  pregnant  or  breastfeeding  worker  or  a  worker  who  has  been
exposed to a heavily 
treatment-experienced source (Box 1).
 Resources for consultation are available from the following sources:
 
Postexposure Testing
 HCP  with  occupational  exposure  to  HIV  should  receive  follow-up  counseling,
postexposure testing, and medical 
evaluation  regardless  of  whether  they  receive  PEP.  HIV-antibody  testing  by  enzyme
immunoassay should be used to monitor HCP 
for  seroconversion  for  >6  months  after  occupational  HIV  exposure.  After  baseline
testing at the time of exposure, 
follow-up testing could be performed at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 
6 months after exposure. Extended HIV follow-up (e.g., for 12 
months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with HCV after exposure to a
source coinfected with HIV and 
HCV. Whether extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to
a source co-infected with HIV and HCV 
in the absence of HCV seroconversion or for exposed 
persons with a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to mount 
an antibody response to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed
HIV 
seroconversion have been reported (56,57), the infrequency of this occurrence does not
warrant adding to exposed persons' anxiety by routinely extending 
the duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this should not preclude a decision to
extend 
follow-up  in  a  particular  situation  based  on  the  clinical  judgment  of  the  exposed
person's health-care provider. The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., 
HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV ribonucleic acid) to detect infection among exposed
HCP usually is not recommended 
(58). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect HIV infection a few days earlier
than EIA, the infrequency of 
occupational  seroconversion  and  increased  costs  of  these  tests  do  not  warrant  their
routine use in this setting. In addition, the relatively 
high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to unnecessary
anxiety or treatment 
(59,60). Nevertheless, HIV testing should be performed on any 
exposed person who has an illness compatible with an acute retroviral 
syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. A person in whom HIV infection is
identified should be 
referred  for  medical  management  to  a  specialist  with  expertise  in  HIV  treatment  and
counseling. 
Health-care providers caring for persons with occupationally acquired HIV infection can
report these cases to CDC at telephone 800-893-0485 or to their state 
health departments.
 
Monitoring and Management of PEP Toxicity
 If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline and
again 2 weeks after starting PEP. 
The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person and
the toxicity of drugs included in the 
PEP  regimen.  Minimally,  laboratory  monitoring  for  toxicity  should  include  a  complete
blood count and renal and hepatic 
function  tests.  Monitoring  for  evidence  of  hyperglycemia  should  be  included  for  HCP
whose regimens include any PI; if the 
exposed  person  is  receiving  IDV,  monitoring  for  crystalluria,  hematuria,  hemolytic
anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. 
If  toxicity  is  noted,  modification  of  the  regimen  should  be  considered  after  expert
consultation; 
further diagnostic studies might be indicated.
 Exposed  HCP  who  choose  to  take  PEP  should  be  advised  of  the  importance  of
completing the prescribed 
regimen. Information should be provided about potential drug 
interactions and drugs that should not be taken with PEP, side effects 
of  prescribed  drugs,  measures  to  minimize  side  effects,  and  methods  of  clinical
monitoring for toxicity 
during the follow-up period. HCP should be advised that evaluation of certain symptoms
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain 
on urination or blood in the urine, or symptoms of hyperglycemia (e.g., increased thirst
or frequent urination) should not 
be delayed.
 HCP often fail to complete the recommended regimen 
often because they experience side effects (e.g., nausea or 
diarrhea).  These  symptoms  often  can  be  managed  with  antimotility  and  antiemetic
agents or other medications that target 
specific  symptoms  without  changing  the  regimen.  In  other  situations,  modifying  the
dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose 
of  drug  more  frequently  throughout  the  day,  as  recommended  by  the  manufacturer)
might facilitate 
adherence to the regimen. Serious adverse 
events§ should be reported to FDA's MedWatch program.
 Although  recommendations  for  follow-up  testing,  monitoring,  and  counseling  of
exposed HCP are unchanged from 
those published previously (3), greater emphasis is needed on improving follow-up care
provided to exposed HCP (Box 2). 
This might result in increased adherence to HIV PEP regimens, better management of
associated symptoms with 
ancillary  medications  or  regimen  changes,  improved  detection  of  serious  adverse
effects, and serologic testing among a larger 
proportion  of  exposed  personnel  to  determine  if  infection  is  transmitted  after
occupational exposures. Closer follow-up should in 
turn reassure HCP who become anxious after these events 
(61,62). The psychologic impact on HCP of needlesticks or exposure 
to  blood  or  body  fluid  should  not  be  underestimated.  Providing  HCP  with  psychologic
counseling should be an 
essential component of the management and care of exposed HCP.
Reevaluation and Updating of HIV PEP Guidelines
 As new antiretroviral agents for treatment of HIV infection and additional information
concerning early HIV infection 
and  prevention  of  HIV  transmission  become  available,  the  PHS  Interagency  Working
Group will assess the need to 
update these guidelines. Updates will be published periodically as appropriate. 
 Acknowledgments
 David K. Henderson, MD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Kimberly A.
Struble, PharmD, Food and 
Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland; and Abe Macher, MD, Health Resources and
Services Administration, Rockville, Maryland, 
assisted in the preparation of this report.
References
 * This interagency working group included representatives from CDC, FDA, the Health
Resources and Services Administration, and the National Institutes 
of  Health.  Information  included  in  these  recommendations  might  not  represent  FDA
approval or approved labeling for the particular product or indications 
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" might not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standard for product approval.
 † Administered by staff members from the University of California at San Francisco and
San Francisco General Hospital; supported by the Health Resources 
and  Services  Administration  Ryan  White  CARE  Act  and  AIDS  Education  and  Training
Centers, and by CDC.
 § Defined by FDA as follows: "Any adverse drug experience occurring at any dose that
results in any of the following outcomes: death, a life-threatening 
adverse  drug  experience,  inpatient  hospitalization  or  prolongation  of  existing
hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital 
anomaly/birth  defect.  Important  medical  events  that  may  not  result  in  death,  be
life-threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse 
drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize
the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention 
to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition" 
(63).
APPENDIX
 
Basic and Expanded HIV Postexposure Prophylaxis Regimens
 BASIC REGIMEN
 Preferred dosing  --- ZDV: 300 mg twice daily or 200 mg three times daily, with food;
total: 600 mg daily
--- 3TC: 300 mg once daily or 150 mg twice daily
--- Combivir: one tablet twice daily  Dosage forms 
 --- ZDV: 100 mg capsule, 300 mg tablet --- 3TC: 150 or 300 mg tablet
--- Combivir: tablet, 300 mg ZDV + 150 mg 3TC  Advantages  --- ZDV associated
with decreased risk for HIV 
transmission --- ZDV used more often than other drugs for PEP for health-care personnel
(HCP)
--- Serious toxicity rare when used for PEP
--- Side effects predictable and manageable with antimotility and antiemetic agents
--- Can be used by pregnant HCP --- Can be given as a single tablet (COMBIVIR™)
twice daily
 Disadvantages  --- Side effects (especially nausea and fatigue) common and might
result in low adherence
--- Source-patient virus resistance to this regimen 
possible
--- Potential for delayed toxicity (oncogenic/teratogenic) unknown
 Preferred dosing  --- ZDV:  300 mg twice daily or 200 mg three times daily, with
food; total: 
600 mg/day, in 2--3 divided doses 
--- FTC: 200 mg (one capsule) once daily
 Dosage forms  --- ZDV: see above 
--- FTC: 200 mg capsule
 FTC  general  comments   ---  Nucleoside  analogue;  same  structure  as  3TC,  except
fluoride residue at position 5 on pyrimidine ring
--- Same resistance and safety profile as 3TC
---  No  apparent  advantage  over  3TC;  tolerability  and  virologic  response  rates
appear better than regimens containing 
ddI + d4T  Advantages  --- ZDV: see above. 
--- FTC
 o Convenient (once daily)
o Well tolerated
o Long intracellular half-life (~40 hours)
 Disadvantages  --- ZDV: see above. 
--- FTC
 o Rash perhaps more frequent than with 3TC
o No long-term experience with this drug
o Cross resistance to 3TC
o Hyperpigimentation among non-Caucasians with long-term use: 3%
 Preferred dosing  --- TDF: 300 mg once daily
--- 3TC: 300 mg once daily or 150 mg twice daily
 Dosage forms  --- TDF: 300 mg tablet 
--- 3TC: see above  Advantages  --- 3TC: see above
--- TDF  o Convenient dosing (single pill once daily)
o Resistance profile activity against certain 
thymidine analogue mutations 
o Well tolerated
 Disadvantages  --- TDF  o Same class warnings as nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) 
o Drug interactions
o Increased TDF concentrations among persons 
taking atazanavir and lopinavir/ritonavir; need to monitor 
patients  for  TDF-associated  toxicities   ---  Preferred  dosage  of  atazanavir  if  used  with
TDF: 300 mg + ritonavir 100 mg once daily + TDF 300 mg once daily
 Preferred dosing  --- TDF: 300 mg once daily 
--- FTC: 200 mg once daily
--- As Truvada™: one tablet daily  Dosage forms  --- TDF: 300 mg tablet 
--- FTC: see FTC
--- Truvada™ (TDF 300 mg plus FTC 200 mg)  Advantages  --- FTC: see above
--- TDF  o Convenient dosing (single pill once daily)
 o Resistance profile activity against certain 
thymidine analogue mutations  o Well tolerated
 Disadvantages  --- TDF  o Same class warnings as NRTIs 
o Drug interactions
o  Increased  TDF  concentrations  among  persons  taking  atazanavir  and
lopinavir/ritonavir; need to monitor 
patients for TDF-associated toxicities 
o  Preferred  dosing  of  atazanavir  if  used  with  TDF:  300  mg  +  ritonavir  100  mg
once daily + TDF 300 mg once daily
 
 ALTERNATE BASIC REGIMENS
 Preferred dosing  --- 3TC: 300 mg once daily or 150 mg twice daily
--- d4T: 40 mg twice daily (can use lower doses of 20--30 mg twice daily if toxicity
occurs; equally 
effective but less toxic among HIV-infected patients with peripheral neuropathy); 30 mg
twice daily if body weight is <60 kg
 Dosage forms
 --- 3TC: see above 
--- d4T: 15, 20, 30, and 40 mg tablet
 Advantages  --- 3TC: see above
--- d4T: gastrointestinal (GI) side effects rare
 Disadvantages  --- Possibility that source-patient virus is resistant to this regimen
--- Potential for delayed toxicity (oncogenic/teratogenic) unknown
  Preferrred dosing  --- FTC: 200 mg daily
--- d4T: 40 mg twice daily (can use lower doses of 
20--30 mg twice daily if toxicity occurs; equally effective but less 
toxic  among  HIV-infected  patients  who  developed  peripheral  neuropathy);  if  body
weight is 
<60 kg, 30 mg twice daily
 Dosage forms  --- FTC: see above
--- d4T: see above
 Advantages  --- 3TC and FTC: see above; d4T's GI side effects rare
 Disadvantages  --- Potential that source-patient virus is resistant to this regimen
--- Unknown potential for delayed toxicity (oncogenic/teratogenic) unknown
  Preferred dosing  --- 3TC: 300 mg once daily or 150 mg twice daily
---  ddI:  Videx®  chewable/dispersible  buffered  tablets  can  be  administered  on  an
empty stomach as either 200 mg 
twice  daily  or  400  mg  once  daily.  Patients  must  take  at  least  two  of  the  appropriate
strength tablets at each dose to 
provide adequate buffering and prevent gastric acid degradation of ddI. Because of the
need for adequate buffering, the 
200-mg strength tablet should be used only as a component of a once-daily regimen.
The dose is either 200 mg twice 
daily or 400 mg once daily for patients weighing >60 kg and 125 mg twice daily or 250
mg once daily for 
patients weighing >60 kg.  Dosage forms  --- 3TC: 150 or 300 mg tablets
---  ddI:  25,  50,  100,  150,  or  200  mg  buffered  white  tablets   Advantages   ---  ddI:
once daily dosing option
--- 3TC: see above
 Disadvantages  --- Tolerability: diarrhea more common with buffered preparation than
with enteric-coated preparation
--- Associated with toxicity: peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, and lactic acidosis
--- Must be taken on empty stomach except with TDF 
--- Drug interactions
--- 3TC: see above
  Preferred dosing  --- FTC: 200 mg once daily
--- ddI: see above  Dosage forms  --- ddI: see above 
--- FTC: see above
 Advantages  --- ddI: see above 
--- FTC: see above
 Disadvantages   ---  Tolerability:  diarrhea  more  common  with  buffered  than  with
enteric-coated preparation
--- Associated with toxicity: peripheral neuropathy, 
pancreatitis, and lactic acidosis 
--- Must be taken on empty stomach except with TDF 
--- Drug interactions
--- FTC: see above
 
 PREFERRED EXPANDED REGIMEN
 Basic regimen plus:
 Preferred dosing  --- LPV/RTV: 400/100 mg = 3 capsules twice daily with food
 Dosage  form   ---  LPV/RTV:  133/33  mg  capsules   Advantages   ---  Potent  HIV
protease inhibitor
--- Generally well-tolerated
 Disadvantages  --- Potential for serious or life-threatening drug interactions (see 
Table 4)
---  Might  accelerate  clearance  of  certain  drugs,  including  oral  contraceptives
(requiring alternative or 
additional contraceptive measures for women taking these drugs)
--- Can cause severe hyperlipidemia, especially hypertriglyceridemia
--- GI (e.g., diarrhea) events common
 
 ALTERNATE EXPANDED REGIMENS
 Basic regimen plus one of the following:
 Preferred dosing  --- ATV: 400 mg once daily, unless used in combination with TDF, in
which case ATV should be boosted with 
RTV, preferred dosing of ATV 300 mg + RTV: 100 mg once daily  Dosage forms  --- ATV:
100, 150, and 200 mg capsules
--- RTV:  100 mg capsule  Advantages  --- Potent HIV protease inhibitor
--- Convenient dosing -- once daily
--- Generally well tolerated
 Disadvantages  --- Hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice common 
--- Potential for serious or life-threatening drug interactions (see 
Table 4)
--- Avoid coadministration with proton pump inhibitors 
---  Separate  antacids  and  buffered  medications  by  2  hours  and  H2-receptor
antagonists by 12 hours to avoid 
decreasing ATV levels
--- Caution should be used with ATV and products known to induce PR prolongation
(e.g., diltiazem)
  Preferred dosing
 --- FOSAPV: 1400 mg twice daily (without RTV) 
--- FOSAPV: 1400 mg once daily + RTV 200 mg once daily 
---  FOSAPV:  700  mg  twice  daily  +  RTV  100  mg  twice  daily   Dosage  form   ---
FOSAPV: 700 mg tablets 
---  RTV:  100  mg  capsule   Advantages   ---  Once  daily  dosing  when  given  with
ritonavir  Disadvantages  --- Tolerability: GI side effects common
--- Multiple drug interactions. Oral contraceptives 
decrease fosamprenavir concentrations 
--- Incidence of rash in healthy volunteers, especially when used with low doses of
ritonavir. Differentiating between 
early  drug-associated  rash  and  acute  seroconversion  can  be  difficult  and  cause
extraordinary concern for the exposed person
  Preferred dosing  --- IDV 800 mg + RTV 100 mg twice daily without 
regard to food  Alternative dosing  --- IDV: 800 mg every 8 hours, on an empty stomach 
Dosage forms  --- IDV:  200 mg, 333, and 400 mg capsule 
--- RTV:  100 mg capsule  Advantages  --- Potent HIV inhibitor
 Disadvantages  --- Potential for serious or life-threatening drug interactions (see 
Table 4)
--- Serious toxicity (e.g., nephrolithiasis) possible; 
consumption of 8 glasses of fluid/day required 
--- Hyperbilirubinemia common; must avoid this drug during late pregnancy
--- Requires acid for absorption and cannot be taken 
simultaneously with ddI, chewable/dispersible buffered 
tablet formulation (doses must be separated by >1 hour)
  Preferred dosing  --- SQV: 1,000 mg (given as Invirase) + RTV 100 mg, twice daily
--- SQV : five capsules twice daily + RTV: one capsule twice daily
 Dosage forms  --- SQV (Invirase): 200 mg capsule 
---  RTV:  100  mg  capsule   Advantages   ---  Generally  well-tolerated,  although  GI
events common
 Disadvantages  --- Potential for serious or life-threatening drug interactions (see 
Table 4)
--- Substantial pill burden
  Preferred dosing  --- NFV: 1,250 mg (2 x 625 mg or 5 x 250 mg tablets), twice daily
with a meal
 Dosage  forms   ---  NFV:  250  or  625  mg  tablet   Advantages   ---  Generally
well-tolerated
 Disadvantages
 --- Diarrhea or other GI events common
--- Potential for serious and/or life-threatening drug 
interactions (see Table 4)
  Preferred dosing  --- EFV: 600 mg daily, at bedtime  Dosage forms  --- EFV: 50, 100,
200 capsules 
---  EFV:  600  mg  tablet   Advantages   ---  Does  not  require  phosphorylation  before
activation and might be active earlier than other antiretroviral agents 
(a theoretic advantage of no demonstrated clinical benefit) 
--- Once daily dosing
 Disadvantages   ---  Drug  associated  with  rash  (early  onset)  that  can  be  severe  and
might rarely progress to Stevens-Johnson syndrome
---  Differentiating  between  early  drug-associated  rash  and  acute  seroconversion
can be difficult and 
cause extraordinary concern for the exposed person 
--- Central nervous system side effects (e.g., dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, or
abnormal dreaming) common; 
severe  psychiatric  symptoms  possible  (dosing  before  bedtime  might  minimize  these
side effects)
--- Teratogen; should not be used during pregnancy 
--- Potential for serious or life-threatening drug interactions (see 
Table 5)
 
 ANTIRETROVIRAL AGENTS GENERALLY NOT RECOMMENDED 
FOR USE AS PEP
 Disadvantages  --- Associated with severe hepatotoxicity (including at least one case of
liver failure requiring liver transplantation in 
an exposed person taking PEP) 
---  Associated  with  rash  (early  onset)  that  can  be  severe  and  progress  to
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
---  Differentiating  between  early  drug-associated  rash  and  acute  seroconversion
can be difficult and 
cause extraordinary concern for the exposed person 
---  Drug  interactions:  can  lower  effectiveness  of  certain  antiretroviral  agents  and
other commonly used 
medicines
  Disadvantages   ---  Drug  associated  with  rash  (early  onset)  that  can  be  severe  and
progress to Stevens-Johnson syndrome
--- Multiple drug interactions
  Disadvantages  --- Severe hypersensitivity reactions can occur, usually within the first
6 weeks
---  Differentiating  between  early  drug-associated  rash/hypersensitivity  and  acute
seroconversion can be 
difficult 
  Disadvantages  --- Three times a day dosing
--- Tolerability
--- Weakest antiretroviral agent
 ANTIRETROVIRAL AGENT FOR USE AS PEP ONLY WITH EXPERT CONSULTATION
 Preferred dosing  --- T20: 90 mg (1 ml) twice daily by subcutaneous 
injection
 Dosage forms
 --- T20: Single-dose vial, reconstituted to 90 mg/ml  
 Advantages  --- New class
--- Unique viral target; to block cell entry
--- Prevalence of resistance low
 Disadvantages  --- Twice-daily injection
--- Safety profile: local injection site reactions
--- Never studied among antiretroviral-naïve or HIV-negative patients
---  False-positive  EIA  HIV  antibody  tests  might  result  from  formation  of  anti-T20
antibodies that cross-react with 
anti-gp41 antibodies  PHS Working Group on Occupational Postexposure 
Prophylaxis: Adelisa L Panlilio, Denise M. Cardo, Division of Healthcare Quality 
Promotion,  National  Center  for  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  Lisa  A.  Grohskopf;  Walid
Heneine, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV, 
STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; Clara Sue Ross, Ahmed Gomaa; Division of Surveillance
and Hazard Evaluations, and Field Studies, National Institute 
for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  CDC;  Kimberly  A.  Struble,  Center  for  Drug
Evaluation and Research, FDA; Abe Macher, HIV/AIDS Bureau, 
HRSA; David K Henderson, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health.
 External  Consultants:  Henry  M.  Blumberg,  Grady  Memorial  Hospital;  Betty  Dong,
National Clinicians' Postexposure Prophylaxis Hotline 
(PEPline);  Ron  Goldschmidt,  University  of  California,  San  Francisco;  Michael  Saag,
University of Alabama, Birmingham; Michael Tapper, Lenox Hill Hospital.
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Date last reviewed: 9/26/2005
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5409a1.htm
