 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Please note: An update has been
published for this report. To view the update, please click here. This report updates and
consolidates all previous U.S. Public Health
Service recommendations for the management of health-care personnel (HCP)
who have occupational exposure to blood and other body fluids that might
contain hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), or human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
 Recommendations for HBV postexposure management include initiation
of the hepatitis B vaccine series to any susceptible, unvaccinated person
who sustains an occupational blood or body fluid exposure.
Postexposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  hepatitis  B  immune  globulin  (HBIG)  and/or
hepatitis
B vaccine series should be considered for occupational exposures
after evaluation of the hepatitis B surface antigen status of the source and
the vaccination and vaccine-response status of the exposed person. Guidance
is provided to clinicians and exposed HCP for selecting the appropriate HBV PEP.
 Immune globulin and antiviral agents (e.g., interferon with or
without ribavirin) are not recommended for PEP of hepatitis C. For HCV
postexposure  management,  the  HCV  status  of  the  source  and  the  exposed  person
should
be determined, and for HCP exposed to an HCV positive source, follow-up
HCV testing should be performed to determine if infection develops.
 Recommendations for HIV PEP include a basic 4-week regimen of two
drugs (zidovudine [ZDV] and lamivudine [3TC]; 3TC and stavudine [d4T]; or
didanosine [ddI] and d4T) for most HIV exposures and an expanded regimen that
includes the addition of a third drug for HIV exposures that pose an increased risk
for transmission. When the source person's virus is known or suspected to
be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the PEP regimen,
the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to be resistant
is recommended.
 In addition, this report outlines several special circumstances (e.g.,
delayed exposure report, unknown source person, pregnancy in the exposed
person, resistance of the source virus to antiretroviral agents, or toxicity of the
PEP regimen) when consultation with local experts and/or the National
Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline ([PEPline] 1-888-448-4911) is advised.
 Occupational exposures should be considered urgent medical concerns
to ensure timely postexposure management and administration of HBIG,
hepatitis B vaccine, and/or HIV PEP.
 
INTRODUCTION
Avoiding occupational blood exposures is the primary way to prevent
transmission  of  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV),  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV),  and  human
immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) in health-care settings (1). However, hepatitis B immunization and
postexposure management are integral components of a complete program to prevent
infection following bloodborne pathogen exposure and are important elements of
workplace safety (2).
The U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) has published previous guidelines for
the management of HIV exposures that included considerations for
postexposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  (3--5).  Since  publication  of  the  1998  HIV  exposure
guidelines
(5), several new antiretroviral agents have been approved by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), and more information is available about the use and safety
of HIV PEP (6--11). In addition, questions exist regarding considerations about
PEP regimens when the source person's virus is known or suspected to be resistant to
one or more of the antiretroviral agents that might be used for PEP. Concern also
has arisen about the use of PEP when it is not warranted. Data indicate that some
health-care personnel (HCP) take a full course of HIV PEP after exposures that do not
confer an HIV transmission risk (10,11).
In September 1999, a meeting of a PHS interagency working group* and
expert consultants was convened by CDC. The PHS working group decided to issue
updated recommendations for the management of occupational exposure to HIV. In
addition,  the  report  was  to  include  recommendations  for  the  management  of
occupational
HBV and HCV exposures so that a single document could comprehensively address
the management of occupational exposures to bloodborne pathogens. This report
updates and consolidates the previous PHS guidelines and recommendations for
occupational HBV, HCV, and HIV exposure management for HCP. Specific practice
recommendations for the management of occupational bloodborne pathogen exposures
are outlined
to assist health-care institutions with the implementation of these PHS
guidelines (Appendices A and B). As relevant information becomes available, updates of
these recommendations will be published. Recommendations for nonoccupational
(e.g., sexual, pediatric, and perinatal) HBV, HCV, and HIV exposures are not addressed
in these guidelines and can be found elsewhere
(12--15).
Definition of Health-Care Personnel and Exposure
In this report, health-care personnel (HCP) are defined as persons (e.g.,
employees, students, contractors, attending clinicians, public-safety
workers, or volunteers) whose activities involve contact with patients or with blood or
other body fluids from
patients  in  a  health-care,  laboratory,  or  public-safety  setting.  The  potential  exists  for
blood
and body fluid exposure to other workers, and the same principles of
exposure management could be applied to other settings.
An exposure that might place HCP at risk for HBV, HCV, or HIV infection is
defined  as  a  percutaneous  injury  (e.g.,  a  needlestick  or  cut  with  a  sharp  object)  or
contact
of mucous membrane or nonintact skin (e.g., exposed skin that is chapped, abraded,
or afflicted with dermatitis) with blood, tissue, or other body fluids that are
potentially infectious (16,17).
In addition to blood and body fluids containing visible blood, semen and
vaginal secretions also are considered potentially infectious. Although semen and
vaginal secretions have been implicated in the sexual transmission of HBV, HCV, and
HIV,
they have not been implicated in occupational transmission from patients to HCP.
The following fluids also are considered potentially infectious: cerebrospinal fluid,
synovial fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid. The risk
for transmission of HBV, HCV, and HIV infection from these fluids is unknown; the
potential risk to HCP from occupational exposures has not been assessed by
epidemiologic  studies  in  health-care  settings.  Feces,  nasal  secretions,  saliva,  sputum,
sweat,
tears, urine, and vomitus are not considered potentially infectious unless they contain
blood. The risk for transmission of HBV, HCV, and HIV infection from these fluids
and materials is extremely low.
Any direct contact (i.e., contact without barrier protection) to concentrated virus
in a research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that
requires clinical evaluation. For human bites, the clinical evaluation must include the
possibility  that  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  were
exposed
to bloodborne pathogens. Transmission of HBV or HIV infection only rarely has
been reported by this route (18--20) (CDC, unpublished data, 1998).
BACKGROUND
This section provides the rationale for the postexposure management
and prophylaxis recommendations presented in this report. Additional details
concerning the risk for occupational bloodborne pathogen transmission to HCP and
management of occupational bloodborne pathogen exposures are available elsewhere
(5,12,13,21-24).
Occupational Transmission of HBV
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HBV
HBV infection is a well recognized occupational risk for HCP
(25). The risk of HBV infection is primarily related to the degree of contact with blood in
the work place
and also to the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) status of the source person. In studies of
HCP who sustained injuries from needles contaminated with blood containing HBV, the
risk of developing clinical hepatitis if the blood was both hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg)- and HBeAg-positive was 22%--31%; the risk of developing
serologic evidence of HBV infection was 37%--62%. By comparison, the risk of
developing clinical hepatitis from a needle contaminated with HBsAg-positive,
HBeAg-negative  blood  was  1%--6%,  and  the  risk  of  developing  serologic  evidence  of
HBV
infection, 23%--37% (26).
Although percutaneous injuries are among the most efficient modes of
HBV transmission, these exposures probably account for only a minority of HBV
infections among HCP. In several investigations of nosocomial hepatitis B outbreaks,
most infected HCP could not recall an overt percutaneous injury
(27,28), although in some studies, up to one third of infected HCP recalled caring for a
patient who was
HBsAg-positive  (29,30).  In  addition,  HBV  has  been  demonstrated  to  survive  in  dried
blood
at room temperature on environmental surfaces for at least 1 week
(31). Thus, HBV
infections that occur in HCP with no history of nonoccupational exposure
or occupational percutaneous injury might have resulted from direct or indirect blood
or body fluid exposures that inoculated HBV into cutaneous scratches, abrasions,
burns, other lesions, or on mucosal surfaces
(32--34). The potential for HBV
transmission through contact with environmental surfaces has been demonstrated in
investigations of HBV outbreaks among patients and staff of hemodialysis units
(35--37).
Blood contains the highest HBV titers of all body fluids and is the most
important  vehicle  of  transmission  in  the  health-care  setting.  HBsAg  is  also  found  in
several
other body fluids, including breast milk, bile, cerebrospinal fluid, feces,
nasopharyngeal washings, saliva, semen, sweat, and synovial fluid
(38). However, the concentration of HBsAg in body fluids can be 100--1000---fold higher
than the concentration
of infectious HBV particles. Therefore, most body fluids are not efficient vehicles
of transmission because they contain low quantities of infectious HBV, despite
the presence of HBsAg.
In serologic studies conducted in the United States during the 1970s, HCP had
a prevalence of HBV infection approximately 10 times higher than the
general population (39--42). Because of the high risk of HBV infection among
      HCP,
routine preexposure vaccination of HCP against hepatitis B and the use of
standard precautions to prevent exposure to blood and other potentially infectious body
fluids have been recommended since the early 1980s
(43). Regulations issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
      (OSHA)
(2) have increased compliance with these recommendations. Since the implementation
of these recommendations,
a sharp decline has occurred in the incidence of HBV infection among HCP.
PEP for HBV
Efficacy of PEP for HBV. The effectiveness of hepatitis B immune globulin
(HBIG) and/or hepatitis B vaccine in various postexposure settings has been evaluated
by prospective studies. For perinatal exposure to an HBsAg-, HBeAg-positive mother,
a regimen combining HBIG and initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series at birth is
85%--95% effective in preventing HBV infection
(44,45).  Regimens  involving  either  multiple  doses  of  HBIG  alone  or  the  hepatitis  B
vaccine series alone are 70%--75% effective
in preventing HBV infection (46). In the occupational setting, multiple doses of
HBIG initiated within 1 week following percutaneous exposure to HBsAg-positive
blood provides an estimated 75% protection from HBV infection
(47--49).  Although  the  postexposure  efficacy  of  the  combination  of  HBIG  and  the
hepatitis B vaccine
series has not been evaluated in the occupational setting, the increased efficacy of
this regimen observed in the perinatal setting, compared with HBIG alone, is presumed
to apply to the occupational setting as well. In addition, because persons requiring PEP
in the occupational setting are generally at continued risk for HBV exposure, they
should receive the hepatitis B vaccine series.
Safety of PEP for HBV. Hepatitis B vaccines have been found to be safe
when administered to infants, children, or adults
(12,50).  Through  the  year  2000,  approximately  100  million  persons  have  received
hepatitis B vaccine in the
United States. The most common side effects from hepatitis B vaccination are pain at
the injection site and mild to moderate fever
(50--55).  Studies  indicate  that  these  side  effects  are  reported  no  more  frequently
among persons vaccinated than among
those receiving placebo (51,52).
Approximately 45 reports have been received by the Vaccine Adverse
Event Reporting System (VAERS) of alopecia (hair loss) in children and adults
after administration of plasma-derived and recombinant hepatitis B vaccine; four
persons sustained hair loss following vaccination on more than one occasion
(56). Hair loss was temporary for approximately two thirds of persons who experienced
hair loss.
An epidemiologic study conducted in the Vaccine Safety Datalink found no
statistical association between alopecia and receipt of hepatitis B vaccine in children
(CDC, unpublished data, 1998). A low rate of anaphylaxis has been observed in
vaccine recipients based on reports to VAERS; the estimated incidence is 1 in 600,000
vaccine doses distributed. Although none of the persons who developed anaphylaxis
died, anaphylactic reactions can be life-threatening; therefore, further vaccination
with hepatitis B vaccine is contraindicated in persons with a history of anaphylaxis after
a previous dose of vaccine.
Hepatitis B immunization programs conducted on a large scale in Taiwan,
Alaska, and New Zealand have observed no association between vaccination and
the occurrence of serious adverse events. Furthermore, in the United States,
surveillance of adverse events following hepatitis B vaccination has demonstrated no
association between hepatitis B vaccine and the occurrence of serious adverse events,
including Guillain-Barré syndrome, transverse myelitis, multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis,
and seizures (57--59) (CDC, unpublished data, 1991). However, several case reports
and case series have claimed an association between hepatitis B vaccination and
such syndromes and diseases as multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis, rheumatoid arthritis,
and other autoimmune diseases (57,60--66). Most of these reported adverse events
have occurred in adults, and no report has compared the frequency of the
purported vaccine-associated syndrome/disease with the frequency in an
unvaccinated population. In addition, recent case-control studies have demonstrated no
association  between  hepatitis  B  vaccination  and  development  or  short-term  risk  of
relapse
of multiple sclerosis (67,68), and reviews by international panels of experts
have concluded that available data do not demonstrate a causal association
between  hepatitis  B  vaccination  and  demyelinating  diseases,  including  multiple
sclerosis
(69).
HBIG is prepared from human plasma known to contain a high titer of antibody
to HBsAg (anti-HBs). The plasma from which HBIG is prepared is screened for
HBsAg and antibodies to HIV and HCV. The process used to prepare HBIG inactivates
and eliminates HIV from the final product. Since 1996, the final product has been free
of HCV RNA as determined by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and, since 1999,
all products available in the United States have been manufactured by methods
that inactivate HCV and other viruses. No evidence exists that HBV, HCV, or HIV have
ever been transmitted by HBIG commercially available in the United States
(70,71).
Serious adverse effects from HBIG when administered as recommended
have been rare. Local pain and tenderness at the injection site, urticaria and
angioedema  might  occur;  anaphylactic  reactions,  although  rare,  have  been  reported
following
the injection of human immune globulin (IG) preparations
(72). Persons with a history of anaphylactic reaction to IG should not receive HBIG.
PEP for HBV During Pregnancy. No apparent risk exists for adverse effects
to developing fetuses when hepatitis B vaccine is administered to pregnant women
(CDC, unpublished data, 1990). The vaccine contains noninfectious HBsAg particles
and should pose no risk to the fetus. HBV infection during pregnancy might result in
severe
disease for the mother and chronic infection for the newborn. Therefore,
neither pregnancy nor lactation should be considered a contraindication to vaccination
of women. HBIG is not contraindicated for pregnant or lactating women.
Occupational Transmission of HCV
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HCV
HCV is not transmitted efficiently through occupational exposures to blood.
The average incidence of anti-HCV seroconversion after accidental
percutaneous exposure from an HCV-positive source is 1.8% (range: 0%--7%)
(73--76),  with  one  study  indicating  that  transmission  occurred  only  from  hollow-bore
needles
compared with other sharps (75). Transmission rarely occurs from mucous membrane
exposures to blood, and no transmission in HCP has been documented from intact or
nonintact skin exposures to blood (77,78). Data are limited on survival of HCV in
the environment. In contrast to HBV, the epidemiologic data for HCV suggest
that environmental contamination with blood containing HCV is not a significant risk
for transmission in the health-care setting
(79,80),  with  the  possible  exception  of  the  hemodialysis  setting  where  HCV
transmission related to environmental
contamination and poor infection-control practices have been implicated
(81--84).  The  risk  for  transmission  from  exposure  to  fluids  or  tissues  other  than
HCV-infected blood also
has not been quantified but is expected to be low.
Postexposure Management for HCV
In several studies, researchers have attempted to assess the effectiveness of
IG following possible exposure to non-A, non-B hepatitis. These studies have
been difficult to interpret because they lack uniformity in diagnostic criteria and
study design, and, in all but one study, the first dose of IG was administered before
potential exposure (48,85,86). In an experiment designed to model HCV transmission
by needlestick exposure in the health-care setting, high anti-HCV titer IG administered
to chimpanzees 1 hour after exposure to HCV-positive blood did not prevent
transmission  of  infection  (87).  In  1994,  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices
(ACIP) reviewed available data regarding the prevention of HCV infection with IG
and concluded that using IG as PEP for hepatitis C was not supported
(88). This conclusion was based on the following facts:
 No protective antibody response has been identified following HCV infection.
 Previous studies of IG use to prevent posttransfusion non-A, non-B
hepatitis might not be relevant in making recommendations regarding PEP for hepatitis
C.
 Experimental studies in chimpanzees with IG containing anti-HCV failed
to prevent transmission of infection after exposure.
No clinical trials have been conducted to assess postexposure use of
antiviral agents (e.g., interferon with or without ribavirin) to prevent HCV infection,
and antivirals are not FDA-approved for this indication. Available data suggest that
an established infection might need to be present before interferon can be an
effective treatment. Kinetic studies suggest that the effect of interferon on chronic HCV
infection occurs in two phases. During the first phase, interferon blocks the production
or
release of virus from infected cells. In the second phase, virus is eradicated from
the infected cells (89); in this later phase, higher pretreatment alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels correlate with an increasing decline in infected cells, and
the rapidity
of the decline correlates with viral clearance. In contrast, the effect of
antiretrovirals  when  used  for  PEP  after  exposure  to  HIV  is  based  on  inhibition  of  HIV
DNA
synthesis early in the retroviral replicative cycle.
In the absence of PEP for HCV, recommendations for postexposure
management  are  intended  to  achieve  early  identification  of  chronic  disease  and,  if
present,
referral for evaluation of treatment options. However, a theoretical argument is
that intervention with antivirals when HCV RNA first becomes detectable might prevent
the development of chronic infection. Data from studies conducted outside the
United States suggest that a short course of interferon started early in the course of
acute hepatitis C is associated with a higher rate of resolved infection than that
achieved when therapy is begun after chronic hepatitis C has been well established
(90--92). These studies used various treatment regimens and included persons with
acute disease whose peak ALT levels were 500--1,000 IU/L at the time therapy was
initiated (2.6--4 months after exposure).
No studies have evaluated the treatment of acute infection in persons with
no evidence of liver disease (i.e., HCV RNA-positive <6 months duration with normal
ALT levels); among patients with chronic HCV infection, the efficacy of antivirals has
been demonstrated only among patients who also had evidence of chronic liver disease
(i.e., abnormal ALT levels). In addition, treatment started early in the course of chronic
HCV infection (i.e., 6 months after onset of infection) might be as effective as
treatment started during acute infection
(13). Because 15%--25% of patients with acute
HCV infection spontaneously resolve their infection
(93),  treatment  of  these  patients  during  the  acute  phase  could  expose  them
unnecessarily to the discomfort and side effects
of antiviral therapy.
Data upon which to base a recommendation for therapy of acute infection
are insufficient because a) no data exist regarding the effect of treating patients with
acute  infection  who  have  no  evidence  of  disease,  b)  treatment  started  early  in  the
course
of chronic infection might be just as effective and would eliminate the need to
treat persons who will spontaneously resolve their infection, and c) the appropriate
regimen is unknown.
Occupational Transmission of HIV
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HIV
In prospective studies of HCP, the average risk of HIV transmission after
a percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood has been estimated to be
approximately 0.3% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.2%--0.5%)
(94)  and  after  a  mucous  membrane  exposure,  approximately  0.09%  (95%  CI  =
0.006%--0.5%)
(95).  Although  episodes  of  HIV  transmission  after  nonintact  skin  exposure  have  been
documented
(96), the average risk for transmission by this route has not been precisely quantified
but
is estimated to be less than the risk for mucous membrane exposures
(97). The risk for transmission after exposure to fluids or tissues other than HIV-infected
blood also
has not been quantified but is probably considerably lower than for blood exposures
(98).
As of June 2000, CDC had received voluntary reports of 56 U.S. HCP
with documented HIV seroconversion temporally associated with an occupational
HIV exposure. An additional 138 episodes in HCP are considered possible occupational
HIV transmissions. These workers had a history of occupational exposure to blood,
other infectious body fluids, or laboratory solutions containing HIV, and no other risk for
HIV infection was identified, but HIV seroconversion after a specific exposure was
not documented (99).
Epidemiologic and laboratory studies suggest that several factors might affect
the risk of HIV transmission after an occupational exposure. In a retrospective
case-control  study  of  HCP  who  had  percutaneous  exposure  to  HIV,  the  risk  for  HIV
infection
was found to be increased with exposure to a larger quantity of blood from the
source person as indicated by a) a device visibly contaminated with the patient's blood,
b)
a procedure that involved a needle being placed directly in a vein or artery, or c) a
deep injury (100). The risk also was increased for exposure to blood from source
persons with terminal illness, possibly reflecting either the higher titer of HIV in blood
late in
the course of AIDS or other factors (e.g., the presence of syncytia-inducing strains of
HIV). A laboratory study that demonstrated that more blood is transferred by
deeper injuries and hollow-bore needles lends further support for the observed variation
in risk related to blood quantity (101).
The use of source person viral load as a surrogate measure of viral titer
for assessing transmission risk has not yet been established. Plasma viral load (e.g.,
HIV RNA) reflects only the level of cell-free virus in the peripheral blood; latently
infected cells might transmit infection in the absence of viremia. Although a lower viral
load (e.g., <1,500 RNA copies/mL) or one that is below the limits of detection
probably  indicates  a  lower  titer  exposure,  it  does  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of
transmission.
Some evidence exists regarding host defenses possibly influencing the risk for
HIV infection. A study of HIV-exposed but uninfected HCP demonstrated an
HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) response when peripheral blood mononuclear
cells
were stimulated in vitro with HIV-specific antigens
(102).  Similar  CTL  responses  have  been  observed  in  other  groups  who  experienced
repeated HIV exposure without
resulting infection (103--108). Among several possible explanations for this observation
is
that the host immune response sometimes might prevent establishment of HIV
infection after a percutaneous exposure; another is that the CTL response simply might
be
a marker for exposure. In a study of 20 HCP with occupational exposure to HIV,
a comparison was made of HCP treated with zidovudine (ZDV) PEP and those
not treated. The findings from this study suggest that ZDV blunted the HIV-specific
CTL response and that PEP might inhibit early HIV replication
(109).
Rationale for HIV PEP
Considerations that influence the rationale and recommendations for PEP include
 the pathogenesis of HIV infection, particularly the time course of early infection;
 the biological plausibility that infection can be prevented or ameliorated by
using antiretroviral drugs;
 direct or indirect evidence of the efficacy of specific agents used for
prophylaxis; and
 the risk and benefit of PEP to exposed HCP.
The following discussion considers each of these concerns.
Role of Pathogenesis in Considering Antiretroviral
Prophylaxis.  Information  about  primary  HIV  infection  indicates  that  systemic  infection
does not occur
immediately, leaving a brief window of opportunity during which postexposure
antiretroviral intervention might modify or prevent viral replication. In a primate model
of
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection, infection of dendritic-like cells occurred
at
the site of inoculation during the first 24 hours following mucosal exposure to
cell-free virus. Over the subsequent 24--48 hours, migration of these cells to regional
lymph nodes occurred, and virus was detectable in the peripheral blood within 5 days
(110). Theoretically, initiation of antiretroviral PEP soon after exposure might prevent
or inhibit systemic infection by limiting the proliferation of virus in the initial target cells
or lymph nodes.
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Animal
Studies. Data from animal studies have been difficult to interpret, in part, because of
problems identifying an
animal model that is comparable to humans. In early studies, differences in
controlled  variables  (e.g.,  choice  of  viral  strain  [based  on  the  animal  model  used],
inoculum
size, route of inoculation, time of prophylaxis initiation, and drug regimen)
made extrapolation of the results to humans difficult. Recently, refinements in
methodology have facilitated more relevant studies; in particular, the viral inocula used
in
animal studies have been reduced to levels more analogous to human exposures
but sufficient to cause infection in control animals
(111--113).
 These
 studies
 provide
 encouraging
 evidence
 of
 postexposure
chemoprophylactic efficacy.
Studies among primates and in murine and feline animal models
have demonstrated that larger viral inocula decrease prophylactic efficacy
(114--117). In addition, delaying initiation, shortening the duration, or decreasing the
antiretroviral  dose  of  PEP,  individually  or  in  combination,  decreased  prophylactic
efficacy
(113,118--124).
 For
 example,
 when
 (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)
 adenine
(tenofovir)
was administered 48 hours before, 4 hours after, or 24 hours after intravenous
SIV inoculation to long-tailed macaques, a 4-week regimen prevented infection in
all treated animals (122). A subsequent study confirmed the efficacy of tenofovir
PEP when administered 24 hours after intravenous inoculation of a dose of SIV
that uniformly results in infection in untreated macaques. In the same study, protection
was incomplete if the tenofovir administration was delayed to 48 or 72 hours
postexposure or if the total duration of treatment was curtailed to 3 or 10 days
(123).
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Human
Studies.  Little  information  exists  from  which  the  efficacy  of  PEP  in  humans  can  be
assessed. Seroconversion is
infrequent following an occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood; therefore, several
thousands of exposed HCP would need to enroll in a prospective trial to achieve the
statistical power necessary to directly demonstrate PEP efficacy
(125).
In the retrospective case-control study of HCP, after controlling for other risk
factors for HIV transmission, use of ZDV as PEP was associated with a reduction in the
risk
of HIV infection by approximately 81% (95% CI = 43%--94%)
(100). Although the results of this study suggest PEP efficacy, its limitations include the
small number of
cases studied and the use of cases and controls from different cohorts.
In a multicenter trial in which ZDV was administered to HIV-infected
pregnant women and their infants, the administration of ZDV during pregnancy, labor,
and delivery and to the infant reduced transmission by 67%
(126). Only part of the
protective effect of ZDV was explained by reduction of the HIV viral load in
the maternal blood, suggesting that ZDV prophylaxis, in part, involves a mechanism
other than the reduction of maternal viral burden
(127,128). Since 1998, studies have highlighted the importance of PEP for prevention of
perinatal HIV transmission.
In Africa, the use of ZDV in combination with lamivudine (3TC) decreased perinatal
HIV transmission by 50% when administered during pregnancy, labor, and for 1
week postpartum, and by 37% when started at the onset of labor and continued for 1
week postpartum (129). Studies in the United States and Uganda also have
demonstrated that rates of perinatal HIV transmission have been reduced with the use
of abbreviated PEP regimens started intrapartum or during the first 48--72 hours of
life (130--132).
The limitations of all of these studies with animals and humans must be
considered when reviewing evidence of PEP efficacy. The extent to which data from
animal  studies  can  be  extrapolated  to  humans  is  largely  unknown,  and  the  exposure
route
for mother-to-infant HIV transmission is not similar to occupational exposures;
therefore, these findings might not be directly applicable to PEP in HCP.
Reports of Failure of PEP. Failure of PEP to prevent HIV infection in HCP has
been reported in at least 21 instances
(78,133--139). In 16 of the cases, ZDV was used
alone as a single agent; in two cases, ZDV and didanosine (ddI) were used in
combination (133,138); and in three cases,
>3 drugs were used for PEP
(137--139).  Thirteen  of  the  source  persons  were  known  to  have  been  treated  with
antiretroviral therapy
before  the  exposure.  Antiretroviral  resistance  testing  of  the  virus  from  the  source
person
was performed in seven instances, and in four, the HIV infection transmitted was found
to have decreased sensitivity to ZDV and/or other drugs used for PEP. In addition
to possible exposure to an antiretroviral-resistant strain of HIV, other factors that
might have contributed to these apparent failures might include a high titer and/or
large inoculum exposure, delayed initiation and/or short duration of PEP, and possible
factors related to the host (e.g., cellular immune system responsiveness) and/or to the
source person's virus (e.g., presence of syncytia-forming strains)
(133). Details regarding the cases of PEP failure involving combinations of antiretroviral
agents are included in
this report (Table 1).
Antiretroviral Agents for PEP
Antiretroviral agents from three classes of drugs are available for the treatment
of HIV infection. These agents include the nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs), nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), and
protease inhibitors (PIs). Only antiretroviral agents that have been approved by FDA
for treatment of HIV infection are discussed in these guidelines.
Determining which agents and how many to use or when to alter a PEP regimen
is largely empiric. Guidelines for the treatment of HIV infection, a condition
usually involving a high total body burden of HIV, include recommendations for the use
of three drugs (140); however, the applicability of these recommendations to
PEP remains unknown. In HIV-infected patients, combination regimens have
proved  superior  to  monotherapy  regimens  in  reducing  HIV  viral  load,  reducing  the
incidence
of opportunistic infections and death, and delaying onset of drug resistance
(141,142).  A  combination  of  drugs  with  activity  at  different  stages  in  the  viral
replication cycle
(e.g., nucleoside analogues with a PI) theoretically could offer an additional preventive
effect in PEP, particularly for occupational exposures that pose an increased risk
of
transmission. Although the use of a three-drug regimen might be justified
for exposures that pose an increased risk of transmission, whether the potential
added  toxicity  of  a  third  drug  is  justified  for  lower-risk  exposures  is  uncertain.
Therefore,
the recommendations at the end of this document provide guidance for two- and
three-drug PEP regimens that are based on the level of risk for HIV transmission
represented by the exposure.
NRTI combinations that can be considered for PEP include ZDV and 3TC, 3TC
and stavudine (d4T), and ddI and d4T. In previous PHS guidelines, a combination of
ZDV and 3TC was considered the first choice for PEP regimens
(3).  Because  ZDV  and  3TC  are  available  in  a  combination  formulation  (Combivir™,
manufactured by
Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC), the use of this combination might be
more convenient for HCP. However, recent data suggest that mutations associated with
ZDV and 3TC resistance might be common in some areas
(143).  Thus,  individual  clinicians  might  prefer  other  NRTIs  or  combinations  based  on
local knowledge and experience
in treating HIV infection and disease.
The addition of a third drug for PEP following high-risk exposures is based
on demonstrated effectiveness in reducing viral burden in HIV-infected
persons. Previously, indinavir (IDV) or nelfinavir (NFV) were recommended as
first-choice agents for inclusion in an expanded PEP regimen
(5). Since the publication of the 1998 PEP guidelines, efavirenz
      (EFV), an NNRTI; abacavir (ABC), a potent NRTI;
and Kaletra™, a PI, have been approved by FDA. Although side effects might be
common with the NNRTIs, EFV might be considered for expanded PEP regimens,
especially when resistance to PIs in the source person's virus is known or suspected.
ABC
has been associated with dangerous hypersensitivity reactions but, with
careful monitoring, may be considered as a third drug for PEP. Kaletra, a combination
of lopinavir and ritonavir, is a potent HIV inhibitor that, with expert consultation, may
be considered in an expanded PEP regimen.
Toxicity and Drug Interactions of Antiretroviral
Agents.  When  administering  PEP,  an  important  goal  is  completion  of  a  4-week  PEP
regimen when PEP is
indicated.  Therefore,  the  toxicity  profile  of  antiretroviral  agents,  including  the
frequency,
severity, duration, and reversibility of side effects, is a relevant consideration. All of
the antiretroviral agents have been associated with side effects (Table 2).
However, studies of adverse events have been conducted primarily with persons who
have advanced disease (and longer treatment courses) and who therefore might not
reflect the experience in persons who are uninfected
(144).
Several primary side effects are associated with antiretroviral agents (Table
2). Side effects associated with many of the NRTIs are chiefly gastrointestinal
(e.g., nausea or diarrhea); however, ddI has been associated with cases of fatal and
nonfatal pancreatitis among HIV-infected patients treated for >4 weeks. The use of PIs
has
been associated with new onset diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, diabetic
      ketoacidosis, exacerbation of preexisting diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia
(145--147). Nephrolithiasis has been associated with IDV use; however, the incidence of
this potential complication might be limited by drinking at least 48 ounces (1.5 L) of
fluid per 24-hour period (e.g., six 8- ounce glasses of water throughout the day)
(148). NFV has been associated with the development of diarrhea; however, this side
effect
might respond to treatment with antimotility agents that can be prescribed for use,
if necessary, at the time the drug is recommended for PEP. The NNRTIs have
been
associated with severe skin reactions, including life-threatening cases of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Hepatotoxicity, including
fatal hepatic necrosis, has occurred in patients treated with nevirapine (NVP);
some episodes began during the first few weeks of therapy (FDA, unpublished data,
2000). EFV has been associated with central nervous system side effects, including
dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, and abnormal dreaming.
All of the approved antiretroviral agents might have potentially serious
drug interactions when used with certain other drugs (Appendix C). Careful evaluation
of concomitant medications used by an exposed person is required before PEP
is prescribed, and close monitoring for toxicity is also needed. Further information
about potential drug interactions can be found in the manufacturer's package insert.
Toxicity Associated with PEP. Information from the National
Surveillance System for Health Care Workers (NaSH) and the HIV Postexposure Registry
indicates that nearly 50% of HCP experience adverse symptoms (e.g., nausea,
malaise, headache, anorexia, and headache) while taking PEP and that approximately
33%
stop taking PEP because of adverse signs and symptoms
(6,7,10,11). Some studies have demonstrated that side effects and discontinuation of
PEP are more common
among HCP taking three-drug combination regimens for PEP compared with HCP taking
two-drug combination regimens (7,10). Although similar rates of side effects
were observed among persons who took PEP after sexual or drug use exposures to HIV
in the San Francisco Post-Exposure Prevention Project, 80% completed 4 weeks
of therapy (149). Participants in the San Francisco Project were followed at 1, 2, 4, 26,
and 52 weeks postexposure and received medication adherence counseling;
most participants took only two drugs for PEP.
Serious side effects, including nephrolithiasis, hepatitis, and pancytopenia
have been reported with the use of combination drugs for PEP
(6,7,150,151).  One  case  of  NVP-associated  fulminant  liver  failure  requiring  liver
transplantation and one case
of hypersensitivity syndrome have been reported in HCP taking NVP for HIV PEP
(152). Including these two cases, from March 1997 through September 2000, FDA
received reports of 22 cases of serious adverse events related to NVP taken for PEP
(153). These events included 12 cases of hepatotoxicity, 14 cases of skin reaction
(including one documented and two possible cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome), and
one
case of rhabdomyolysis; four cases involved both hepatotoxicty and skin reaction, and
one case involved both rhabdomyolysis and skin reaction.
Resistance to Antiretroviral Agents. Known or suspected resistance of the
source virus to antiretroviral agents, particularly to agents that might be included in a
PEP regimen, is a concern for persons making decisions about PEP. Resistance to
HIV infection occurs with all of the available antiretroviral agents, and
cross-resistance within drug classes is frequent
(154). Recent studies have demonstrated an emergence of drug-resistant HIV among
source persons for occupational
exposures (143,155). A study conducted at seven U.S. sites during 1998--1999 found
that
16 (39%) of 41 source persons whose virus was sequenced had primary
genetic mutations associated with resistance to RTIs, and 4 (10%) had primary
mutations associated with resistance to PIs
(143). In addition, occupational transmission
of resistant HIV strains, despite PEP with combination drug regimens, has been
reported (137,139). In one case, a hospital worker became infected after an HIV
exposure despite a PEP regimen that included ddI, d4T, and NVP
(139). The transmitted HIV
contained two primary genetic mutations associated with resistance to NNRTIs
(the source person was taking EFV at the time of the exposure). Despite recent studies
and  case  reports,  the  relevance  of  exposure  to  a  resistant  virus  is  still  not  well
understood.
Empiric decisions about the presence of antiretroviral drug resistance are
often difficult to make because patients generally take more than one antiretroviral
agent. Resistance should be suspected in source persons when they are experiencing
clinical progression of disease or a persistently increasing viral load, and/or decline in
CD4
T-cell count, despite therapy or a lack of virologic response to therapy.
However, resistance testing of the source virus at the time of an exposure is not
practical because the results will not be available in time to influence the choice of the
initial
PEP regimen. Furthermore, in this situation, whether modification of the PEP regimen
is necessary or will influence the outcome of an occupational exposure is unknown.
No data exist to suggest that modification of a PEP regimen after receiving results
from resistance testing (usually a minimum of 1--2 weeks) improves efficacy of PEP.
Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy. Data are limited on the
potential effects of antiretroviral drugs on the developing fetus or neonate
(156). Carcinogenicity and/or mutagenicity is evident in several in vitro screening tests
for ZDV and all other FDA-licensed NRTIs. The relevance of animal data to humans
is unknown; however, because teratogenic effects were observed in primates at
drug exposures similar to those representing human therapeutic exposure, the use of
EFV should be avoided in pregnant women
(140). IDV is associated with infrequent
side effects in adults (i.e., hyperbilirubinemia and renal stones) that could be
problematic  for  a  newborn.  Because  the  half-life  of  IDV  in  adults  is  short,  these
concerns might
be relevant only if the drug is administered shortly before delivery.
In a recent study in France of perinatal HIV transmission, two cases of
progressive neurologic disease and death were reported in uninfected infants exposed
to ZDV
and 3TC (157). Laboratory studies of these children suggested mitochondrial
dysfunction.  In  a  careful  review  of  deaths  in  children  followed  in  U.S.  perinatal  HIV
cohorts,
no deaths attributable to mitochondrial disease have been found
(158).
Recent reports of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women
treated throughout gestation with a combination of d4T and ddI have prompted
warnings about use of these drugs during pregnancy
(159).  Although  the  case-patients  were  HIV-infected  women  taking  the  drugs  for  >4
weeks, pregnant women and
their providers should be advised to consider d4T and ddI only when the benefits of
their use outweigh the risks.
PEP Use in Hospitals in the United
States.  Analysis  of  data  from  NaSH  provides  information  on  the  use  of  PEP  following
occupational exposures in 47 hospitals in
the United States. A total of 11,784 exposures to blood and body fluids was reported
from June 1996 through November 2000 (CDC, unpublished data, 2001). For all
exposures with known sources, 6% were to HIV-positive sources, 74% to HIV-negative
sources, and 20% to sources with an unknown HIV status. Sixty-three percent of HCP
exposed to a known HIV-positive source started PEP, and 54% of HCP took it for at least
20
days, whereas 14% of HCP exposed to a source person subsequently found to be
HIV-negative initiated PEP, and 3% of those took it for at least 20 days.
Information  recorded  about  HIV  exposures  in  NaSH  indicates  that  46%  of  exposures
involving
an HIV-positive source warranted only a two-drug PEP regimen (i.e., the exposure was
to mucous membranes or skin or was a superficial percutaneous injury and the
source person did not have end-stage AIDS or acute HIV illness); however, 53% of
these
exposed HCP took >3 drugs (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). Similarly, the
National Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline (PEPline) reported that PEPline
staff recommended stopping or not starting PEP for approximately one half of the HCP
who consulted them about exposures (D. Bangsberg, San Francisco General
Hospital, unpublished data, September 1999). The observation that some HCP exposed
to
HIV-negative source persons take PEP from several days to weeks following
their exposures suggests that strategies be employed such as the use of a rapid
HIV antibody assay, which could minimize exposure to unnecessary PEP
(11). A recent study demonstrated that use of a rapid HIV test for evaluation of source
persons
after occupational exposures not only resulted in decreased use of PEP, but also was
cost-effective compared with use of the standard enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test
for source persons subsequently found to be HIV-negative
(160).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HCP POTENTIALLY EXPOSED TO HBV,
HCV, or HIV
Exposure prevention remains the primary strategy for reducing
occupational  bloodborne  pathogen  infections;  however,  occupational  exposures  will
continue
to occur. Health-care organizations should make available to their personnel a
system that includes written protocols for prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling,
treatment,  and  follow-up  of  occupational  exposures  that  might  place  HCP  at  risk  for
acquiring
a bloodborne infection. HCP should be educated concerning the risk for and
prevention  of  bloodborne  infections,  including  the  need  to  be  vaccinated  against
hepatitis
B (17,21,161--163). Employers are required to establish exposure-control plans
that include postexposure follow-up for their employees and to comply with
incident reporting requirements mandated by the 1992 OSHA bloodborne pathogen
standard  (2).  Access  to  clinicians  who  can  provide  postexposure  care  should  be
available
during all working hours, including nights and weekends. HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine,
and antiretroviral agents for HIV PEP should be available for timely administration
(i.e., either by providing access on-site or by creating linkages with other facilities
or providers to make them available off-site). Persons responsible for
providing postexposure management should be familiar with evaluation and treatment
protocols  and  the  facility's  plans  for  accessing  HBIG,  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  and
antiretroviral
drugs for HIV PEP.
HCP should be educated to report occupational exposures immediately after
they occur, particularly because HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine, and HIV PEP are most likely
to
be effective if administered as soon after the exposure as possible. HCP who are at
risk for occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens should be familiarized with
the principles of postexposure management as part of job orientation and ongoing
job training.
Hepatitis B Vaccination
Any person who performs tasks involving contact with blood,
blood-contaminated  body  fluids,  other  body  fluids,  or  sharps  should  be  vaccinated
against hepatitis B
(2,21). Prevaccination serologic screening for previous infection is not indicated for
persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk, unless the hospital or
health-care organization considers screening cost-effective.
Hepatitis B vaccine should always be administered by the intramuscular route
in the deltoid muscle with a needle 1--1.5 inches long. Hepatitis B vaccine can
be administered at the same time as other vaccines with no interference with
antibody response to the other vaccines
(164). If the vaccination series is interrupted after
the first dose, the second dose should be administered as soon as possible. The
second and third doses should be separated by an interval of at least 2 months. If only
the third dose is delayed, it should be administered when convenient. HCP who
have contact with patients or blood and are at ongoing risk for percutaneous injuries
should be tested 1--2 months after completion of the 3dose vaccination series for
      anti-HBs (21). Persons who do not respond to the primary vaccine series (i.e.,
      anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL)  should  complete  a  second  3-dose  vaccine  series  or  be
evaluated to determine
if they are HBsAg-positive. Revaccinated persons should be retested at the
completion  of  the  second  vaccine  series.  Persons  who  do  not  respond  to  an  initial
3-dose
vaccine series have a 30%--50% chance of responding to a second 3-dose series
(165). Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled regarding how
to prevent HBV transmission to others and regarding the need for medical
evaluation (12,163,166). Nonresponders to vaccination who are
      HBsAg-negative should
be considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled
regarding  precautions  to  prevent  HBV  infection  and  the  need  to  obtain  HBIG
prophylaxis for
any known or probable parenteral exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. Booster doses
of hepatitis B vaccine are not necessary, and periodic serologic testing to
monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series is not
recommended.  Any  blood  or  body  fluid  exposure  sustained  by  an  unvaccinated,
susceptible
person should lead to the initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
Treatment of an Exposure Site
Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood or body fluids should
be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes should be flushed with water.
No evidence exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by
squeezing  the  wound  further  reduces  the  risk  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission;
however,
the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g.,
bleach)  or  the  injection  of  antiseptics  or  disinfectants  into  the  wound  is  not
recommended.
Exposure Report
If an occupational exposure occurs, the circumstances and
postexposure  management  should  be  recorded  in  the  exposed  person's  confidential
medical
record (usually on a form the facility designates for this purpose) (Box 1). In
addition, employers should follow all federal (including OSHA) and state requirements
for recording and reporting occupational injuries and exposures.
Evaluation of the Exposure and the Exposure Source
Evaluation of the Exposure
The exposure should be evaluated for the potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and
HIV based on the type of body substance involved and the route and severity of
the exposure (Box 2). Blood, fluid containing visible blood, or other potentially
infectious fluid (including semen; vaginal secretions; and cerebrospinal,
      synovial,
pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids) or tissue can be infectious for
bloodborne viruses. Exposures to these fluids or tissue through a percutaneous injury
(i.e., needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through contact with
a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for bloodborne virus
transmission and require further evaluation. For HCV and HIV, exposure to a blood-filled
hollow needle or visibly bloody device suggests a higher risk exposure than exposure to
a needle that was most likely used for giving an injection. In addition, any direct
contact (i.e, personal protective equipment either was not present or was ineffective
in protecting skin or mucous membranes) with concentrated virus in a
research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that requires
clinical evaluation.
For skin exposure, follow-up is indicated only if it involves exposure to a body
fluid previously listed and evidence exists of compromised skin integrity (e.g.,
dermatitis,  abrasion,  or  open  wound).  In  the  clinical  evaluation  for  human  bites,
possible
exposure  of  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  must  be
considered. If
a bite results in blood exposure to either person involved, postexposure
follow-up should be provided.
Evaluation of the Exposure Source
The person whose blood or body fluid is the source of an occupational
exposure  should  be  evaluated  for  HBV,  HCV,  and  HIV  infection  (Box  3).  Information
available
in the medical record at the time of exposure (e.g., laboratory test results,
admitting  diagnosis,  or  previous  medical  history)  or  from  the  source  person,  might
confirm
or exclude bloodborne virus infection.
If the HBV, HCV, and/or HIV infection status of the source is unknown, the
source person should be informed of the incident and tested for serologic evidence
of bloodborne virus infection. Procedures should be followed for testing source
persons, including obtaining informed consent, in accordance with applicable state and
local laws. Any persons determined to be infected with HBV, HCV, or HIV should be
referred for appropriate counseling and treatment. Confidentiality of the source person
should be maintained at all times.
Testing to determine the HBV, HCV, and HIV infection status of an exposure
source should be performed as soon as possible. Hospitals, clinics and other sites
that manage exposed HCP should consult their laboratories regarding the
most appropriate test to use to expedite obtaining these results. An FDA-approved
rapid HIV-antibody test kit should be considered for use in this situation, particularly if
testing by EIA cannot be completed within 24--48 hours. Repeatedly reactive results by
EIA
or rapid HIV-antibody tests are considered to be highly suggestive of infection, whereas
a negative result is an excellent indicator of the absence of HIV antibody. Confirmation
of a reactive result by Western blot or immunofluorescent antibody is not necessary
to make initial decisions about postexposure management but should be done
to complete the testing process and before informing the source person.
Repeatedly reactive results by EIA for anti-HCV should be confirmed by a supplemental
test
(i.e., recombinant immunoblot assay [RIBA™] or HCV PCR). Direct virus assays (e.g.,
HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA or HCV RNA) for routine HIV or HCV screening
of source persons are not recommended.
If the exposure source is unknown or cannot be tested, information about
where and under what circumstances the exposure occurred should be
assessed
epidemiologically for the likelihood of transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
Certain situations as well as the type of exposure might suggest an increased or
decreased risk; an important consideration is the prevalence of HBV, HCV, or HIV in the
population group (i.e., institution or community) from which the contaminated source
material
is derived. For example, an exposure that occurs in a geographic area where
injection-drug  use  is  prevalent  or  involves  a  needle  discarded  in  a  drug-treatment
facility
would be considered epidemiologically to have a higher risk for transmission than
an exposure that occurs in a nursing home for the elderly.
Testing of needles or other sharp instruments implicated in an
exposure, regardless of whether the source is known or unknown, is not recommended.
The reliability and interpretation of findings in such circumstances are unknown,
and testing might be hazardous to persons handling the sharp instrument.
Examples of information to consider when evaluating an exposure source
for possible HBV, HCV, or HIV infection include laboratory information (e.g., previous
HBV,  HCV,  or  HIV  test  results  or  results  of  immunologic  testing  [e.g.,  CD4+  T-cell
count])
or liver enzymes (e.g., ALT), clinical symptoms (e.g., acute syndrome suggestive
of primary HIV infection or undiagnosed immunodeficiency disease), and history
of recent (i.e., within 3 months) possible HBV, HCV, or HIV exposures (e.g.,
injection-drug  use  or  sexual  contact  with  a  known  positive  partner).  Health-care
providers should
be aware of local and state laws governing the collection and release of HIV
serostatus information on a source person, following an occupational exposure.
If the source person is known to have HIV infection, available information about
this person's stage of infection (i.e., asymptomatic, symptomatic, or AIDS), CD4+
T-cell count, results of viral load testing, current and previous antiretroviral therapy,
and results of any genotypic or phenotypic viral resistance testing should be gathered
for consideration in choosing an appropriate PEP regimen. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of exposed HCP should be considered within 72 hours
postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or source person
becomes available.
If the source person is HIV seronegative and has no clinical evidence of AIDS
or symptoms of HIV infection, no further testing of the person for HIV infection
is indicated. The likelihood of the source person being in the "window period" of
HIV  infection  in  the  absence  of  symptoms  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome  is  extremely
small.
Management of Exposures to HBV
For percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood, several factors must
be considered when making a decision to provide prophylaxis, including the HBsAg
status of the source and the hepatitis B vaccination and vaccine-response status of
the exposed person. Such exposures usually involve persons for whom hepatitis
B vaccination is recommended. Any blood or body fluid exposure to an
unvaccinated person should lead to initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
The hepatitis B vaccination status and the vaccine-response status (if known) of
the exposed person should be reviewed. A summary of prophylaxis recommendations
for percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood according to the HBsAg status of
the exposure source and the vaccination and vaccine-response status of the
exposed person is included in this report (Table 3).
When HBIG is indicated, it should be administered as soon as possible
after exposure (preferably within 24 hours). The effectiveness of HBIG when
administered  >7  days  after  exposure  is  unknown.  When  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is
indicated, it
should also be administered as soon as possible (preferably within 24 hours) and can
be administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate site (vaccine should always
be administered in the deltoid muscle).
For exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated but have
not completed the vaccination series, vaccination should be completed as scheduled,
and HBIG should be added as indicated (Table 3). Persons exposed to
      HBsAg-positive
blood or body fluids who are known not to have responded to a primary vaccine
series should receive a single dose of HBIG and reinitiate the hepatitis B vaccine series
with the first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after
exposure. Alternatively, they should receive two doses of HBIG, one dose as soon as
possible  after  exposure,  and  the  second  dose  1  month  later.  The  option  of
administering
one dose of HBIG and reinitiating the vaccine series is preferred for nonresponders
who did not complete a second 3-dose vaccine series. For persons who
previously completed a second vaccine series but failed to respond, two doses of HBIG
are preferred.
Management of Exposures to HCV
Individual institutions should establish policies and procedures for testing HCP
for HCV after percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood and ensure that all
personnel
are familiar with these policies and procedures. The following are
recommendations for follow-up of occupational HCV exposures:
 For the source, perform testing for anti-HCV.
 For the person exposed to an HCV-positive source
    --- perform baseline testing for anti-HCV and ALT activity; and
   --- perform follow-up testing (e.g., at 4--6 months) for anti-HCV and ALT
activity (if earlier diagnosis of HCV infection is desired, testing for HCV RNA may
be performed at 4--6 weeks).
 Confirm all anti-HCV results reported positive by enzyme immunoassay
using  supplemental  anti-HCV  testing  (e.g.,  recombinant  immunoblot  assay  [RIBA™])
(13).
Health-care professionals who provide care to persons exposed to HCV in
the occupational setting should be knowledgeable regarding the risk for HCV infection
and appropriate counseling, testing, and medical follow-up.
IG and antiviral agents are not recommended for PEP after exposure to
HCV-positive blood. In addition, no guidelines exist for administration of therapy during
the acute phase of HCV infection. However, limited data indicate that antiviral
therapy might be beneficial when started early in the course of HCV infection. When
HCV infection is identified early, the person should be referred for medical management
to a specialist knowledgeable in this area.
Counseling for HCP Exposed to Viral Hepatitis
HCP exposed to HBV- or HCV-infected blood do not need to take any
special precautions to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up period
(12,13); however, they should refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or
semen. The exposed person does not need to modify sexual practices or refrain
from becoming pregnant. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she does not need
to discontinue.
No modifications to an exposed person's patient-care responsibilities
are necessary to prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to
      HBV-
or HCV-positive blood. If an exposed person becomes acutely infected with HBV,
the person should be evaluated according to published recommendations for infected
HCP (165). No recommendations exist regarding restricting the professional activities
of HCP with HCV infection (13). As recommended for all
      HCP, those who are
chronically infected with HBV or HCV should follow all recommended infection-control
practices, including standard precautions and appropriate use of hand washing,
protective barriers, and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp
instruments (162).
Management of Exposures to HIV
Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing of Exposed HCP
HCP exposed to HIV should be evaluated within hours (rather than days) after
their  exposure  and  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  baseline  (i.e.,  to  establish  infection
status
at
the time of exposure). If the source person is seronegative for HIV, baseline testing
or further follow-up of the exposed person normally is not necessary. Serologic
testing should be made available to all HCP who are concerned that they might have
been occupationally infected with HIV. For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the
evaluation also should include information about medications the exposed person might
be
taking and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances (i.e.,
pregnancy,  breast  feeding,  or  renal  or  hepatic  disease)  that  might  influence  drug
selection.
PEP for HIV
The following recommendations (Table 4 and Table 5) apply to situations when a
person has been exposed to a source person with HIV infection or when information
suggests the likelihood that the source person is HIV-infected. These recommendations
are based on the risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and on limited
data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most occupational HIV exposures
do not result in the transmission of HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully
considered when prescribing PEP. To assist with the initial management of an HIV
exposure, health-care facilities should have drugs for an initial PEP regimen selected
and available for use. When possible, these recommendations should be implemented
in consultation with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral therapy and
HIV transmission (Box 4).
Timing and Duration of PEP. PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The
interval within which PEP should be initiated for optimal efficacy is not known. Animal
studies have demonstrated the importance of starting PEP soon after an
exposure  (111,112,118).  If  questions  exist  about  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use  or
whether
to use a basic or expanded regimen, starting the basic regimen immediately rather
than delaying PEP administration is probably better. Although animal studies suggest
that PEP probably is substantially less effective when started more than 24--36
hours  postexposure  (112,119,122),  the  interval  after  which  no  benefit  is  gained  from
PEP
for humans is undefined. Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be
started  even  when  the  interval  since  exposure  exceeds  36  hours.  Initiating  therapy
after
a longer interval (e.g., 1 week) might be considered for exposures that represent
an increased risk for transmission. The optimal duration of PEP is unknown. Because
4 weeks of ZDV appeared protective in occupational and animal studies
(100,123), PEP probably should be administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
Use of PEP When HIV Infection Status of Source Person is
Unknown.  If  the  source  person's  HIV  infection  status  is  unknown  at  the  time  of
exposure, use of PEP should
be decided on a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in the source (Table 4 and
Table 5).
If these considerations suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of
the source person is pending, initiating a two-drug PEP regimen until laboratory
results  have  been  obtained  and  later  modifying  or  discontinuing  the  regimen
accordingly
is reasonable. The following are recommendations regarding HIV
postexposure prophylaxis:
 If indicated, start PEP as soon as possible after an exposure.
 Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 Administer PEP for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 If a source person is determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should be discontinued.
PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 Avoiding occupational blood exposures is the primary way to prevent
transmission  of  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV),  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV),  and  human
immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) in health-care settings (1). However, hepatitis B immunization and
postexposure management are integral components of a complete program to prevent
infection following bloodborne pathogen exposure and are important elements of
workplace safety (2).
 The U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) has published previous guidelines for
the management of HIV exposures that included considerations for
postexposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  (3--5).  Since  publication  of  the  1998  HIV  exposure
guidelines
(5), several new antiretroviral agents have been approved by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), and more information is available about the use and safety
of HIV PEP (6--11). In addition, questions exist regarding considerations about
PEP regimens when the source person's virus is known or suspected to be resistant to
one or more of the antiretroviral agents that might be used for PEP. Concern also
has arisen about the use of PEP when it is not warranted. Data indicate that some
health-care personnel (HCP) take a full course of HIV PEP after exposures that do not
confer an HIV transmission risk (10,11).
 In September 1999, a meeting of a PHS interagency working group* and
expert consultants was convened by CDC. The PHS working group decided to issue
updated recommendations for the management of occupational exposure to HIV. In
addition,  the  report  was  to  include  recommendations  for  the  management  of
occupational
HBV and HCV exposures so that a single document could comprehensively address
the management of occupational exposures to bloodborne pathogens. This report
updates and consolidates the previous PHS guidelines and recommendations for
occupational HBV, HCV, and HIV exposure management for HCP. Specific practice
recommendations for the management of occupational bloodborne pathogen exposures
are outlined
to assist health-care institutions with the implementation of these PHS
guidelines (Appendices A and B). As relevant information becomes available, updates of
these recommendations will be published. Recommendations for nonoccupational
(e.g., sexual, pediatric, and perinatal) HBV, HCV, and HIV exposures are not addressed
in these guidelines and can be found elsewhere
(12--15).
 
Definition of Health-Care Personnel and Exposure
 In this report, health-care personnel (HCP) are defined as persons (e.g.,
employees, students, contractors, attending clinicians, public-safety
workers, or volunteers) whose activities involve contact with patients or with blood or
other body fluids from
patients  in  a  health-care,  laboratory,  or  public-safety  setting.  The  potential  exists  for
blood
and body fluid exposure to other workers, and the same principles of
exposure management could be applied to other settings.
 An exposure that might place HCP at risk for HBV, HCV, or HIV infection is
defined  as  a  percutaneous  injury  (e.g.,  a  needlestick  or  cut  with  a  sharp  object)  or
contact
of mucous membrane or nonintact skin (e.g., exposed skin that is chapped, abraded,
or afflicted with dermatitis) with blood, tissue, or other body fluids that are
potentially infectious (16,17).
 In addition to blood and body fluids containing visible blood, semen and
vaginal secretions also are considered potentially infectious. Although semen and
vaginal secretions have been implicated in the sexual transmission of HBV, HCV, and
HIV,
they have not been implicated in occupational transmission from patients to HCP.
The following fluids also are considered potentially infectious: cerebrospinal fluid,
synovial fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid. The risk
for transmission of HBV, HCV, and HIV infection from these fluids is unknown; the
potential risk to HCP from occupational exposures has not been assessed by
epidemiologic  studies  in  health-care  settings.  Feces,  nasal  secretions,  saliva,  sputum,
sweat,
tears, urine, and vomitus are not considered potentially infectious unless they contain
blood. The risk for transmission of HBV, HCV, and HIV infection from these fluids
and materials is extremely low.
 Any direct contact (i.e., contact without barrier protection) to concentrated virus
in a research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that
requires clinical evaluation. For human bites, the clinical evaluation must include the
possibility  that  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  were
exposed
to bloodborne pathogens. Transmission of HBV or HIV infection only rarely has
been reported by this route (18--20) (CDC, unpublished data, 1998).
BACKGROUND
This section provides the rationale for the postexposure management
and prophylaxis recommendations presented in this report. Additional details
concerning the risk for occupational bloodborne pathogen transmission to HCP and
management of occupational bloodborne pathogen exposures are available elsewhere
(5,12,13,21-24).
Occupational Transmission of HBV
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HBV
HBV infection is a well recognized occupational risk for HCP
(25). The risk of HBV infection is primarily related to the degree of contact with blood in
the work place
and also to the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) status of the source person. In studies of
HCP who sustained injuries from needles contaminated with blood containing HBV, the
risk of developing clinical hepatitis if the blood was both hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg)- and HBeAg-positive was 22%--31%; the risk of developing
serologic evidence of HBV infection was 37%--62%. By comparison, the risk of
developing clinical hepatitis from a needle contaminated with HBsAg-positive,
HBeAg-negative  blood  was  1%--6%,  and  the  risk  of  developing  serologic  evidence  of
HBV
infection, 23%--37% (26).
Although percutaneous injuries are among the most efficient modes of
HBV transmission, these exposures probably account for only a minority of HBV
infections among HCP. In several investigations of nosocomial hepatitis B outbreaks,
most infected HCP could not recall an overt percutaneous injury
(27,28), although in some studies, up to one third of infected HCP recalled caring for a
patient who was
HBsAg-positive  (29,30).  In  addition,  HBV  has  been  demonstrated  to  survive  in  dried
blood
at room temperature on environmental surfaces for at least 1 week
(31). Thus, HBV
infections that occur in HCP with no history of nonoccupational exposure
or occupational percutaneous injury might have resulted from direct or indirect blood
or body fluid exposures that inoculated HBV into cutaneous scratches, abrasions,
burns, other lesions, or on mucosal surfaces
(32--34). The potential for HBV
transmission through contact with environmental surfaces has been demonstrated in
investigations of HBV outbreaks among patients and staff of hemodialysis units
(35--37).
Blood contains the highest HBV titers of all body fluids and is the most
important  vehicle  of  transmission  in  the  health-care  setting.  HBsAg  is  also  found  in
several
other body fluids, including breast milk, bile, cerebrospinal fluid, feces,
nasopharyngeal washings, saliva, semen, sweat, and synovial fluid
(38). However, the concentration of HBsAg in body fluids can be 100--1000---fold higher
than the concentration
of infectious HBV particles. Therefore, most body fluids are not efficient vehicles
of transmission because they contain low quantities of infectious HBV, despite
the presence of HBsAg.
In serologic studies conducted in the United States during the 1970s, HCP had
a prevalence of HBV infection approximately 10 times higher than the
general population (39--42). Because of the high risk of HBV infection among
      HCP,
routine preexposure vaccination of HCP against hepatitis B and the use of
standard precautions to prevent exposure to blood and other potentially infectious body
fluids have been recommended since the early 1980s
(43). Regulations issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
      (OSHA)
(2) have increased compliance with these recommendations. Since the implementation
of these recommendations,
a sharp decline has occurred in the incidence of HBV infection among HCP.
PEP for HBV
Efficacy of PEP for HBV. The effectiveness of hepatitis B immune globulin
(HBIG) and/or hepatitis B vaccine in various postexposure settings has been evaluated
by prospective studies. For perinatal exposure to an HBsAg-, HBeAg-positive mother,
a regimen combining HBIG and initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series at birth is
85%--95% effective in preventing HBV infection
(44,45).  Regimens  involving  either  multiple  doses  of  HBIG  alone  or  the  hepatitis  B
vaccine series alone are 70%--75% effective
in preventing HBV infection (46). In the occupational setting, multiple doses of
HBIG initiated within 1 week following percutaneous exposure to HBsAg-positive
blood provides an estimated 75% protection from HBV infection
(47--49).  Although  the  postexposure  efficacy  of  the  combination  of  HBIG  and  the
hepatitis B vaccine
series has not been evaluated in the occupational setting, the increased efficacy of
this regimen observed in the perinatal setting, compared with HBIG alone, is presumed
to apply to the occupational setting as well. In addition, because persons requiring PEP
in the occupational setting are generally at continued risk for HBV exposure, they
should receive the hepatitis B vaccine series.
Safety of PEP for HBV. Hepatitis B vaccines have been found to be safe
when administered to infants, children, or adults
(12,50).  Through  the  year  2000,  approximately  100  million  persons  have  received
hepatitis B vaccine in the
United States. The most common side effects from hepatitis B vaccination are pain at
the injection site and mild to moderate fever
(50--55).  Studies  indicate  that  these  side  effects  are  reported  no  more  frequently
among persons vaccinated than among
those receiving placebo (51,52).
Approximately 45 reports have been received by the Vaccine Adverse
Event Reporting System (VAERS) of alopecia (hair loss) in children and adults
after administration of plasma-derived and recombinant hepatitis B vaccine; four
persons sustained hair loss following vaccination on more than one occasion
(56). Hair loss was temporary for approximately two thirds of persons who experienced
hair loss.
An epidemiologic study conducted in the Vaccine Safety Datalink found no
statistical association between alopecia and receipt of hepatitis B vaccine in children
(CDC, unpublished data, 1998). A low rate of anaphylaxis has been observed in
vaccine recipients based on reports to VAERS; the estimated incidence is 1 in 600,000
vaccine doses distributed. Although none of the persons who developed anaphylaxis
died, anaphylactic reactions can be life-threatening; therefore, further vaccination
with hepatitis B vaccine is contraindicated in persons with a history of anaphylaxis after
a previous dose of vaccine.
Hepatitis B immunization programs conducted on a large scale in Taiwan,
Alaska, and New Zealand have observed no association between vaccination and
the occurrence of serious adverse events. Furthermore, in the United States,
surveillance of adverse events following hepatitis B vaccination has demonstrated no
association between hepatitis B vaccine and the occurrence of serious adverse events,
including Guillain-Barré syndrome, transverse myelitis, multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis,
and seizures (57--59) (CDC, unpublished data, 1991). However, several case reports
and case series have claimed an association between hepatitis B vaccination and
such syndromes and diseases as multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis, rheumatoid arthritis,
and other autoimmune diseases (57,60--66). Most of these reported adverse events
have occurred in adults, and no report has compared the frequency of the
purported vaccine-associated syndrome/disease with the frequency in an
unvaccinated population. In addition, recent case-control studies have demonstrated no
association  between  hepatitis  B  vaccination  and  development  or  short-term  risk  of
relapse
of multiple sclerosis (67,68), and reviews by international panels of experts
have concluded that available data do not demonstrate a causal association
between  hepatitis  B  vaccination  and  demyelinating  diseases,  including  multiple
sclerosis
(69).
HBIG is prepared from human plasma known to contain a high titer of antibody
to HBsAg (anti-HBs). The plasma from which HBIG is prepared is screened for
HBsAg and antibodies to HIV and HCV. The process used to prepare HBIG inactivates
and eliminates HIV from the final product. Since 1996, the final product has been free
of HCV RNA as determined by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and, since 1999,
all products available in the United States have been manufactured by methods
that inactivate HCV and other viruses. No evidence exists that HBV, HCV, or HIV have
ever been transmitted by HBIG commercially available in the United States
(70,71).
Serious adverse effects from HBIG when administered as recommended
have been rare. Local pain and tenderness at the injection site, urticaria and
angioedema  might  occur;  anaphylactic  reactions,  although  rare,  have  been  reported
following
the injection of human immune globulin (IG) preparations
(72). Persons with a history of anaphylactic reaction to IG should not receive HBIG.
PEP for HBV During Pregnancy. No apparent risk exists for adverse effects
to developing fetuses when hepatitis B vaccine is administered to pregnant women
(CDC, unpublished data, 1990). The vaccine contains noninfectious HBsAg particles
and should pose no risk to the fetus. HBV infection during pregnancy might result in
severe
disease for the mother and chronic infection for the newborn. Therefore,
neither pregnancy nor lactation should be considered a contraindication to vaccination
of women. HBIG is not contraindicated for pregnant or lactating women.
Occupational Transmission of HCV
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HCV
HCV is not transmitted efficiently through occupational exposures to blood.
The average incidence of anti-HCV seroconversion after accidental
percutaneous exposure from an HCV-positive source is 1.8% (range: 0%--7%)
(73--76),  with  one  study  indicating  that  transmission  occurred  only  from  hollow-bore
needles
compared with other sharps (75). Transmission rarely occurs from mucous membrane
exposures to blood, and no transmission in HCP has been documented from intact or
nonintact skin exposures to blood (77,78). Data are limited on survival of HCV in
the environment. In contrast to HBV, the epidemiologic data for HCV suggest
that environmental contamination with blood containing HCV is not a significant risk
for transmission in the health-care setting
(79,80),  with  the  possible  exception  of  the  hemodialysis  setting  where  HCV
transmission related to environmental
contamination and poor infection-control practices have been implicated
(81--84).  The  risk  for  transmission  from  exposure  to  fluids  or  tissues  other  than
HCV-infected blood also
has not been quantified but is expected to be low.
Postexposure Management for HCV
In several studies, researchers have attempted to assess the effectiveness of
IG following possible exposure to non-A, non-B hepatitis. These studies have
been difficult to interpret because they lack uniformity in diagnostic criteria and
study design, and, in all but one study, the first dose of IG was administered before
potential exposure (48,85,86). In an experiment designed to model HCV transmission
by needlestick exposure in the health-care setting, high anti-HCV titer IG administered
to chimpanzees 1 hour after exposure to HCV-positive blood did not prevent
transmission  of  infection  (87).  In  1994,  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices
(ACIP) reviewed available data regarding the prevention of HCV infection with IG
and concluded that using IG as PEP for hepatitis C was not supported
(88). This conclusion was based on the following facts:
 No protective antibody response has been identified following HCV infection.
 Previous studies of IG use to prevent posttransfusion non-A, non-B
hepatitis might not be relevant in making recommendations regarding PEP for hepatitis
C.
 Experimental studies in chimpanzees with IG containing anti-HCV failed
to prevent transmission of infection after exposure.
No clinical trials have been conducted to assess postexposure use of
antiviral agents (e.g., interferon with or without ribavirin) to prevent HCV infection,
and antivirals are not FDA-approved for this indication. Available data suggest that
an established infection might need to be present before interferon can be an
effective treatment. Kinetic studies suggest that the effect of interferon on chronic HCV
infection occurs in two phases. During the first phase, interferon blocks the production
or
release of virus from infected cells. In the second phase, virus is eradicated from
the infected cells (89); in this later phase, higher pretreatment alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels correlate with an increasing decline in infected cells, and
the rapidity
of the decline correlates with viral clearance. In contrast, the effect of
antiretrovirals  when  used  for  PEP  after  exposure  to  HIV  is  based  on  inhibition  of  HIV
DNA
synthesis early in the retroviral replicative cycle.
In the absence of PEP for HCV, recommendations for postexposure
management  are  intended  to  achieve  early  identification  of  chronic  disease  and,  if
present,
referral for evaluation of treatment options. However, a theoretical argument is
that intervention with antivirals when HCV RNA first becomes detectable might prevent
the development of chronic infection. Data from studies conducted outside the
United States suggest that a short course of interferon started early in the course of
acute hepatitis C is associated with a higher rate of resolved infection than that
achieved when therapy is begun after chronic hepatitis C has been well established
(90--92). These studies used various treatment regimens and included persons with
acute disease whose peak ALT levels were 500--1,000 IU/L at the time therapy was
initiated (2.6--4 months after exposure).
No studies have evaluated the treatment of acute infection in persons with
no evidence of liver disease (i.e., HCV RNA-positive <6 months duration with normal
ALT levels); among patients with chronic HCV infection, the efficacy of antivirals has
been demonstrated only among patients who also had evidence of chronic liver disease
(i.e., abnormal ALT levels). In addition, treatment started early in the course of chronic
HCV infection (i.e., 6 months after onset of infection) might be as effective as
treatment started during acute infection
(13). Because 15%--25% of patients with acute
HCV infection spontaneously resolve their infection
(93),  treatment  of  these  patients  during  the  acute  phase  could  expose  them
unnecessarily to the discomfort and side effects
of antiviral therapy.
Data upon which to base a recommendation for therapy of acute infection
are insufficient because a) no data exist regarding the effect of treating patients with
acute  infection  who  have  no  evidence  of  disease,  b)  treatment  started  early  in  the
course
of chronic infection might be just as effective and would eliminate the need to
treat persons who will spontaneously resolve their infection, and c) the appropriate
regimen is unknown.
Occupational Transmission of HIV
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HIV
In prospective studies of HCP, the average risk of HIV transmission after
a percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood has been estimated to be
approximately 0.3% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.2%--0.5%)
(94)  and  after  a  mucous  membrane  exposure,  approximately  0.09%  (95%  CI  =
0.006%--0.5%)
(95).  Although  episodes  of  HIV  transmission  after  nonintact  skin  exposure  have  been
documented
(96), the average risk for transmission by this route has not been precisely quantified
but
is estimated to be less than the risk for mucous membrane exposures
(97). The risk for transmission after exposure to fluids or tissues other than HIV-infected
blood also
has not been quantified but is probably considerably lower than for blood exposures
(98).
As of June 2000, CDC had received voluntary reports of 56 U.S. HCP
with documented HIV seroconversion temporally associated with an occupational
HIV exposure. An additional 138 episodes in HCP are considered possible occupational
HIV transmissions. These workers had a history of occupational exposure to blood,
other infectious body fluids, or laboratory solutions containing HIV, and no other risk for
HIV infection was identified, but HIV seroconversion after a specific exposure was
not documented (99).
Epidemiologic and laboratory studies suggest that several factors might affect
the risk of HIV transmission after an occupational exposure. In a retrospective
case-control  study  of  HCP  who  had  percutaneous  exposure  to  HIV,  the  risk  for  HIV
infection
was found to be increased with exposure to a larger quantity of blood from the
source person as indicated by a) a device visibly contaminated with the patient's blood,
b)
a procedure that involved a needle being placed directly in a vein or artery, or c) a
deep injury (100). The risk also was increased for exposure to blood from source
persons with terminal illness, possibly reflecting either the higher titer of HIV in blood
late in
the course of AIDS or other factors (e.g., the presence of syncytia-inducing strains of
HIV). A laboratory study that demonstrated that more blood is transferred by
deeper injuries and hollow-bore needles lends further support for the observed variation
in risk related to blood quantity (101).
The use of source person viral load as a surrogate measure of viral titer
for assessing transmission risk has not yet been established. Plasma viral load (e.g.,
HIV RNA) reflects only the level of cell-free virus in the peripheral blood; latently
infected cells might transmit infection in the absence of viremia. Although a lower viral
load (e.g., <1,500 RNA copies/mL) or one that is below the limits of detection
probably  indicates  a  lower  titer  exposure,  it  does  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of
transmission.
Some evidence exists regarding host defenses possibly influencing the risk for
HIV infection. A study of HIV-exposed but uninfected HCP demonstrated an
HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) response when peripheral blood mononuclear
cells
were stimulated in vitro with HIV-specific antigens
(102).  Similar  CTL  responses  have  been  observed  in  other  groups  who  experienced
repeated HIV exposure without
resulting infection (103--108). Among several possible explanations for this observation
is
that the host immune response sometimes might prevent establishment of HIV
infection after a percutaneous exposure; another is that the CTL response simply might
be
a marker for exposure. In a study of 20 HCP with occupational exposure to HIV,
a comparison was made of HCP treated with zidovudine (ZDV) PEP and those
not treated. The findings from this study suggest that ZDV blunted the HIV-specific
CTL response and that PEP might inhibit early HIV replication
(109).
Rationale for HIV PEP
Considerations that influence the rationale and recommendations for PEP include
 the pathogenesis of HIV infection, particularly the time course of early infection;
 the biological plausibility that infection can be prevented or ameliorated by
using antiretroviral drugs;
 direct or indirect evidence of the efficacy of specific agents used for
prophylaxis; and
 the risk and benefit of PEP to exposed HCP.
The following discussion considers each of these concerns.
Role of Pathogenesis in Considering Antiretroviral
Prophylaxis.  Information  about  primary  HIV  infection  indicates  that  systemic  infection
does not occur
immediately, leaving a brief window of opportunity during which postexposure
antiretroviral intervention might modify or prevent viral replication. In a primate model
of
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection, infection of dendritic-like cells occurred
at
the site of inoculation during the first 24 hours following mucosal exposure to
cell-free virus. Over the subsequent 24--48 hours, migration of these cells to regional
lymph nodes occurred, and virus was detectable in the peripheral blood within 5 days
(110). Theoretically, initiation of antiretroviral PEP soon after exposure might prevent
or inhibit systemic infection by limiting the proliferation of virus in the initial target cells
or lymph nodes.
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Animal
Studies. Data from animal studies have been difficult to interpret, in part, because of
problems identifying an
animal model that is comparable to humans. In early studies, differences in
controlled  variables  (e.g.,  choice  of  viral  strain  [based  on  the  animal  model  used],
inoculum
size, route of inoculation, time of prophylaxis initiation, and drug regimen)
made extrapolation of the results to humans difficult. Recently, refinements in
methodology have facilitated more relevant studies; in particular, the viral inocula used
in
animal studies have been reduced to levels more analogous to human exposures
but sufficient to cause infection in control animals
(111--113).
 These
 studies
 provide
 encouraging
 evidence
 of
 postexposure
chemoprophylactic efficacy.
Studies among primates and in murine and feline animal models
have demonstrated that larger viral inocula decrease prophylactic efficacy
(114--117). In addition, delaying initiation, shortening the duration, or decreasing the
antiretroviral  dose  of  PEP,  individually  or  in  combination,  decreased  prophylactic
efficacy
(113,118--124).
 For
 example,
 when
 (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)
 adenine
(tenofovir)
was administered 48 hours before, 4 hours after, or 24 hours after intravenous
SIV inoculation to long-tailed macaques, a 4-week regimen prevented infection in
all treated animals (122). A subsequent study confirmed the efficacy of tenofovir
PEP when administered 24 hours after intravenous inoculation of a dose of SIV
that uniformly results in infection in untreated macaques. In the same study, protection
was incomplete if the tenofovir administration was delayed to 48 or 72 hours
postexposure or if the total duration of treatment was curtailed to 3 or 10 days
(123).
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Human
Studies.  Little  information  exists  from  which  the  efficacy  of  PEP  in  humans  can  be
assessed. Seroconversion is
infrequent following an occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood; therefore, several
thousands of exposed HCP would need to enroll in a prospective trial to achieve the
statistical power necessary to directly demonstrate PEP efficacy
(125).
In the retrospective case-control study of HCP, after controlling for other risk
factors for HIV transmission, use of ZDV as PEP was associated with a reduction in the
risk
of HIV infection by approximately 81% (95% CI = 43%--94%)
(100). Although the results of this study suggest PEP efficacy, its limitations include the
small number of
cases studied and the use of cases and controls from different cohorts.
In a multicenter trial in which ZDV was administered to HIV-infected
pregnant women and their infants, the administration of ZDV during pregnancy, labor,
and delivery and to the infant reduced transmission by 67%
(126). Only part of the
protective effect of ZDV was explained by reduction of the HIV viral load in
the maternal blood, suggesting that ZDV prophylaxis, in part, involves a mechanism
other than the reduction of maternal viral burden
(127,128). Since 1998, studies have highlighted the importance of PEP for prevention of
perinatal HIV transmission.
In Africa, the use of ZDV in combination with lamivudine (3TC) decreased perinatal
HIV transmission by 50% when administered during pregnancy, labor, and for 1
week postpartum, and by 37% when started at the onset of labor and continued for 1
week postpartum (129). Studies in the United States and Uganda also have
demonstrated that rates of perinatal HIV transmission have been reduced with the use
of abbreviated PEP regimens started intrapartum or during the first 48--72 hours of
life (130--132).
The limitations of all of these studies with animals and humans must be
considered when reviewing evidence of PEP efficacy. The extent to which data from
animal  studies  can  be  extrapolated  to  humans  is  largely  unknown,  and  the  exposure
route
for mother-to-infant HIV transmission is not similar to occupational exposures;
therefore, these findings might not be directly applicable to PEP in HCP.
Reports of Failure of PEP. Failure of PEP to prevent HIV infection in HCP has
been reported in at least 21 instances
(78,133--139). In 16 of the cases, ZDV was used
alone as a single agent; in two cases, ZDV and didanosine (ddI) were used in
combination (133,138); and in three cases,
>3 drugs were used for PEP
(137--139).  Thirteen  of  the  source  persons  were  known  to  have  been  treated  with
antiretroviral therapy
before  the  exposure.  Antiretroviral  resistance  testing  of  the  virus  from  the  source
person
was performed in seven instances, and in four, the HIV infection transmitted was found
to have decreased sensitivity to ZDV and/or other drugs used for PEP. In addition
to possible exposure to an antiretroviral-resistant strain of HIV, other factors that
might have contributed to these apparent failures might include a high titer and/or
large inoculum exposure, delayed initiation and/or short duration of PEP, and possible
factors related to the host (e.g., cellular immune system responsiveness) and/or to the
source person's virus (e.g., presence of syncytia-forming strains)
(133). Details regarding the cases of PEP failure involving combinations of antiretroviral
agents are included in
this report (Table 1).
Antiretroviral Agents for PEP
Antiretroviral agents from three classes of drugs are available for the treatment
of HIV infection. These agents include the nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs), nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), and
protease inhibitors (PIs). Only antiretroviral agents that have been approved by FDA
for treatment of HIV infection are discussed in these guidelines.
Determining which agents and how many to use or when to alter a PEP regimen
is largely empiric. Guidelines for the treatment of HIV infection, a condition
usually involving a high total body burden of HIV, include recommendations for the use
of three drugs (140); however, the applicability of these recommendations to
PEP remains unknown. In HIV-infected patients, combination regimens have
proved  superior  to  monotherapy  regimens  in  reducing  HIV  viral  load,  reducing  the
incidence
of opportunistic infections and death, and delaying onset of drug resistance
(141,142).  A  combination  of  drugs  with  activity  at  different  stages  in  the  viral
replication cycle
(e.g., nucleoside analogues with a PI) theoretically could offer an additional preventive
effect in PEP, particularly for occupational exposures that pose an increased risk
of
transmission. Although the use of a three-drug regimen might be justified
for exposures that pose an increased risk of transmission, whether the potential
added  toxicity  of  a  third  drug  is  justified  for  lower-risk  exposures  is  uncertain.
Therefore,
the recommendations at the end of this document provide guidance for two- and
three-drug PEP regimens that are based on the level of risk for HIV transmission
represented by the exposure.
NRTI combinations that can be considered for PEP include ZDV and 3TC, 3TC
and stavudine (d4T), and ddI and d4T. In previous PHS guidelines, a combination of
ZDV and 3TC was considered the first choice for PEP regimens
(3).  Because  ZDV  and  3TC  are  available  in  a  combination  formulation  (Combivir™,
manufactured by
Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC), the use of this combination might be
more convenient for HCP. However, recent data suggest that mutations associated with
ZDV and 3TC resistance might be common in some areas
(143).  Thus,  individual  clinicians  might  prefer  other  NRTIs  or  combinations  based  on
local knowledge and experience
in treating HIV infection and disease.
The addition of a third drug for PEP following high-risk exposures is based
on demonstrated effectiveness in reducing viral burden in HIV-infected
persons. Previously, indinavir (IDV) or nelfinavir (NFV) were recommended as
first-choice agents for inclusion in an expanded PEP regimen
(5). Since the publication of the 1998 PEP guidelines, efavirenz
      (EFV), an NNRTI; abacavir (ABC), a potent NRTI;
and Kaletra™, a PI, have been approved by FDA. Although side effects might be
common with the NNRTIs, EFV might be considered for expanded PEP regimens,
especially when resistance to PIs in the source person's virus is known or suspected.
ABC
has been associated with dangerous hypersensitivity reactions but, with
careful monitoring, may be considered as a third drug for PEP. Kaletra, a combination
of lopinavir and ritonavir, is a potent HIV inhibitor that, with expert consultation, may
be considered in an expanded PEP regimen.
Toxicity and Drug Interactions of Antiretroviral
Agents.  When  administering  PEP,  an  important  goal  is  completion  of  a  4-week  PEP
regimen when PEP is
indicated.  Therefore,  the  toxicity  profile  of  antiretroviral  agents,  including  the
frequency,
severity, duration, and reversibility of side effects, is a relevant consideration. All of
the antiretroviral agents have been associated with side effects (Table 2).
However, studies of adverse events have been conducted primarily with persons who
have advanced disease (and longer treatment courses) and who therefore might not
reflect the experience in persons who are uninfected
(144).
Several primary side effects are associated with antiretroviral agents (Table
2). Side effects associated with many of the NRTIs are chiefly gastrointestinal
(e.g., nausea or diarrhea); however, ddI has been associated with cases of fatal and
nonfatal pancreatitis among HIV-infected patients treated for >4 weeks. The use of PIs
has
been associated with new onset diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, diabetic
      ketoacidosis, exacerbation of preexisting diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia
(145--147). Nephrolithiasis has been associated with IDV use; however, the incidence of
this potential complication might be limited by drinking at least 48 ounces (1.5 L) of
fluid per 24-hour period (e.g., six 8- ounce glasses of water throughout the day)
(148). NFV has been associated with the development of diarrhea; however, this side
effect
might respond to treatment with antimotility agents that can be prescribed for use,
if necessary, at the time the drug is recommended for PEP. The NNRTIs have
been
associated with severe skin reactions, including life-threatening cases of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Hepatotoxicity, including
fatal hepatic necrosis, has occurred in patients treated with nevirapine (NVP);
some episodes began during the first few weeks of therapy (FDA, unpublished data,
2000). EFV has been associated with central nervous system side effects, including
dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, and abnormal dreaming.
All of the approved antiretroviral agents might have potentially serious
drug interactions when used with certain other drugs (Appendix C). Careful evaluation
of concomitant medications used by an exposed person is required before PEP
is prescribed, and close monitoring for toxicity is also needed. Further information
about potential drug interactions can be found in the manufacturer's package insert.
Toxicity Associated with PEP. Information from the National
Surveillance System for Health Care Workers (NaSH) and the HIV Postexposure Registry
indicates that nearly 50% of HCP experience adverse symptoms (e.g., nausea,
malaise, headache, anorexia, and headache) while taking PEP and that approximately
33%
stop taking PEP because of adverse signs and symptoms
(6,7,10,11). Some studies have demonstrated that side effects and discontinuation of
PEP are more common
among HCP taking three-drug combination regimens for PEP compared with HCP taking
two-drug combination regimens (7,10). Although similar rates of side effects
were observed among persons who took PEP after sexual or drug use exposures to HIV
in the San Francisco Post-Exposure Prevention Project, 80% completed 4 weeks
of therapy (149). Participants in the San Francisco Project were followed at 1, 2, 4, 26,
and 52 weeks postexposure and received medication adherence counseling;
most participants took only two drugs for PEP.
Serious side effects, including nephrolithiasis, hepatitis, and pancytopenia
have been reported with the use of combination drugs for PEP
(6,7,150,151).  One  case  of  NVP-associated  fulminant  liver  failure  requiring  liver
transplantation and one case
of hypersensitivity syndrome have been reported in HCP taking NVP for HIV PEP
(152). Including these two cases, from March 1997 through September 2000, FDA
received reports of 22 cases of serious adverse events related to NVP taken for PEP
(153). These events included 12 cases of hepatotoxicity, 14 cases of skin reaction
(including one documented and two possible cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome), and
one
case of rhabdomyolysis; four cases involved both hepatotoxicty and skin reaction, and
one case involved both rhabdomyolysis and skin reaction.
Resistance to Antiretroviral Agents. Known or suspected resistance of the
source virus to antiretroviral agents, particularly to agents that might be included in a
PEP regimen, is a concern for persons making decisions about PEP. Resistance to
HIV infection occurs with all of the available antiretroviral agents, and
cross-resistance within drug classes is frequent
(154). Recent studies have demonstrated an emergence of drug-resistant HIV among
source persons for occupational
exposures (143,155). A study conducted at seven U.S. sites during 1998--1999 found
that
16 (39%) of 41 source persons whose virus was sequenced had primary
genetic mutations associated with resistance to RTIs, and 4 (10%) had primary
mutations associated with resistance to PIs
(143). In addition, occupational transmission
of resistant HIV strains, despite PEP with combination drug regimens, has been
reported (137,139). In one case, a hospital worker became infected after an HIV
exposure despite a PEP regimen that included ddI, d4T, and NVP
(139). The transmitted HIV
contained two primary genetic mutations associated with resistance to NNRTIs
(the source person was taking EFV at the time of the exposure). Despite recent studies
and  case  reports,  the  relevance  of  exposure  to  a  resistant  virus  is  still  not  well
understood.
Empiric decisions about the presence of antiretroviral drug resistance are
often difficult to make because patients generally take more than one antiretroviral
agent. Resistance should be suspected in source persons when they are experiencing
clinical progression of disease or a persistently increasing viral load, and/or decline in
CD4
T-cell count, despite therapy or a lack of virologic response to therapy.
However, resistance testing of the source virus at the time of an exposure is not
practical because the results will not be available in time to influence the choice of the
initial
PEP regimen. Furthermore, in this situation, whether modification of the PEP regimen
is necessary or will influence the outcome of an occupational exposure is unknown.
No data exist to suggest that modification of a PEP regimen after receiving results
from resistance testing (usually a minimum of 1--2 weeks) improves efficacy of PEP.
Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy. Data are limited on the
potential effects of antiretroviral drugs on the developing fetus or neonate
(156). Carcinogenicity and/or mutagenicity is evident in several in vitro screening tests
for ZDV and all other FDA-licensed NRTIs. The relevance of animal data to humans
is unknown; however, because teratogenic effects were observed in primates at
drug exposures similar to those representing human therapeutic exposure, the use of
EFV should be avoided in pregnant women
(140). IDV is associated with infrequent
side effects in adults (i.e., hyperbilirubinemia and renal stones) that could be
problematic  for  a  newborn.  Because  the  half-life  of  IDV  in  adults  is  short,  these
concerns might
be relevant only if the drug is administered shortly before delivery.
In a recent study in France of perinatal HIV transmission, two cases of
progressive neurologic disease and death were reported in uninfected infants exposed
to ZDV
and 3TC (157). Laboratory studies of these children suggested mitochondrial
dysfunction.  In  a  careful  review  of  deaths  in  children  followed  in  U.S.  perinatal  HIV
cohorts,
no deaths attributable to mitochondrial disease have been found
(158).
Recent reports of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women
treated throughout gestation with a combination of d4T and ddI have prompted
warnings about use of these drugs during pregnancy
(159).  Although  the  case-patients  were  HIV-infected  women  taking  the  drugs  for  >4
weeks, pregnant women and
their providers should be advised to consider d4T and ddI only when the benefits of
their use outweigh the risks.
PEP Use in Hospitals in the United
States.  Analysis  of  data  from  NaSH  provides  information  on  the  use  of  PEP  following
occupational exposures in 47 hospitals in
the United States. A total of 11,784 exposures to blood and body fluids was reported
from June 1996 through November 2000 (CDC, unpublished data, 2001). For all
exposures with known sources, 6% were to HIV-positive sources, 74% to HIV-negative
sources, and 20% to sources with an unknown HIV status. Sixty-three percent of HCP
exposed to a known HIV-positive source started PEP, and 54% of HCP took it for at least
20
days, whereas 14% of HCP exposed to a source person subsequently found to be
HIV-negative initiated PEP, and 3% of those took it for at least 20 days.
Information  recorded  about  HIV  exposures  in  NaSH  indicates  that  46%  of  exposures
involving
an HIV-positive source warranted only a two-drug PEP regimen (i.e., the exposure was
to mucous membranes or skin or was a superficial percutaneous injury and the
source person did not have end-stage AIDS or acute HIV illness); however, 53% of
these
exposed HCP took >3 drugs (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). Similarly, the
National Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline (PEPline) reported that PEPline
staff recommended stopping or not starting PEP for approximately one half of the HCP
who consulted them about exposures (D. Bangsberg, San Francisco General
Hospital, unpublished data, September 1999). The observation that some HCP exposed
to
HIV-negative source persons take PEP from several days to weeks following
their exposures suggests that strategies be employed such as the use of a rapid
HIV antibody assay, which could minimize exposure to unnecessary PEP
(11). A recent study demonstrated that use of a rapid HIV test for evaluation of source
persons
after occupational exposures not only resulted in decreased use of PEP, but also was
cost-effective compared with use of the standard enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test
for source persons subsequently found to be HIV-negative
(160).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HCP POTENTIALLY EXPOSED TO HBV,
HCV, or HIV
Exposure prevention remains the primary strategy for reducing
occupational  bloodborne  pathogen  infections;  however,  occupational  exposures  will
continue
to occur. Health-care organizations should make available to their personnel a
system that includes written protocols for prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling,
treatment,  and  follow-up  of  occupational  exposures  that  might  place  HCP  at  risk  for
acquiring
a bloodborne infection. HCP should be educated concerning the risk for and
prevention  of  bloodborne  infections,  including  the  need  to  be  vaccinated  against
hepatitis
B (17,21,161--163). Employers are required to establish exposure-control plans
that include postexposure follow-up for their employees and to comply with
incident reporting requirements mandated by the 1992 OSHA bloodborne pathogen
standard  (2).  Access  to  clinicians  who  can  provide  postexposure  care  should  be
available
during all working hours, including nights and weekends. HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine,
and antiretroviral agents for HIV PEP should be available for timely administration
(i.e., either by providing access on-site or by creating linkages with other facilities
or providers to make them available off-site). Persons responsible for
providing postexposure management should be familiar with evaluation and treatment
protocols  and  the  facility's  plans  for  accessing  HBIG,  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  and
antiretroviral
drugs for HIV PEP.
HCP should be educated to report occupational exposures immediately after
they occur, particularly because HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine, and HIV PEP are most likely
to
be effective if administered as soon after the exposure as possible. HCP who are at
risk for occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens should be familiarized with
the principles of postexposure management as part of job orientation and ongoing
job training.
Hepatitis B Vaccination
Any person who performs tasks involving contact with blood,
blood-contaminated  body  fluids,  other  body  fluids,  or  sharps  should  be  vaccinated
against hepatitis B
(2,21). Prevaccination serologic screening for previous infection is not indicated for
persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk, unless the hospital or
health-care organization considers screening cost-effective.
Hepatitis B vaccine should always be administered by the intramuscular route
in the deltoid muscle with a needle 1--1.5 inches long. Hepatitis B vaccine can
be administered at the same time as other vaccines with no interference with
antibody response to the other vaccines
(164). If the vaccination series is interrupted after
the first dose, the second dose should be administered as soon as possible. The
second and third doses should be separated by an interval of at least 2 months. If only
the third dose is delayed, it should be administered when convenient. HCP who
have contact with patients or blood and are at ongoing risk for percutaneous injuries
should be tested 1--2 months after completion of the 3dose vaccination series for
      anti-HBs (21). Persons who do not respond to the primary vaccine series (i.e.,
      anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL)  should  complete  a  second  3-dose  vaccine  series  or  be
evaluated to determine
if they are HBsAg-positive. Revaccinated persons should be retested at the
completion  of  the  second  vaccine  series.  Persons  who  do  not  respond  to  an  initial
3-dose
vaccine series have a 30%--50% chance of responding to a second 3-dose series
(165). Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled regarding how
to prevent HBV transmission to others and regarding the need for medical
evaluation (12,163,166). Nonresponders to vaccination who are
      HBsAg-negative should
be considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled
regarding  precautions  to  prevent  HBV  infection  and  the  need  to  obtain  HBIG
prophylaxis for
any known or probable parenteral exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. Booster doses
of hepatitis B vaccine are not necessary, and periodic serologic testing to
monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series is not
recommended.  Any  blood  or  body  fluid  exposure  sustained  by  an  unvaccinated,
susceptible
person should lead to the initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
Treatment of an Exposure Site
Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood or body fluids should
be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes should be flushed with water.
No evidence exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by
squeezing  the  wound  further  reduces  the  risk  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission;
however,
the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g.,
bleach)  or  the  injection  of  antiseptics  or  disinfectants  into  the  wound  is  not
recommended.
Exposure Report
If an occupational exposure occurs, the circumstances and
postexposure  management  should  be  recorded  in  the  exposed  person's  confidential
medical
record (usually on a form the facility designates for this purpose) (Box 1). In
addition, employers should follow all federal (including OSHA) and state requirements
for recording and reporting occupational injuries and exposures.
Evaluation of the Exposure and the Exposure Source
Evaluation of the Exposure
The exposure should be evaluated for the potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and
HIV based on the type of body substance involved and the route and severity of
the exposure (Box 2). Blood, fluid containing visible blood, or other potentially
infectious fluid (including semen; vaginal secretions; and cerebrospinal,
      synovial,
pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids) or tissue can be infectious for
bloodborne viruses. Exposures to these fluids or tissue through a percutaneous injury
(i.e., needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through contact with
a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for bloodborne virus
transmission and require further evaluation. For HCV and HIV, exposure to a blood-filled
hollow needle or visibly bloody device suggests a higher risk exposure than exposure to
a needle that was most likely used for giving an injection. In addition, any direct
contact (i.e, personal protective equipment either was not present or was ineffective
in protecting skin or mucous membranes) with concentrated virus in a
research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that requires
clinical evaluation.
For skin exposure, follow-up is indicated only if it involves exposure to a body
fluid previously listed and evidence exists of compromised skin integrity (e.g.,
dermatitis,  abrasion,  or  open  wound).  In  the  clinical  evaluation  for  human  bites,
possible
exposure  of  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  must  be
considered. If
a bite results in blood exposure to either person involved, postexposure
follow-up should be provided.
Evaluation of the Exposure Source
The person whose blood or body fluid is the source of an occupational
exposure  should  be  evaluated  for  HBV,  HCV,  and  HIV  infection  (Box  3).  Information
available
in the medical record at the time of exposure (e.g., laboratory test results,
admitting  diagnosis,  or  previous  medical  history)  or  from  the  source  person,  might
confirm
or exclude bloodborne virus infection.
If the HBV, HCV, and/or HIV infection status of the source is unknown, the
source person should be informed of the incident and tested for serologic evidence
of bloodborne virus infection. Procedures should be followed for testing source
persons, including obtaining informed consent, in accordance with applicable state and
local laws. Any persons determined to be infected with HBV, HCV, or HIV should be
referred for appropriate counseling and treatment. Confidentiality of the source person
should be maintained at all times.
Testing to determine the HBV, HCV, and HIV infection status of an exposure
source should be performed as soon as possible. Hospitals, clinics and other sites
that manage exposed HCP should consult their laboratories regarding the
most appropriate test to use to expedite obtaining these results. An FDA-approved
rapid HIV-antibody test kit should be considered for use in this situation, particularly if
testing by EIA cannot be completed within 24--48 hours. Repeatedly reactive results by
EIA
or rapid HIV-antibody tests are considered to be highly suggestive of infection, whereas
a negative result is an excellent indicator of the absence of HIV antibody. Confirmation
of a reactive result by Western blot or immunofluorescent antibody is not necessary
to make initial decisions about postexposure management but should be done
to complete the testing process and before informing the source person.
Repeatedly reactive results by EIA for anti-HCV should be confirmed by a supplemental
test
(i.e., recombinant immunoblot assay [RIBA™] or HCV PCR). Direct virus assays (e.g.,
HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA or HCV RNA) for routine HIV or HCV screening
of source persons are not recommended.
If the exposure source is unknown or cannot be tested, information about
where and under what circumstances the exposure occurred should be
assessed
epidemiologically for the likelihood of transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
Certain situations as well as the type of exposure might suggest an increased or
decreased risk; an important consideration is the prevalence of HBV, HCV, or HIV in the
population group (i.e., institution or community) from which the contaminated source
material
is derived. For example, an exposure that occurs in a geographic area where
injection-drug  use  is  prevalent  or  involves  a  needle  discarded  in  a  drug-treatment
facility
would be considered epidemiologically to have a higher risk for transmission than
an exposure that occurs in a nursing home for the elderly.
Testing of needles or other sharp instruments implicated in an
exposure, regardless of whether the source is known or unknown, is not recommended.
The reliability and interpretation of findings in such circumstances are unknown,
and testing might be hazardous to persons handling the sharp instrument.
Examples of information to consider when evaluating an exposure source
for possible HBV, HCV, or HIV infection include laboratory information (e.g., previous
HBV,  HCV,  or  HIV  test  results  or  results  of  immunologic  testing  [e.g.,  CD4+  T-cell
count])
or liver enzymes (e.g., ALT), clinical symptoms (e.g., acute syndrome suggestive
of primary HIV infection or undiagnosed immunodeficiency disease), and history
of recent (i.e., within 3 months) possible HBV, HCV, or HIV exposures (e.g.,
injection-drug  use  or  sexual  contact  with  a  known  positive  partner).  Health-care
providers should
be aware of local and state laws governing the collection and release of HIV
serostatus information on a source person, following an occupational exposure.
If the source person is known to have HIV infection, available information about
this person's stage of infection (i.e., asymptomatic, symptomatic, or AIDS), CD4+
T-cell count, results of viral load testing, current and previous antiretroviral therapy,
and results of any genotypic or phenotypic viral resistance testing should be gathered
for consideration in choosing an appropriate PEP regimen. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of exposed HCP should be considered within 72 hours
postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or source person
becomes available.
If the source person is HIV seronegative and has no clinical evidence of AIDS
or symptoms of HIV infection, no further testing of the person for HIV infection
is indicated. The likelihood of the source person being in the "window period" of
HIV  infection  in  the  absence  of  symptoms  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome  is  extremely
small.
Management of Exposures to HBV
For percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood, several factors must
be considered when making a decision to provide prophylaxis, including the HBsAg
status of the source and the hepatitis B vaccination and vaccine-response status of
the exposed person. Such exposures usually involve persons for whom hepatitis
B vaccination is recommended. Any blood or body fluid exposure to an
unvaccinated person should lead to initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
The hepatitis B vaccination status and the vaccine-response status (if known) of
the exposed person should be reviewed. A summary of prophylaxis recommendations
for percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood according to the HBsAg status of
the exposure source and the vaccination and vaccine-response status of the
exposed person is included in this report (Table 3).
When HBIG is indicated, it should be administered as soon as possible
after exposure (preferably within 24 hours). The effectiveness of HBIG when
administered  >7  days  after  exposure  is  unknown.  When  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is
indicated, it
should also be administered as soon as possible (preferably within 24 hours) and can
be administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate site (vaccine should always
be administered in the deltoid muscle).
For exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated but have
not completed the vaccination series, vaccination should be completed as scheduled,
and HBIG should be added as indicated (Table 3). Persons exposed to
      HBsAg-positive
blood or body fluids who are known not to have responded to a primary vaccine
series should receive a single dose of HBIG and reinitiate the hepatitis B vaccine series
with the first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after
exposure. Alternatively, they should receive two doses of HBIG, one dose as soon as
possible  after  exposure,  and  the  second  dose  1  month  later.  The  option  of
administering
one dose of HBIG and reinitiating the vaccine series is preferred for nonresponders
who did not complete a second 3-dose vaccine series. For persons who
previously completed a second vaccine series but failed to respond, two doses of HBIG
are preferred.
Management of Exposures to HCV
Individual institutions should establish policies and procedures for testing HCP
for HCV after percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood and ensure that all
personnel
are familiar with these policies and procedures. The following are
recommendations for follow-up of occupational HCV exposures:
 For the source, perform testing for anti-HCV.
 For the person exposed to an HCV-positive source
    --- perform baseline testing for anti-HCV and ALT activity; and
   --- perform follow-up testing (e.g., at 4--6 months) for anti-HCV and ALT
activity (if earlier diagnosis of HCV infection is desired, testing for HCV RNA may
be performed at 4--6 weeks).
 Confirm all anti-HCV results reported positive by enzyme immunoassay
using  supplemental  anti-HCV  testing  (e.g.,  recombinant  immunoblot  assay  [RIBA™])
(13).
Health-care professionals who provide care to persons exposed to HCV in
the occupational setting should be knowledgeable regarding the risk for HCV infection
and appropriate counseling, testing, and medical follow-up.
IG and antiviral agents are not recommended for PEP after exposure to
HCV-positive blood. In addition, no guidelines exist for administration of therapy during
the acute phase of HCV infection. However, limited data indicate that antiviral
therapy might be beneficial when started early in the course of HCV infection. When
HCV infection is identified early, the person should be referred for medical management
to a specialist knowledgeable in this area.
Counseling for HCP Exposed to Viral Hepatitis
HCP exposed to HBV- or HCV-infected blood do not need to take any
special precautions to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up period
(12,13); however, they should refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or
semen. The exposed person does not need to modify sexual practices or refrain
from becoming pregnant. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she does not need
to discontinue.
No modifications to an exposed person's patient-care responsibilities
are necessary to prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to
      HBV-
or HCV-positive blood. If an exposed person becomes acutely infected with HBV,
the person should be evaluated according to published recommendations for infected
HCP (165). No recommendations exist regarding restricting the professional activities
of HCP with HCV infection (13). As recommended for all
      HCP, those who are
chronically infected with HBV or HCV should follow all recommended infection-control
practices, including standard precautions and appropriate use of hand washing,
protective barriers, and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp
instruments (162).
Management of Exposures to HIV
Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing of Exposed HCP
HCP exposed to HIV should be evaluated within hours (rather than days) after
their  exposure  and  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  baseline  (i.e.,  to  establish  infection
status
at
the time of exposure). If the source person is seronegative for HIV, baseline testing
or further follow-up of the exposed person normally is not necessary. Serologic
testing should be made available to all HCP who are concerned that they might have
been occupationally infected with HIV. For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the
evaluation also should include information about medications the exposed person might
be
taking and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances (i.e.,
pregnancy,  breast  feeding,  or  renal  or  hepatic  disease)  that  might  influence  drug
selection.
PEP for HIV
The following recommendations (Table 4 and Table 5) apply to situations when a
person has been exposed to a source person with HIV infection or when information
suggests the likelihood that the source person is HIV-infected. These recommendations
are based on the risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and on limited
data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most occupational HIV exposures
do not result in the transmission of HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully
considered when prescribing PEP. To assist with the initial management of an HIV
exposure, health-care facilities should have drugs for an initial PEP regimen selected
and available for use. When possible, these recommendations should be implemented
in consultation with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral therapy and
HIV transmission (Box 4).
Timing and Duration of PEP. PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The
interval within which PEP should be initiated for optimal efficacy is not known. Animal
studies have demonstrated the importance of starting PEP soon after an
exposure  (111,112,118).  If  questions  exist  about  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use  or
whether
to use a basic or expanded regimen, starting the basic regimen immediately rather
than delaying PEP administration is probably better. Although animal studies suggest
that PEP probably is substantially less effective when started more than 24--36
hours  postexposure  (112,119,122),  the  interval  after  which  no  benefit  is  gained  from
PEP
for humans is undefined. Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be
started  even  when  the  interval  since  exposure  exceeds  36  hours.  Initiating  therapy
after
a longer interval (e.g., 1 week) might be considered for exposures that represent
an increased risk for transmission. The optimal duration of PEP is unknown. Because
4 weeks of ZDV appeared protective in occupational and animal studies
(100,123), PEP probably should be administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
Use of PEP When HIV Infection Status of Source Person is
Unknown.  If  the  source  person's  HIV  infection  status  is  unknown  at  the  time  of
exposure, use of PEP should
be decided on a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in the source (Table 4 and
Table 5).
If these considerations suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of
the source person is pending, initiating a two-drug PEP regimen until laboratory
results  have  been  obtained  and  later  modifying  or  discontinuing  the  regimen
accordingly
is reasonable. The following are recommendations regarding HIV
postexposure prophylaxis:
 If indicated, start PEP as soon as possible after an exposure.
 Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 Administer PEP for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 If a source person is determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should be discontinued.
PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 This section provides the rationale for the postexposure management
and prophylaxis recommendations presented in this report. Additional details
concerning the risk for occupational bloodborne pathogen transmission to HCP and
management of occupational bloodborne pathogen exposures are available elsewhere
(5,12,13,21-24).
 
Occupational Transmission of HBV
 
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HBV
 HBV infection is a well recognized occupational risk for HCP
(25). The risk of HBV infection is primarily related to the degree of contact with blood in
the work place
and also to the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) status of the source person. In studies of
HCP who sustained injuries from needles contaminated with blood containing HBV, the
risk of developing clinical hepatitis if the blood was both hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg)- and HBeAg-positive was 22%--31%; the risk of developing
serologic evidence of HBV infection was 37%--62%. By comparison, the risk of
developing clinical hepatitis from a needle contaminated with HBsAg-positive,
HBeAg-negative  blood  was  1%--6%,  and  the  risk  of  developing  serologic  evidence  of
HBV
infection, 23%--37% (26).
 Although percutaneous injuries are among the most efficient modes of
HBV transmission, these exposures probably account for only a minority of HBV
infections among HCP. In several investigations of nosocomial hepatitis B outbreaks,
most infected HCP could not recall an overt percutaneous injury
(27,28), although in some studies, up to one third of infected HCP recalled caring for a
patient who was
HBsAg-positive  (29,30).  In  addition,  HBV  has  been  demonstrated  to  survive  in  dried
blood
at room temperature on environmental surfaces for at least 1 week
(31). Thus, HBV
infections that occur in HCP with no history of nonoccupational exposure
or occupational percutaneous injury might have resulted from direct or indirect blood
or body fluid exposures that inoculated HBV into cutaneous scratches, abrasions,
burns, other lesions, or on mucosal surfaces
(32--34). The potential for HBV
transmission through contact with environmental surfaces has been demonstrated in
investigations of HBV outbreaks among patients and staff of hemodialysis units
(35--37).
 Blood contains the highest HBV titers of all body fluids and is the most
important  vehicle  of  transmission  in  the  health-care  setting.  HBsAg  is  also  found  in
several
other body fluids, including breast milk, bile, cerebrospinal fluid, feces,
nasopharyngeal washings, saliva, semen, sweat, and synovial fluid
(38). However, the concentration of HBsAg in body fluids can be 100--1000---fold higher
than the concentration
of infectious HBV particles. Therefore, most body fluids are not efficient vehicles
of transmission because they contain low quantities of infectious HBV, despite
the presence of HBsAg.
 In serologic studies conducted in the United States during the 1970s, HCP had
a prevalence of HBV infection approximately 10 times higher than the
general population (39--42). Because of the high risk of HBV infection among
      HCP,
routine preexposure vaccination of HCP against hepatitis B and the use of
standard precautions to prevent exposure to blood and other potentially infectious body
fluids have been recommended since the early 1980s
(43). Regulations issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
      (OSHA)
(2) have increased compliance with these recommendations. Since the implementation
of these recommendations,
a sharp decline has occurred in the incidence of HBV infection among HCP.
 
PEP for HBV
 Efficacy of PEP for HBV. The effectiveness of hepatitis B immune globulin
(HBIG) and/or hepatitis B vaccine in various postexposure settings has been evaluated
by prospective studies. For perinatal exposure to an HBsAg-, HBeAg-positive mother,
a regimen combining HBIG and initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series at birth is
85%--95% effective in preventing HBV infection
(44,45).  Regimens  involving  either  multiple  doses  of  HBIG  alone  or  the  hepatitis  B
vaccine series alone are 70%--75% effective
in preventing HBV infection (46). In the occupational setting, multiple doses of
HBIG initiated within 1 week following percutaneous exposure to HBsAg-positive
blood provides an estimated 75% protection from HBV infection
(47--49).  Although  the  postexposure  efficacy  of  the  combination  of  HBIG  and  the
hepatitis B vaccine
series has not been evaluated in the occupational setting, the increased efficacy of
this regimen observed in the perinatal setting, compared with HBIG alone, is presumed
to apply to the occupational setting as well. In addition, because persons requiring PEP
in the occupational setting are generally at continued risk for HBV exposure, they
should receive the hepatitis B vaccine series.
 Safety of PEP for HBV. Hepatitis B vaccines have been found to be safe
when administered to infants, children, or adults
(12,50).  Through  the  year  2000,  approximately  100  million  persons  have  received
hepatitis B vaccine in the
United States. The most common side effects from hepatitis B vaccination are pain at
the injection site and mild to moderate fever
(50--55).  Studies  indicate  that  these  side  effects  are  reported  no  more  frequently
among persons vaccinated than among
those receiving placebo (51,52).
 Approximately 45 reports have been received by the Vaccine Adverse
Event Reporting System (VAERS) of alopecia (hair loss) in children and adults
after administration of plasma-derived and recombinant hepatitis B vaccine; four
persons sustained hair loss following vaccination on more than one occasion
(56). Hair loss was temporary for approximately two thirds of persons who experienced
hair loss.
An epidemiologic study conducted in the Vaccine Safety Datalink found no
statistical association between alopecia and receipt of hepatitis B vaccine in children
(CDC, unpublished data, 1998). A low rate of anaphylaxis has been observed in
vaccine recipients based on reports to VAERS; the estimated incidence is 1 in 600,000
vaccine doses distributed. Although none of the persons who developed anaphylaxis
died, anaphylactic reactions can be life-threatening; therefore, further vaccination
with hepatitis B vaccine is contraindicated in persons with a history of anaphylaxis after
a previous dose of vaccine.
 Hepatitis B immunization programs conducted on a large scale in Taiwan,
Alaska, and New Zealand have observed no association between vaccination and
the occurrence of serious adverse events. Furthermore, in the United States,
surveillance of adverse events following hepatitis B vaccination has demonstrated no
association between hepatitis B vaccine and the occurrence of serious adverse events,
including Guillain-Barré syndrome, transverse myelitis, multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis,
and seizures (57--59) (CDC, unpublished data, 1991). However, several case reports
and case series have claimed an association between hepatitis B vaccination and
such syndromes and diseases as multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis, rheumatoid arthritis,
and other autoimmune diseases (57,60--66). Most of these reported adverse events
have occurred in adults, and no report has compared the frequency of the
purported vaccine-associated syndrome/disease with the frequency in an
unvaccinated population. In addition, recent case-control studies have demonstrated no
association  between  hepatitis  B  vaccination  and  development  or  short-term  risk  of
relapse
of multiple sclerosis (67,68), and reviews by international panels of experts
have concluded that available data do not demonstrate a causal association
between  hepatitis  B  vaccination  and  demyelinating  diseases,  including  multiple
sclerosis
(69).
 HBIG is prepared from human plasma known to contain a high titer of antibody
to HBsAg (anti-HBs). The plasma from which HBIG is prepared is screened for
HBsAg and antibodies to HIV and HCV. The process used to prepare HBIG inactivates
and eliminates HIV from the final product. Since 1996, the final product has been free
of HCV RNA as determined by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and, since 1999,
all products available in the United States have been manufactured by methods
that inactivate HCV and other viruses. No evidence exists that HBV, HCV, or HIV have
ever been transmitted by HBIG commercially available in the United States
(70,71).
 Serious adverse effects from HBIG when administered as recommended
have been rare. Local pain and tenderness at the injection site, urticaria and
angioedema  might  occur;  anaphylactic  reactions,  although  rare,  have  been  reported
following
the injection of human immune globulin (IG) preparations
(72). Persons with a history of anaphylactic reaction to IG should not receive HBIG.
 PEP for HBV During Pregnancy. No apparent risk exists for adverse effects
to developing fetuses when hepatitis B vaccine is administered to pregnant women
(CDC, unpublished data, 1990). The vaccine contains noninfectious HBsAg particles
and should pose no risk to the fetus. HBV infection during pregnancy might result in
severe
disease for the mother and chronic infection for the newborn. Therefore,
neither pregnancy nor lactation should be considered a contraindication to vaccination
of women. HBIG is not contraindicated for pregnant or lactating women.
 
Occupational Transmission of HCV
 
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HCV
 HCV is not transmitted efficiently through occupational exposures to blood.
The average incidence of anti-HCV seroconversion after accidental
percutaneous exposure from an HCV-positive source is 1.8% (range: 0%--7%)
(73--76),  with  one  study  indicating  that  transmission  occurred  only  from  hollow-bore
needles
compared with other sharps (75). Transmission rarely occurs from mucous membrane
exposures to blood, and no transmission in HCP has been documented from intact or
nonintact skin exposures to blood (77,78). Data are limited on survival of HCV in
the environment. In contrast to HBV, the epidemiologic data for HCV suggest
that environmental contamination with blood containing HCV is not a significant risk
for transmission in the health-care setting
(79,80),  with  the  possible  exception  of  the  hemodialysis  setting  where  HCV
transmission related to environmental
contamination and poor infection-control practices have been implicated
(81--84).  The  risk  for  transmission  from  exposure  to  fluids  or  tissues  other  than
HCV-infected blood also
has not been quantified but is expected to be low.
 
Postexposure Management for HCV
 In several studies, researchers have attempted to assess the effectiveness of
IG following possible exposure to non-A, non-B hepatitis. These studies have
been difficult to interpret because they lack uniformity in diagnostic criteria and
study design, and, in all but one study, the first dose of IG was administered before
potential exposure (48,85,86). In an experiment designed to model HCV transmission
by needlestick exposure in the health-care setting, high anti-HCV titer IG administered
to chimpanzees 1 hour after exposure to HCV-positive blood did not prevent
transmission  of  infection  (87).  In  1994,  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices
(ACIP) reviewed available data regarding the prevention of HCV infection with IG
and concluded that using IG as PEP for hepatitis C was not supported
(88). This conclusion was based on the following facts:
 No protective antibody response has been identified following HCV infection.
 Previous studies of IG use to prevent posttransfusion non-A, non-B
hepatitis might not be relevant in making recommendations regarding PEP for hepatitis
C.
 Experimental studies in chimpanzees with IG containing anti-HCV failed
to prevent transmission of infection after exposure.
No clinical trials have been conducted to assess postexposure use of
antiviral agents (e.g., interferon with or without ribavirin) to prevent HCV infection,
and antivirals are not FDA-approved for this indication. Available data suggest that
an established infection might need to be present before interferon can be an
effective treatment. Kinetic studies suggest that the effect of interferon on chronic HCV
infection occurs in two phases. During the first phase, interferon blocks the production
or
release of virus from infected cells. In the second phase, virus is eradicated from
the infected cells (89); in this later phase, higher pretreatment alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels correlate with an increasing decline in infected cells, and
the rapidity
of the decline correlates with viral clearance. In contrast, the effect of
antiretrovirals  when  used  for  PEP  after  exposure  to  HIV  is  based  on  inhibition  of  HIV
DNA
synthesis early in the retroviral replicative cycle.
In the absence of PEP for HCV, recommendations for postexposure
management  are  intended  to  achieve  early  identification  of  chronic  disease  and,  if
present,
referral for evaluation of treatment options. However, a theoretical argument is
that intervention with antivirals when HCV RNA first becomes detectable might prevent
the development of chronic infection. Data from studies conducted outside the
United States suggest that a short course of interferon started early in the course of
acute hepatitis C is associated with a higher rate of resolved infection than that
achieved when therapy is begun after chronic hepatitis C has been well established
(90--92). These studies used various treatment regimens and included persons with
acute disease whose peak ALT levels were 500--1,000 IU/L at the time therapy was
initiated (2.6--4 months after exposure).
No studies have evaluated the treatment of acute infection in persons with
no evidence of liver disease (i.e., HCV RNA-positive <6 months duration with normal
ALT levels); among patients with chronic HCV infection, the efficacy of antivirals has
been demonstrated only among patients who also had evidence of chronic liver disease
(i.e., abnormal ALT levels). In addition, treatment started early in the course of chronic
HCV infection (i.e., 6 months after onset of infection) might be as effective as
treatment started during acute infection
(13). Because 15%--25% of patients with acute
HCV infection spontaneously resolve their infection
(93),  treatment  of  these  patients  during  the  acute  phase  could  expose  them
unnecessarily to the discomfort and side effects
of antiviral therapy.
Data upon which to base a recommendation for therapy of acute infection
are insufficient because a) no data exist regarding the effect of treating patients with
acute  infection  who  have  no  evidence  of  disease,  b)  treatment  started  early  in  the
course
of chronic infection might be just as effective and would eliminate the need to
treat persons who will spontaneously resolve their infection, and c) the appropriate
regimen is unknown.
Occupational Transmission of HIV
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HIV
In prospective studies of HCP, the average risk of HIV transmission after
a percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood has been estimated to be
approximately 0.3% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.2%--0.5%)
(94)  and  after  a  mucous  membrane  exposure,  approximately  0.09%  (95%  CI  =
0.006%--0.5%)
(95).  Although  episodes  of  HIV  transmission  after  nonintact  skin  exposure  have  been
documented
(96), the average risk for transmission by this route has not been precisely quantified
but
is estimated to be less than the risk for mucous membrane exposures
(97). The risk for transmission after exposure to fluids or tissues other than HIV-infected
blood also
has not been quantified but is probably considerably lower than for blood exposures
(98).
As of June 2000, CDC had received voluntary reports of 56 U.S. HCP
with documented HIV seroconversion temporally associated with an occupational
HIV exposure. An additional 138 episodes in HCP are considered possible occupational
HIV transmissions. These workers had a history of occupational exposure to blood,
other infectious body fluids, or laboratory solutions containing HIV, and no other risk for
HIV infection was identified, but HIV seroconversion after a specific exposure was
not documented (99).
Epidemiologic and laboratory studies suggest that several factors might affect
the risk of HIV transmission after an occupational exposure. In a retrospective
case-control  study  of  HCP  who  had  percutaneous  exposure  to  HIV,  the  risk  for  HIV
infection
was found to be increased with exposure to a larger quantity of blood from the
source person as indicated by a) a device visibly contaminated with the patient's blood,
b)
a procedure that involved a needle being placed directly in a vein or artery, or c) a
deep injury (100). The risk also was increased for exposure to blood from source
persons with terminal illness, possibly reflecting either the higher titer of HIV in blood
late in
the course of AIDS or other factors (e.g., the presence of syncytia-inducing strains of
HIV). A laboratory study that demonstrated that more blood is transferred by
deeper injuries and hollow-bore needles lends further support for the observed variation
in risk related to blood quantity (101).
The use of source person viral load as a surrogate measure of viral titer
for assessing transmission risk has not yet been established. Plasma viral load (e.g.,
HIV RNA) reflects only the level of cell-free virus in the peripheral blood; latently
infected cells might transmit infection in the absence of viremia. Although a lower viral
load (e.g., <1,500 RNA copies/mL) or one that is below the limits of detection
probably  indicates  a  lower  titer  exposure,  it  does  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of
transmission.
Some evidence exists regarding host defenses possibly influencing the risk for
HIV infection. A study of HIV-exposed but uninfected HCP demonstrated an
HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) response when peripheral blood mononuclear
cells
were stimulated in vitro with HIV-specific antigens
(102).  Similar  CTL  responses  have  been  observed  in  other  groups  who  experienced
repeated HIV exposure without
resulting infection (103--108). Among several possible explanations for this observation
is
that the host immune response sometimes might prevent establishment of HIV
infection after a percutaneous exposure; another is that the CTL response simply might
be
a marker for exposure. In a study of 20 HCP with occupational exposure to HIV,
a comparison was made of HCP treated with zidovudine (ZDV) PEP and those
not treated. The findings from this study suggest that ZDV blunted the HIV-specific
CTL response and that PEP might inhibit early HIV replication
(109).
Rationale for HIV PEP
Considerations that influence the rationale and recommendations for PEP include
 the pathogenesis of HIV infection, particularly the time course of early infection;
 the biological plausibility that infection can be prevented or ameliorated by
using antiretroviral drugs;
 direct or indirect evidence of the efficacy of specific agents used for
prophylaxis; and
 the risk and benefit of PEP to exposed HCP.
The following discussion considers each of these concerns.
Role of Pathogenesis in Considering Antiretroviral
Prophylaxis.  Information  about  primary  HIV  infection  indicates  that  systemic  infection
does not occur
immediately, leaving a brief window of opportunity during which postexposure
antiretroviral intervention might modify or prevent viral replication. In a primate model
of
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection, infection of dendritic-like cells occurred
at
the site of inoculation during the first 24 hours following mucosal exposure to
cell-free virus. Over the subsequent 24--48 hours, migration of these cells to regional
lymph nodes occurred, and virus was detectable in the peripheral blood within 5 days
(110). Theoretically, initiation of antiretroviral PEP soon after exposure might prevent
or inhibit systemic infection by limiting the proliferation of virus in the initial target cells
or lymph nodes.
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Animal
Studies. Data from animal studies have been difficult to interpret, in part, because of
problems identifying an
animal model that is comparable to humans. In early studies, differences in
controlled  variables  (e.g.,  choice  of  viral  strain  [based  on  the  animal  model  used],
inoculum
size, route of inoculation, time of prophylaxis initiation, and drug regimen)
made extrapolation of the results to humans difficult. Recently, refinements in
methodology have facilitated more relevant studies; in particular, the viral inocula used
in
animal studies have been reduced to levels more analogous to human exposures
but sufficient to cause infection in control animals
(111--113).
 These
 studies
 provide
 encouraging
 evidence
 of
 postexposure
chemoprophylactic efficacy.
Studies among primates and in murine and feline animal models
have demonstrated that larger viral inocula decrease prophylactic efficacy
(114--117). In addition, delaying initiation, shortening the duration, or decreasing the
antiretroviral  dose  of  PEP,  individually  or  in  combination,  decreased  prophylactic
efficacy
(113,118--124).
 For
 example,
 when
 (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)
 adenine
(tenofovir)
was administered 48 hours before, 4 hours after, or 24 hours after intravenous
SIV inoculation to long-tailed macaques, a 4-week regimen prevented infection in
all treated animals (122). A subsequent study confirmed the efficacy of tenofovir
PEP when administered 24 hours after intravenous inoculation of a dose of SIV
that uniformly results in infection in untreated macaques. In the same study, protection
was incomplete if the tenofovir administration was delayed to 48 or 72 hours
postexposure or if the total duration of treatment was curtailed to 3 or 10 days
(123).
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Human
Studies.  Little  information  exists  from  which  the  efficacy  of  PEP  in  humans  can  be
assessed. Seroconversion is
infrequent following an occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood; therefore, several
thousands of exposed HCP would need to enroll in a prospective trial to achieve the
statistical power necessary to directly demonstrate PEP efficacy
(125).
In the retrospective case-control study of HCP, after controlling for other risk
factors for HIV transmission, use of ZDV as PEP was associated with a reduction in the
risk
of HIV infection by approximately 81% (95% CI = 43%--94%)
(100). Although the results of this study suggest PEP efficacy, its limitations include the
small number of
cases studied and the use of cases and controls from different cohorts.
In a multicenter trial in which ZDV was administered to HIV-infected
pregnant women and their infants, the administration of ZDV during pregnancy, labor,
and delivery and to the infant reduced transmission by 67%
(126). Only part of the
protective effect of ZDV was explained by reduction of the HIV viral load in
the maternal blood, suggesting that ZDV prophylaxis, in part, involves a mechanism
other than the reduction of maternal viral burden
(127,128). Since 1998, studies have highlighted the importance of PEP for prevention of
perinatal HIV transmission.
In Africa, the use of ZDV in combination with lamivudine (3TC) decreased perinatal
HIV transmission by 50% when administered during pregnancy, labor, and for 1
week postpartum, and by 37% when started at the onset of labor and continued for 1
week postpartum (129). Studies in the United States and Uganda also have
demonstrated that rates of perinatal HIV transmission have been reduced with the use
of abbreviated PEP regimens started intrapartum or during the first 48--72 hours of
life (130--132).
The limitations of all of these studies with animals and humans must be
considered when reviewing evidence of PEP efficacy. The extent to which data from
animal  studies  can  be  extrapolated  to  humans  is  largely  unknown,  and  the  exposure
route
for mother-to-infant HIV transmission is not similar to occupational exposures;
therefore, these findings might not be directly applicable to PEP in HCP.
Reports of Failure of PEP. Failure of PEP to prevent HIV infection in HCP has
been reported in at least 21 instances
(78,133--139). In 16 of the cases, ZDV was used
alone as a single agent; in two cases, ZDV and didanosine (ddI) were used in
combination (133,138); and in three cases,
>3 drugs were used for PEP
(137--139).  Thirteen  of  the  source  persons  were  known  to  have  been  treated  with
antiretroviral therapy
before  the  exposure.  Antiretroviral  resistance  testing  of  the  virus  from  the  source
person
was performed in seven instances, and in four, the HIV infection transmitted was found
to have decreased sensitivity to ZDV and/or other drugs used for PEP. In addition
to possible exposure to an antiretroviral-resistant strain of HIV, other factors that
might have contributed to these apparent failures might include a high titer and/or
large inoculum exposure, delayed initiation and/or short duration of PEP, and possible
factors related to the host (e.g., cellular immune system responsiveness) and/or to the
source person's virus (e.g., presence of syncytia-forming strains)
(133). Details regarding the cases of PEP failure involving combinations of antiretroviral
agents are included in
this report (Table 1).
Antiretroviral Agents for PEP
Antiretroviral agents from three classes of drugs are available for the treatment
of HIV infection. These agents include the nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs), nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), and
protease inhibitors (PIs). Only antiretroviral agents that have been approved by FDA
for treatment of HIV infection are discussed in these guidelines.
Determining which agents and how many to use or when to alter a PEP regimen
is largely empiric. Guidelines for the treatment of HIV infection, a condition
usually involving a high total body burden of HIV, include recommendations for the use
of three drugs (140); however, the applicability of these recommendations to
PEP remains unknown. In HIV-infected patients, combination regimens have
proved  superior  to  monotherapy  regimens  in  reducing  HIV  viral  load,  reducing  the
incidence
of opportunistic infections and death, and delaying onset of drug resistance
(141,142).  A  combination  of  drugs  with  activity  at  different  stages  in  the  viral
replication cycle
(e.g., nucleoside analogues with a PI) theoretically could offer an additional preventive
effect in PEP, particularly for occupational exposures that pose an increased risk
of
transmission. Although the use of a three-drug regimen might be justified
for exposures that pose an increased risk of transmission, whether the potential
added  toxicity  of  a  third  drug  is  justified  for  lower-risk  exposures  is  uncertain.
Therefore,
the recommendations at the end of this document provide guidance for two- and
three-drug PEP regimens that are based on the level of risk for HIV transmission
represented by the exposure.
NRTI combinations that can be considered for PEP include ZDV and 3TC, 3TC
and stavudine (d4T), and ddI and d4T. In previous PHS guidelines, a combination of
ZDV and 3TC was considered the first choice for PEP regimens
(3).  Because  ZDV  and  3TC  are  available  in  a  combination  formulation  (Combivir™,
manufactured by
Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC), the use of this combination might be
more convenient for HCP. However, recent data suggest that mutations associated with
ZDV and 3TC resistance might be common in some areas
(143).  Thus,  individual  clinicians  might  prefer  other  NRTIs  or  combinations  based  on
local knowledge and experience
in treating HIV infection and disease.
The addition of a third drug for PEP following high-risk exposures is based
on demonstrated effectiveness in reducing viral burden in HIV-infected
persons. Previously, indinavir (IDV) or nelfinavir (NFV) were recommended as
first-choice agents for inclusion in an expanded PEP regimen
(5). Since the publication of the 1998 PEP guidelines, efavirenz
      (EFV), an NNRTI; abacavir (ABC), a potent NRTI;
and Kaletra™, a PI, have been approved by FDA. Although side effects might be
common with the NNRTIs, EFV might be considered for expanded PEP regimens,
especially when resistance to PIs in the source person's virus is known or suspected.
ABC
has been associated with dangerous hypersensitivity reactions but, with
careful monitoring, may be considered as a third drug for PEP. Kaletra, a combination
of lopinavir and ritonavir, is a potent HIV inhibitor that, with expert consultation, may
be considered in an expanded PEP regimen.
Toxicity and Drug Interactions of Antiretroviral
Agents.  When  administering  PEP,  an  important  goal  is  completion  of  a  4-week  PEP
regimen when PEP is
indicated.  Therefore,  the  toxicity  profile  of  antiretroviral  agents,  including  the
frequency,
severity, duration, and reversibility of side effects, is a relevant consideration. All of
the antiretroviral agents have been associated with side effects (Table 2).
However, studies of adverse events have been conducted primarily with persons who
have advanced disease (and longer treatment courses) and who therefore might not
reflect the experience in persons who are uninfected
(144).
Several primary side effects are associated with antiretroviral agents (Table
2). Side effects associated with many of the NRTIs are chiefly gastrointestinal
(e.g., nausea or diarrhea); however, ddI has been associated with cases of fatal and
nonfatal pancreatitis among HIV-infected patients treated for >4 weeks. The use of PIs
has
been associated with new onset diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, diabetic
      ketoacidosis, exacerbation of preexisting diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia
(145--147). Nephrolithiasis has been associated with IDV use; however, the incidence of
this potential complication might be limited by drinking at least 48 ounces (1.5 L) of
fluid per 24-hour period (e.g., six 8- ounce glasses of water throughout the day)
(148). NFV has been associated with the development of diarrhea; however, this side
effect
might respond to treatment with antimotility agents that can be prescribed for use,
if necessary, at the time the drug is recommended for PEP. The NNRTIs have
been
associated with severe skin reactions, including life-threatening cases of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Hepatotoxicity, including
fatal hepatic necrosis, has occurred in patients treated with nevirapine (NVP);
some episodes began during the first few weeks of therapy (FDA, unpublished data,
2000). EFV has been associated with central nervous system side effects, including
dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, and abnormal dreaming.
All of the approved antiretroviral agents might have potentially serious
drug interactions when used with certain other drugs (Appendix C). Careful evaluation
of concomitant medications used by an exposed person is required before PEP
is prescribed, and close monitoring for toxicity is also needed. Further information
about potential drug interactions can be found in the manufacturer's package insert.
Toxicity Associated with PEP. Information from the National
Surveillance System for Health Care Workers (NaSH) and the HIV Postexposure Registry
indicates that nearly 50% of HCP experience adverse symptoms (e.g., nausea,
malaise, headache, anorexia, and headache) while taking PEP and that approximately
33%
stop taking PEP because of adverse signs and symptoms
(6,7,10,11). Some studies have demonstrated that side effects and discontinuation of
PEP are more common
among HCP taking three-drug combination regimens for PEP compared with HCP taking
two-drug combination regimens (7,10). Although similar rates of side effects
were observed among persons who took PEP after sexual or drug use exposures to HIV
in the San Francisco Post-Exposure Prevention Project, 80% completed 4 weeks
of therapy (149). Participants in the San Francisco Project were followed at 1, 2, 4, 26,
and 52 weeks postexposure and received medication adherence counseling;
most participants took only two drugs for PEP.
Serious side effects, including nephrolithiasis, hepatitis, and pancytopenia
have been reported with the use of combination drugs for PEP
(6,7,150,151).  One  case  of  NVP-associated  fulminant  liver  failure  requiring  liver
transplantation and one case
of hypersensitivity syndrome have been reported in HCP taking NVP for HIV PEP
(152). Including these two cases, from March 1997 through September 2000, FDA
received reports of 22 cases of serious adverse events related to NVP taken for PEP
(153). These events included 12 cases of hepatotoxicity, 14 cases of skin reaction
(including one documented and two possible cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome), and
one
case of rhabdomyolysis; four cases involved both hepatotoxicty and skin reaction, and
one case involved both rhabdomyolysis and skin reaction.
Resistance to Antiretroviral Agents. Known or suspected resistance of the
source virus to antiretroviral agents, particularly to agents that might be included in a
PEP regimen, is a concern for persons making decisions about PEP. Resistance to
HIV infection occurs with all of the available antiretroviral agents, and
cross-resistance within drug classes is frequent
(154). Recent studies have demonstrated an emergence of drug-resistant HIV among
source persons for occupational
exposures (143,155). A study conducted at seven U.S. sites during 1998--1999 found
that
16 (39%) of 41 source persons whose virus was sequenced had primary
genetic mutations associated with resistance to RTIs, and 4 (10%) had primary
mutations associated with resistance to PIs
(143). In addition, occupational transmission
of resistant HIV strains, despite PEP with combination drug regimens, has been
reported (137,139). In one case, a hospital worker became infected after an HIV
exposure despite a PEP regimen that included ddI, d4T, and NVP
(139). The transmitted HIV
contained two primary genetic mutations associated with resistance to NNRTIs
(the source person was taking EFV at the time of the exposure). Despite recent studies
and  case  reports,  the  relevance  of  exposure  to  a  resistant  virus  is  still  not  well
understood.
Empiric decisions about the presence of antiretroviral drug resistance are
often difficult to make because patients generally take more than one antiretroviral
agent. Resistance should be suspected in source persons when they are experiencing
clinical progression of disease or a persistently increasing viral load, and/or decline in
CD4
T-cell count, despite therapy or a lack of virologic response to therapy.
However, resistance testing of the source virus at the time of an exposure is not
practical because the results will not be available in time to influence the choice of the
initial
PEP regimen. Furthermore, in this situation, whether modification of the PEP regimen
is necessary or will influence the outcome of an occupational exposure is unknown.
No data exist to suggest that modification of a PEP regimen after receiving results
from resistance testing (usually a minimum of 1--2 weeks) improves efficacy of PEP.
Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy. Data are limited on the
potential effects of antiretroviral drugs on the developing fetus or neonate
(156). Carcinogenicity and/or mutagenicity is evident in several in vitro screening tests
for ZDV and all other FDA-licensed NRTIs. The relevance of animal data to humans
is unknown; however, because teratogenic effects were observed in primates at
drug exposures similar to those representing human therapeutic exposure, the use of
EFV should be avoided in pregnant women
(140). IDV is associated with infrequent
side effects in adults (i.e., hyperbilirubinemia and renal stones) that could be
problematic  for  a  newborn.  Because  the  half-life  of  IDV  in  adults  is  short,  these
concerns might
be relevant only if the drug is administered shortly before delivery.
In a recent study in France of perinatal HIV transmission, two cases of
progressive neurologic disease and death were reported in uninfected infants exposed
to ZDV
and 3TC (157). Laboratory studies of these children suggested mitochondrial
dysfunction.  In  a  careful  review  of  deaths  in  children  followed  in  U.S.  perinatal  HIV
cohorts,
no deaths attributable to mitochondrial disease have been found
(158).
Recent reports of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women
treated throughout gestation with a combination of d4T and ddI have prompted
warnings about use of these drugs during pregnancy
(159).  Although  the  case-patients  were  HIV-infected  women  taking  the  drugs  for  >4
weeks, pregnant women and
their providers should be advised to consider d4T and ddI only when the benefits of
their use outweigh the risks.
PEP Use in Hospitals in the United
States.  Analysis  of  data  from  NaSH  provides  information  on  the  use  of  PEP  following
occupational exposures in 47 hospitals in
the United States. A total of 11,784 exposures to blood and body fluids was reported
from June 1996 through November 2000 (CDC, unpublished data, 2001). For all
exposures with known sources, 6% were to HIV-positive sources, 74% to HIV-negative
sources, and 20% to sources with an unknown HIV status. Sixty-three percent of HCP
exposed to a known HIV-positive source started PEP, and 54% of HCP took it for at least
20
days, whereas 14% of HCP exposed to a source person subsequently found to be
HIV-negative initiated PEP, and 3% of those took it for at least 20 days.
Information  recorded  about  HIV  exposures  in  NaSH  indicates  that  46%  of  exposures
involving
an HIV-positive source warranted only a two-drug PEP regimen (i.e., the exposure was
to mucous membranes or skin or was a superficial percutaneous injury and the
source person did not have end-stage AIDS or acute HIV illness); however, 53% of
these
exposed HCP took >3 drugs (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). Similarly, the
National Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline (PEPline) reported that PEPline
staff recommended stopping or not starting PEP for approximately one half of the HCP
who consulted them about exposures (D. Bangsberg, San Francisco General
Hospital, unpublished data, September 1999). The observation that some HCP exposed
to
HIV-negative source persons take PEP from several days to weeks following
their exposures suggests that strategies be employed such as the use of a rapid
HIV antibody assay, which could minimize exposure to unnecessary PEP
(11). A recent study demonstrated that use of a rapid HIV test for evaluation of source
persons
after occupational exposures not only resulted in decreased use of PEP, but also was
cost-effective compared with use of the standard enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test
for source persons subsequently found to be HIV-negative
(160).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HCP POTENTIALLY EXPOSED TO HBV,
HCV, or HIV
Exposure prevention remains the primary strategy for reducing
occupational  bloodborne  pathogen  infections;  however,  occupational  exposures  will
continue
to occur. Health-care organizations should make available to their personnel a
system that includes written protocols for prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling,
treatment,  and  follow-up  of  occupational  exposures  that  might  place  HCP  at  risk  for
acquiring
a bloodborne infection. HCP should be educated concerning the risk for and
prevention  of  bloodborne  infections,  including  the  need  to  be  vaccinated  against
hepatitis
B (17,21,161--163). Employers are required to establish exposure-control plans
that include postexposure follow-up for their employees and to comply with
incident reporting requirements mandated by the 1992 OSHA bloodborne pathogen
standard  (2).  Access  to  clinicians  who  can  provide  postexposure  care  should  be
available
during all working hours, including nights and weekends. HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine,
and antiretroviral agents for HIV PEP should be available for timely administration
(i.e., either by providing access on-site or by creating linkages with other facilities
or providers to make them available off-site). Persons responsible for
providing postexposure management should be familiar with evaluation and treatment
protocols  and  the  facility's  plans  for  accessing  HBIG,  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  and
antiretroviral
drugs for HIV PEP.
HCP should be educated to report occupational exposures immediately after
they occur, particularly because HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine, and HIV PEP are most likely
to
be effective if administered as soon after the exposure as possible. HCP who are at
risk for occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens should be familiarized with
the principles of postexposure management as part of job orientation and ongoing
job training.
Hepatitis B Vaccination
Any person who performs tasks involving contact with blood,
blood-contaminated  body  fluids,  other  body  fluids,  or  sharps  should  be  vaccinated
against hepatitis B
(2,21). Prevaccination serologic screening for previous infection is not indicated for
persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk, unless the hospital or
health-care organization considers screening cost-effective.
Hepatitis B vaccine should always be administered by the intramuscular route
in the deltoid muscle with a needle 1--1.5 inches long. Hepatitis B vaccine can
be administered at the same time as other vaccines with no interference with
antibody response to the other vaccines
(164). If the vaccination series is interrupted after
the first dose, the second dose should be administered as soon as possible. The
second and third doses should be separated by an interval of at least 2 months. If only
the third dose is delayed, it should be administered when convenient. HCP who
have contact with patients or blood and are at ongoing risk for percutaneous injuries
should be tested 1--2 months after completion of the 3dose vaccination series for
      anti-HBs (21). Persons who do not respond to the primary vaccine series (i.e.,
      anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL)  should  complete  a  second  3-dose  vaccine  series  or  be
evaluated to determine
if they are HBsAg-positive. Revaccinated persons should be retested at the
completion  of  the  second  vaccine  series.  Persons  who  do  not  respond  to  an  initial
3-dose
vaccine series have a 30%--50% chance of responding to a second 3-dose series
(165). Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled regarding how
to prevent HBV transmission to others and regarding the need for medical
evaluation (12,163,166). Nonresponders to vaccination who are
      HBsAg-negative should
be considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled
regarding  precautions  to  prevent  HBV  infection  and  the  need  to  obtain  HBIG
prophylaxis for
any known or probable parenteral exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. Booster doses
of hepatitis B vaccine are not necessary, and periodic serologic testing to
monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series is not
recommended.  Any  blood  or  body  fluid  exposure  sustained  by  an  unvaccinated,
susceptible
person should lead to the initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
Treatment of an Exposure Site
Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood or body fluids should
be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes should be flushed with water.
No evidence exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by
squeezing  the  wound  further  reduces  the  risk  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission;
however,
the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g.,
bleach)  or  the  injection  of  antiseptics  or  disinfectants  into  the  wound  is  not
recommended.
Exposure Report
If an occupational exposure occurs, the circumstances and
postexposure  management  should  be  recorded  in  the  exposed  person's  confidential
medical
record (usually on a form the facility designates for this purpose) (Box 1). In
addition, employers should follow all federal (including OSHA) and state requirements
for recording and reporting occupational injuries and exposures.
Evaluation of the Exposure and the Exposure Source
Evaluation of the Exposure
The exposure should be evaluated for the potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and
HIV based on the type of body substance involved and the route and severity of
the exposure (Box 2). Blood, fluid containing visible blood, or other potentially
infectious fluid (including semen; vaginal secretions; and cerebrospinal,
      synovial,
pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids) or tissue can be infectious for
bloodborne viruses. Exposures to these fluids or tissue through a percutaneous injury
(i.e., needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through contact with
a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for bloodborne virus
transmission and require further evaluation. For HCV and HIV, exposure to a blood-filled
hollow needle or visibly bloody device suggests a higher risk exposure than exposure to
a needle that was most likely used for giving an injection. In addition, any direct
contact (i.e, personal protective equipment either was not present or was ineffective
in protecting skin or mucous membranes) with concentrated virus in a
research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that requires
clinical evaluation.
For skin exposure, follow-up is indicated only if it involves exposure to a body
fluid previously listed and evidence exists of compromised skin integrity (e.g.,
dermatitis,  abrasion,  or  open  wound).  In  the  clinical  evaluation  for  human  bites,
possible
exposure  of  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  must  be
considered. If
a bite results in blood exposure to either person involved, postexposure
follow-up should be provided.
Evaluation of the Exposure Source
The person whose blood or body fluid is the source of an occupational
exposure  should  be  evaluated  for  HBV,  HCV,  and  HIV  infection  (Box  3).  Information
available
in the medical record at the time of exposure (e.g., laboratory test results,
admitting  diagnosis,  or  previous  medical  history)  or  from  the  source  person,  might
confirm
or exclude bloodborne virus infection.
If the HBV, HCV, and/or HIV infection status of the source is unknown, the
source person should be informed of the incident and tested for serologic evidence
of bloodborne virus infection. Procedures should be followed for testing source
persons, including obtaining informed consent, in accordance with applicable state and
local laws. Any persons determined to be infected with HBV, HCV, or HIV should be
referred for appropriate counseling and treatment. Confidentiality of the source person
should be maintained at all times.
Testing to determine the HBV, HCV, and HIV infection status of an exposure
source should be performed as soon as possible. Hospitals, clinics and other sites
that manage exposed HCP should consult their laboratories regarding the
most appropriate test to use to expedite obtaining these results. An FDA-approved
rapid HIV-antibody test kit should be considered for use in this situation, particularly if
testing by EIA cannot be completed within 24--48 hours. Repeatedly reactive results by
EIA
or rapid HIV-antibody tests are considered to be highly suggestive of infection, whereas
a negative result is an excellent indicator of the absence of HIV antibody. Confirmation
of a reactive result by Western blot or immunofluorescent antibody is not necessary
to make initial decisions about postexposure management but should be done
to complete the testing process and before informing the source person.
Repeatedly reactive results by EIA for anti-HCV should be confirmed by a supplemental
test
(i.e., recombinant immunoblot assay [RIBA™] or HCV PCR). Direct virus assays (e.g.,
HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA or HCV RNA) for routine HIV or HCV screening
of source persons are not recommended.
If the exposure source is unknown or cannot be tested, information about
where and under what circumstances the exposure occurred should be
assessed
epidemiologically for the likelihood of transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
Certain situations as well as the type of exposure might suggest an increased or
decreased risk; an important consideration is the prevalence of HBV, HCV, or HIV in the
population group (i.e., institution or community) from which the contaminated source
material
is derived. For example, an exposure that occurs in a geographic area where
injection-drug  use  is  prevalent  or  involves  a  needle  discarded  in  a  drug-treatment
facility
would be considered epidemiologically to have a higher risk for transmission than
an exposure that occurs in a nursing home for the elderly.
Testing of needles or other sharp instruments implicated in an
exposure, regardless of whether the source is known or unknown, is not recommended.
The reliability and interpretation of findings in such circumstances are unknown,
and testing might be hazardous to persons handling the sharp instrument.
Examples of information to consider when evaluating an exposure source
for possible HBV, HCV, or HIV infection include laboratory information (e.g., previous
HBV,  HCV,  or  HIV  test  results  or  results  of  immunologic  testing  [e.g.,  CD4+  T-cell
count])
or liver enzymes (e.g., ALT), clinical symptoms (e.g., acute syndrome suggestive
of primary HIV infection or undiagnosed immunodeficiency disease), and history
of recent (i.e., within 3 months) possible HBV, HCV, or HIV exposures (e.g.,
injection-drug  use  or  sexual  contact  with  a  known  positive  partner).  Health-care
providers should
be aware of local and state laws governing the collection and release of HIV
serostatus information on a source person, following an occupational exposure.
If the source person is known to have HIV infection, available information about
this person's stage of infection (i.e., asymptomatic, symptomatic, or AIDS), CD4+
T-cell count, results of viral load testing, current and previous antiretroviral therapy,
and results of any genotypic or phenotypic viral resistance testing should be gathered
for consideration in choosing an appropriate PEP regimen. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of exposed HCP should be considered within 72 hours
postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or source person
becomes available.
If the source person is HIV seronegative and has no clinical evidence of AIDS
or symptoms of HIV infection, no further testing of the person for HIV infection
is indicated. The likelihood of the source person being in the "window period" of
HIV  infection  in  the  absence  of  symptoms  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome  is  extremely
small.
Management of Exposures to HBV
For percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood, several factors must
be considered when making a decision to provide prophylaxis, including the HBsAg
status of the source and the hepatitis B vaccination and vaccine-response status of
the exposed person. Such exposures usually involve persons for whom hepatitis
B vaccination is recommended. Any blood or body fluid exposure to an
unvaccinated person should lead to initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
The hepatitis B vaccination status and the vaccine-response status (if known) of
the exposed person should be reviewed. A summary of prophylaxis recommendations
for percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood according to the HBsAg status of
the exposure source and the vaccination and vaccine-response status of the
exposed person is included in this report (Table 3).
When HBIG is indicated, it should be administered as soon as possible
after exposure (preferably within 24 hours). The effectiveness of HBIG when
administered  >7  days  after  exposure  is  unknown.  When  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is
indicated, it
should also be administered as soon as possible (preferably within 24 hours) and can
be administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate site (vaccine should always
be administered in the deltoid muscle).
For exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated but have
not completed the vaccination series, vaccination should be completed as scheduled,
and HBIG should be added as indicated (Table 3). Persons exposed to
      HBsAg-positive
blood or body fluids who are known not to have responded to a primary vaccine
series should receive a single dose of HBIG and reinitiate the hepatitis B vaccine series
with the first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after
exposure. Alternatively, they should receive two doses of HBIG, one dose as soon as
possible  after  exposure,  and  the  second  dose  1  month  later.  The  option  of
administering
one dose of HBIG and reinitiating the vaccine series is preferred for nonresponders
who did not complete a second 3-dose vaccine series. For persons who
previously completed a second vaccine series but failed to respond, two doses of HBIG
are preferred.
Management of Exposures to HCV
Individual institutions should establish policies and procedures for testing HCP
for HCV after percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood and ensure that all
personnel
are familiar with these policies and procedures. The following are
recommendations for follow-up of occupational HCV exposures:
 For the source, perform testing for anti-HCV.
 For the person exposed to an HCV-positive source
    --- perform baseline testing for anti-HCV and ALT activity; and
   --- perform follow-up testing (e.g., at 4--6 months) for anti-HCV and ALT
activity (if earlier diagnosis of HCV infection is desired, testing for HCV RNA may
be performed at 4--6 weeks).
 Confirm all anti-HCV results reported positive by enzyme immunoassay
using  supplemental  anti-HCV  testing  (e.g.,  recombinant  immunoblot  assay  [RIBA™])
(13).
Health-care professionals who provide care to persons exposed to HCV in
the occupational setting should be knowledgeable regarding the risk for HCV infection
and appropriate counseling, testing, and medical follow-up.
IG and antiviral agents are not recommended for PEP after exposure to
HCV-positive blood. In addition, no guidelines exist for administration of therapy during
the acute phase of HCV infection. However, limited data indicate that antiviral
therapy might be beneficial when started early in the course of HCV infection. When
HCV infection is identified early, the person should be referred for medical management
to a specialist knowledgeable in this area.
Counseling for HCP Exposed to Viral Hepatitis
HCP exposed to HBV- or HCV-infected blood do not need to take any
special precautions to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up period
(12,13); however, they should refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or
semen. The exposed person does not need to modify sexual practices or refrain
from becoming pregnant. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she does not need
to discontinue.
No modifications to an exposed person's patient-care responsibilities
are necessary to prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to
      HBV-
or HCV-positive blood. If an exposed person becomes acutely infected with HBV,
the person should be evaluated according to published recommendations for infected
HCP (165). No recommendations exist regarding restricting the professional activities
of HCP with HCV infection (13). As recommended for all
      HCP, those who are
chronically infected with HBV or HCV should follow all recommended infection-control
practices, including standard precautions and appropriate use of hand washing,
protective barriers, and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp
instruments (162).
Management of Exposures to HIV
Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing of Exposed HCP
HCP exposed to HIV should be evaluated within hours (rather than days) after
their  exposure  and  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  baseline  (i.e.,  to  establish  infection
status
at
the time of exposure). If the source person is seronegative for HIV, baseline testing
or further follow-up of the exposed person normally is not necessary. Serologic
testing should be made available to all HCP who are concerned that they might have
been occupationally infected with HIV. For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the
evaluation also should include information about medications the exposed person might
be
taking and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances (i.e.,
pregnancy,  breast  feeding,  or  renal  or  hepatic  disease)  that  might  influence  drug
selection.
PEP for HIV
The following recommendations (Table 4 and Table 5) apply to situations when a
person has been exposed to a source person with HIV infection or when information
suggests the likelihood that the source person is HIV-infected. These recommendations
are based on the risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and on limited
data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most occupational HIV exposures
do not result in the transmission of HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully
considered when prescribing PEP. To assist with the initial management of an HIV
exposure, health-care facilities should have drugs for an initial PEP regimen selected
and available for use. When possible, these recommendations should be implemented
in consultation with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral therapy and
HIV transmission (Box 4).
Timing and Duration of PEP. PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The
interval within which PEP should be initiated for optimal efficacy is not known. Animal
studies have demonstrated the importance of starting PEP soon after an
exposure  (111,112,118).  If  questions  exist  about  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use  or
whether
to use a basic or expanded regimen, starting the basic regimen immediately rather
than delaying PEP administration is probably better. Although animal studies suggest
that PEP probably is substantially less effective when started more than 24--36
hours  postexposure  (112,119,122),  the  interval  after  which  no  benefit  is  gained  from
PEP
for humans is undefined. Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be
started  even  when  the  interval  since  exposure  exceeds  36  hours.  Initiating  therapy
after
a longer interval (e.g., 1 week) might be considered for exposures that represent
an increased risk for transmission. The optimal duration of PEP is unknown. Because
4 weeks of ZDV appeared protective in occupational and animal studies
(100,123), PEP probably should be administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
Use of PEP When HIV Infection Status of Source Person is
Unknown.  If  the  source  person's  HIV  infection  status  is  unknown  at  the  time  of
exposure, use of PEP should
be decided on a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in the source (Table 4 and
Table 5).
If these considerations suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of
the source person is pending, initiating a two-drug PEP regimen until laboratory
results  have  been  obtained  and  later  modifying  or  discontinuing  the  regimen
accordingly
is reasonable. The following are recommendations regarding HIV
postexposure prophylaxis:
 If indicated, start PEP as soon as possible after an exposure.
 Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 Administer PEP for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 If a source person is determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should be discontinued.
PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 No clinical trials have been conducted to assess postexposure use of
antiviral agents (e.g., interferon with or without ribavirin) to prevent HCV infection,
and antivirals are not FDA-approved for this indication. Available data suggest that
an established infection might need to be present before interferon can be an
effective treatment. Kinetic studies suggest that the effect of interferon on chronic HCV
infection occurs in two phases. During the first phase, interferon blocks the production
or
release of virus from infected cells. In the second phase, virus is eradicated from
the infected cells (89); in this later phase, higher pretreatment alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels correlate with an increasing decline in infected cells, and
the rapidity
of the decline correlates with viral clearance. In contrast, the effect of
antiretrovirals  when  used  for  PEP  after  exposure  to  HIV  is  based  on  inhibition  of  HIV
DNA
synthesis early in the retroviral replicative cycle.
 In the absence of PEP for HCV, recommendations for postexposure
management  are  intended  to  achieve  early  identification  of  chronic  disease  and,  if
present,
referral for evaluation of treatment options. However, a theoretical argument is
that intervention with antivirals when HCV RNA first becomes detectable might prevent
the development of chronic infection. Data from studies conducted outside the
United States suggest that a short course of interferon started early in the course of
acute hepatitis C is associated with a higher rate of resolved infection than that
achieved when therapy is begun after chronic hepatitis C has been well established
(90--92). These studies used various treatment regimens and included persons with
acute disease whose peak ALT levels were 500--1,000 IU/L at the time therapy was
initiated (2.6--4 months after exposure).
 No studies have evaluated the treatment of acute infection in persons with
no evidence of liver disease (i.e., HCV RNA-positive <6 months duration with normal
ALT levels); among patients with chronic HCV infection, the efficacy of antivirals has
been demonstrated only among patients who also had evidence of chronic liver disease
(i.e., abnormal ALT levels). In addition, treatment started early in the course of chronic
HCV infection (i.e., 6 months after onset of infection) might be as effective as
treatment started during acute infection
(13). Because 15%--25% of patients with acute
HCV infection spontaneously resolve their infection
(93),  treatment  of  these  patients  during  the  acute  phase  could  expose  them
unnecessarily to the discomfort and side effects
of antiviral therapy.
 Data upon which to base a recommendation for therapy of acute infection
are insufficient because a) no data exist regarding the effect of treating patients with
acute  infection  who  have  no  evidence  of  disease,  b)  treatment  started  early  in  the
course
of chronic infection might be just as effective and would eliminate the need to
treat persons who will spontaneously resolve their infection, and c) the appropriate
regimen is unknown.
 
Occupational Transmission of HIV
 
Risk for Occupational Transmission of HIV
 In prospective studies of HCP, the average risk of HIV transmission after
a percutaneous exposure to HIV-infected blood has been estimated to be
approximately 0.3% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.2%--0.5%)
(94)  and  after  a  mucous  membrane  exposure,  approximately  0.09%  (95%  CI  =
0.006%--0.5%)
(95).  Although  episodes  of  HIV  transmission  after  nonintact  skin  exposure  have  been
documented
(96), the average risk for transmission by this route has not been precisely quantified
but
is estimated to be less than the risk for mucous membrane exposures
(97). The risk for transmission after exposure to fluids or tissues other than HIV-infected
blood also
has not been quantified but is probably considerably lower than for blood exposures
(98).
 As of June 2000, CDC had received voluntary reports of 56 U.S. HCP
with documented HIV seroconversion temporally associated with an occupational
HIV exposure. An additional 138 episodes in HCP are considered possible occupational
HIV transmissions. These workers had a history of occupational exposure to blood,
other infectious body fluids, or laboratory solutions containing HIV, and no other risk for
HIV infection was identified, but HIV seroconversion after a specific exposure was
not documented (99).
 Epidemiologic and laboratory studies suggest that several factors might affect
the risk of HIV transmission after an occupational exposure. In a retrospective
case-control  study  of  HCP  who  had  percutaneous  exposure  to  HIV,  the  risk  for  HIV
infection
was found to be increased with exposure to a larger quantity of blood from the
source person as indicated by a) a device visibly contaminated with the patient's blood,
b)
a procedure that involved a needle being placed directly in a vein or artery, or c) a
deep injury (100). The risk also was increased for exposure to blood from source
persons with terminal illness, possibly reflecting either the higher titer of HIV in blood
late in
the course of AIDS or other factors (e.g., the presence of syncytia-inducing strains of
HIV). A laboratory study that demonstrated that more blood is transferred by
deeper injuries and hollow-bore needles lends further support for the observed variation
in risk related to blood quantity (101).
 The use of source person viral load as a surrogate measure of viral titer
for assessing transmission risk has not yet been established. Plasma viral load (e.g.,
HIV RNA) reflects only the level of cell-free virus in the peripheral blood; latently
infected cells might transmit infection in the absence of viremia. Although a lower viral
load (e.g., <1,500 RNA copies/mL) or one that is below the limits of detection
probably  indicates  a  lower  titer  exposure,  it  does  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of
transmission.
 Some evidence exists regarding host defenses possibly influencing the risk for
HIV infection. A study of HIV-exposed but uninfected HCP demonstrated an
HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) response when peripheral blood mononuclear
cells
were stimulated in vitro with HIV-specific antigens
(102).  Similar  CTL  responses  have  been  observed  in  other  groups  who  experienced
repeated HIV exposure without
resulting infection (103--108). Among several possible explanations for this observation
is
that the host immune response sometimes might prevent establishment of HIV
infection after a percutaneous exposure; another is that the CTL response simply might
be
a marker for exposure. In a study of 20 HCP with occupational exposure to HIV,
a comparison was made of HCP treated with zidovudine (ZDV) PEP and those
not treated. The findings from this study suggest that ZDV blunted the HIV-specific
CTL response and that PEP might inhibit early HIV replication
(109).
 
Rationale for HIV PEP
 Considerations that influence the rationale and recommendations for PEP include
 the pathogenesis of HIV infection, particularly the time course of early infection;
 the biological plausibility that infection can be prevented or ameliorated by
using antiretroviral drugs;
 direct or indirect evidence of the efficacy of specific agents used for
prophylaxis; and
 the risk and benefit of PEP to exposed HCP.
The following discussion considers each of these concerns.
Role of Pathogenesis in Considering Antiretroviral
Prophylaxis.  Information  about  primary  HIV  infection  indicates  that  systemic  infection
does not occur
immediately, leaving a brief window of opportunity during which postexposure
antiretroviral intervention might modify or prevent viral replication. In a primate model
of
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection, infection of dendritic-like cells occurred
at
the site of inoculation during the first 24 hours following mucosal exposure to
cell-free virus. Over the subsequent 24--48 hours, migration of these cells to regional
lymph nodes occurred, and virus was detectable in the peripheral blood within 5 days
(110). Theoretically, initiation of antiretroviral PEP soon after exposure might prevent
or inhibit systemic infection by limiting the proliferation of virus in the initial target cells
or lymph nodes.
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Animal
Studies. Data from animal studies have been difficult to interpret, in part, because of
problems identifying an
animal model that is comparable to humans. In early studies, differences in
controlled  variables  (e.g.,  choice  of  viral  strain  [based  on  the  animal  model  used],
inoculum
size, route of inoculation, time of prophylaxis initiation, and drug regimen)
made extrapolation of the results to humans difficult. Recently, refinements in
methodology have facilitated more relevant studies; in particular, the viral inocula used
in
animal studies have been reduced to levels more analogous to human exposures
but sufficient to cause infection in control animals
(111--113).
 These
 studies
 provide
 encouraging
 evidence
 of
 postexposure
chemoprophylactic efficacy.
Studies among primates and in murine and feline animal models
have demonstrated that larger viral inocula decrease prophylactic efficacy
(114--117). In addition, delaying initiation, shortening the duration, or decreasing the
antiretroviral  dose  of  PEP,  individually  or  in  combination,  decreased  prophylactic
efficacy
(113,118--124).
 For
 example,
 when
 (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)
 adenine
(tenofovir)
was administered 48 hours before, 4 hours after, or 24 hours after intravenous
SIV inoculation to long-tailed macaques, a 4-week regimen prevented infection in
all treated animals (122). A subsequent study confirmed the efficacy of tenofovir
PEP when administered 24 hours after intravenous inoculation of a dose of SIV
that uniformly results in infection in untreated macaques. In the same study, protection
was incomplete if the tenofovir administration was delayed to 48 or 72 hours
postexposure or if the total duration of treatment was curtailed to 3 or 10 days
(123).
Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Human
Studies.  Little  information  exists  from  which  the  efficacy  of  PEP  in  humans  can  be
assessed. Seroconversion is
infrequent following an occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood; therefore, several
thousands of exposed HCP would need to enroll in a prospective trial to achieve the
statistical power necessary to directly demonstrate PEP efficacy
(125).
In the retrospective case-control study of HCP, after controlling for other risk
factors for HIV transmission, use of ZDV as PEP was associated with a reduction in the
risk
of HIV infection by approximately 81% (95% CI = 43%--94%)
(100). Although the results of this study suggest PEP efficacy, its limitations include the
small number of
cases studied and the use of cases and controls from different cohorts.
In a multicenter trial in which ZDV was administered to HIV-infected
pregnant women and their infants, the administration of ZDV during pregnancy, labor,
and delivery and to the infant reduced transmission by 67%
(126). Only part of the
protective effect of ZDV was explained by reduction of the HIV viral load in
the maternal blood, suggesting that ZDV prophylaxis, in part, involves a mechanism
other than the reduction of maternal viral burden
(127,128). Since 1998, studies have highlighted the importance of PEP for prevention of
perinatal HIV transmission.
In Africa, the use of ZDV in combination with lamivudine (3TC) decreased perinatal
HIV transmission by 50% when administered during pregnancy, labor, and for 1
week postpartum, and by 37% when started at the onset of labor and continued for 1
week postpartum (129). Studies in the United States and Uganda also have
demonstrated that rates of perinatal HIV transmission have been reduced with the use
of abbreviated PEP regimens started intrapartum or during the first 48--72 hours of
life (130--132).
The limitations of all of these studies with animals and humans must be
considered when reviewing evidence of PEP efficacy. The extent to which data from
animal  studies  can  be  extrapolated  to  humans  is  largely  unknown,  and  the  exposure
route
for mother-to-infant HIV transmission is not similar to occupational exposures;
therefore, these findings might not be directly applicable to PEP in HCP.
Reports of Failure of PEP. Failure of PEP to prevent HIV infection in HCP has
been reported in at least 21 instances
(78,133--139). In 16 of the cases, ZDV was used
alone as a single agent; in two cases, ZDV and didanosine (ddI) were used in
combination (133,138); and in three cases,
>3 drugs were used for PEP
(137--139).  Thirteen  of  the  source  persons  were  known  to  have  been  treated  with
antiretroviral therapy
before  the  exposure.  Antiretroviral  resistance  testing  of  the  virus  from  the  source
person
was performed in seven instances, and in four, the HIV infection transmitted was found
to have decreased sensitivity to ZDV and/or other drugs used for PEP. In addition
to possible exposure to an antiretroviral-resistant strain of HIV, other factors that
might have contributed to these apparent failures might include a high titer and/or
large inoculum exposure, delayed initiation and/or short duration of PEP, and possible
factors related to the host (e.g., cellular immune system responsiveness) and/or to the
source person's virus (e.g., presence of syncytia-forming strains)
(133). Details regarding the cases of PEP failure involving combinations of antiretroviral
agents are included in
this report (Table 1).
Antiretroviral Agents for PEP
Antiretroviral agents from three classes of drugs are available for the treatment
of HIV infection. These agents include the nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs), nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), and
protease inhibitors (PIs). Only antiretroviral agents that have been approved by FDA
for treatment of HIV infection are discussed in these guidelines.
Determining which agents and how many to use or when to alter a PEP regimen
is largely empiric. Guidelines for the treatment of HIV infection, a condition
usually involving a high total body burden of HIV, include recommendations for the use
of three drugs (140); however, the applicability of these recommendations to
PEP remains unknown. In HIV-infected patients, combination regimens have
proved  superior  to  monotherapy  regimens  in  reducing  HIV  viral  load,  reducing  the
incidence
of opportunistic infections and death, and delaying onset of drug resistance
(141,142).  A  combination  of  drugs  with  activity  at  different  stages  in  the  viral
replication cycle
(e.g., nucleoside analogues with a PI) theoretically could offer an additional preventive
effect in PEP, particularly for occupational exposures that pose an increased risk
of
transmission. Although the use of a three-drug regimen might be justified
for exposures that pose an increased risk of transmission, whether the potential
added  toxicity  of  a  third  drug  is  justified  for  lower-risk  exposures  is  uncertain.
Therefore,
the recommendations at the end of this document provide guidance for two- and
three-drug PEP regimens that are based on the level of risk for HIV transmission
represented by the exposure.
NRTI combinations that can be considered for PEP include ZDV and 3TC, 3TC
and stavudine (d4T), and ddI and d4T. In previous PHS guidelines, a combination of
ZDV and 3TC was considered the first choice for PEP regimens
(3).  Because  ZDV  and  3TC  are  available  in  a  combination  formulation  (Combivir™,
manufactured by
Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC), the use of this combination might be
more convenient for HCP. However, recent data suggest that mutations associated with
ZDV and 3TC resistance might be common in some areas
(143).  Thus,  individual  clinicians  might  prefer  other  NRTIs  or  combinations  based  on
local knowledge and experience
in treating HIV infection and disease.
The addition of a third drug for PEP following high-risk exposures is based
on demonstrated effectiveness in reducing viral burden in HIV-infected
persons. Previously, indinavir (IDV) or nelfinavir (NFV) were recommended as
first-choice agents for inclusion in an expanded PEP regimen
(5). Since the publication of the 1998 PEP guidelines, efavirenz
      (EFV), an NNRTI; abacavir (ABC), a potent NRTI;
and Kaletra™, a PI, have been approved by FDA. Although side effects might be
common with the NNRTIs, EFV might be considered for expanded PEP regimens,
especially when resistance to PIs in the source person's virus is known or suspected.
ABC
has been associated with dangerous hypersensitivity reactions but, with
careful monitoring, may be considered as a third drug for PEP. Kaletra, a combination
of lopinavir and ritonavir, is a potent HIV inhibitor that, with expert consultation, may
be considered in an expanded PEP regimen.
Toxicity and Drug Interactions of Antiretroviral
Agents.  When  administering  PEP,  an  important  goal  is  completion  of  a  4-week  PEP
regimen when PEP is
indicated.  Therefore,  the  toxicity  profile  of  antiretroviral  agents,  including  the
frequency,
severity, duration, and reversibility of side effects, is a relevant consideration. All of
the antiretroviral agents have been associated with side effects (Table 2).
However, studies of adverse events have been conducted primarily with persons who
have advanced disease (and longer treatment courses) and who therefore might not
reflect the experience in persons who are uninfected
(144).
Several primary side effects are associated with antiretroviral agents (Table
2). Side effects associated with many of the NRTIs are chiefly gastrointestinal
(e.g., nausea or diarrhea); however, ddI has been associated with cases of fatal and
nonfatal pancreatitis among HIV-infected patients treated for >4 weeks. The use of PIs
has
been associated with new onset diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, diabetic
      ketoacidosis, exacerbation of preexisting diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia
(145--147). Nephrolithiasis has been associated with IDV use; however, the incidence of
this potential complication might be limited by drinking at least 48 ounces (1.5 L) of
fluid per 24-hour period (e.g., six 8- ounce glasses of water throughout the day)
(148). NFV has been associated with the development of diarrhea; however, this side
effect
might respond to treatment with antimotility agents that can be prescribed for use,
if necessary, at the time the drug is recommended for PEP. The NNRTIs have
been
associated with severe skin reactions, including life-threatening cases of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Hepatotoxicity, including
fatal hepatic necrosis, has occurred in patients treated with nevirapine (NVP);
some episodes began during the first few weeks of therapy (FDA, unpublished data,
2000). EFV has been associated with central nervous system side effects, including
dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, and abnormal dreaming.
All of the approved antiretroviral agents might have potentially serious
drug interactions when used with certain other drugs (Appendix C). Careful evaluation
of concomitant medications used by an exposed person is required before PEP
is prescribed, and close monitoring for toxicity is also needed. Further information
about potential drug interactions can be found in the manufacturer's package insert.
Toxicity Associated with PEP. Information from the National
Surveillance System for Health Care Workers (NaSH) and the HIV Postexposure Registry
indicates that nearly 50% of HCP experience adverse symptoms (e.g., nausea,
malaise, headache, anorexia, and headache) while taking PEP and that approximately
33%
stop taking PEP because of adverse signs and symptoms
(6,7,10,11). Some studies have demonstrated that side effects and discontinuation of
PEP are more common
among HCP taking three-drug combination regimens for PEP compared with HCP taking
two-drug combination regimens (7,10). Although similar rates of side effects
were observed among persons who took PEP after sexual or drug use exposures to HIV
in the San Francisco Post-Exposure Prevention Project, 80% completed 4 weeks
of therapy (149). Participants in the San Francisco Project were followed at 1, 2, 4, 26,
and 52 weeks postexposure and received medication adherence counseling;
most participants took only two drugs for PEP.
Serious side effects, including nephrolithiasis, hepatitis, and pancytopenia
have been reported with the use of combination drugs for PEP
(6,7,150,151).  One  case  of  NVP-associated  fulminant  liver  failure  requiring  liver
transplantation and one case
of hypersensitivity syndrome have been reported in HCP taking NVP for HIV PEP
(152). Including these two cases, from March 1997 through September 2000, FDA
received reports of 22 cases of serious adverse events related to NVP taken for PEP
(153). These events included 12 cases of hepatotoxicity, 14 cases of skin reaction
(including one documented and two possible cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome), and
one
case of rhabdomyolysis; four cases involved both hepatotoxicty and skin reaction, and
one case involved both rhabdomyolysis and skin reaction.
Resistance to Antiretroviral Agents. Known or suspected resistance of the
source virus to antiretroviral agents, particularly to agents that might be included in a
PEP regimen, is a concern for persons making decisions about PEP. Resistance to
HIV infection occurs with all of the available antiretroviral agents, and
cross-resistance within drug classes is frequent
(154). Recent studies have demonstrated an emergence of drug-resistant HIV among
source persons for occupational
exposures (143,155). A study conducted at seven U.S. sites during 1998--1999 found
that
16 (39%) of 41 source persons whose virus was sequenced had primary
genetic mutations associated with resistance to RTIs, and 4 (10%) had primary
mutations associated with resistance to PIs
(143). In addition, occupational transmission
of resistant HIV strains, despite PEP with combination drug regimens, has been
reported (137,139). In one case, a hospital worker became infected after an HIV
exposure despite a PEP regimen that included ddI, d4T, and NVP
(139). The transmitted HIV
contained two primary genetic mutations associated with resistance to NNRTIs
(the source person was taking EFV at the time of the exposure). Despite recent studies
and  case  reports,  the  relevance  of  exposure  to  a  resistant  virus  is  still  not  well
understood.
Empiric decisions about the presence of antiretroviral drug resistance are
often difficult to make because patients generally take more than one antiretroviral
agent. Resistance should be suspected in source persons when they are experiencing
clinical progression of disease or a persistently increasing viral load, and/or decline in
CD4
T-cell count, despite therapy or a lack of virologic response to therapy.
However, resistance testing of the source virus at the time of an exposure is not
practical because the results will not be available in time to influence the choice of the
initial
PEP regimen. Furthermore, in this situation, whether modification of the PEP regimen
is necessary or will influence the outcome of an occupational exposure is unknown.
No data exist to suggest that modification of a PEP regimen after receiving results
from resistance testing (usually a minimum of 1--2 weeks) improves efficacy of PEP.
Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy. Data are limited on the
potential effects of antiretroviral drugs on the developing fetus or neonate
(156). Carcinogenicity and/or mutagenicity is evident in several in vitro screening tests
for ZDV and all other FDA-licensed NRTIs. The relevance of animal data to humans
is unknown; however, because teratogenic effects were observed in primates at
drug exposures similar to those representing human therapeutic exposure, the use of
EFV should be avoided in pregnant women
(140). IDV is associated with infrequent
side effects in adults (i.e., hyperbilirubinemia and renal stones) that could be
problematic  for  a  newborn.  Because  the  half-life  of  IDV  in  adults  is  short,  these
concerns might
be relevant only if the drug is administered shortly before delivery.
In a recent study in France of perinatal HIV transmission, two cases of
progressive neurologic disease and death were reported in uninfected infants exposed
to ZDV
and 3TC (157). Laboratory studies of these children suggested mitochondrial
dysfunction.  In  a  careful  review  of  deaths  in  children  followed  in  U.S.  perinatal  HIV
cohorts,
no deaths attributable to mitochondrial disease have been found
(158).
Recent reports of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women
treated throughout gestation with a combination of d4T and ddI have prompted
warnings about use of these drugs during pregnancy
(159).  Although  the  case-patients  were  HIV-infected  women  taking  the  drugs  for  >4
weeks, pregnant women and
their providers should be advised to consider d4T and ddI only when the benefits of
their use outweigh the risks.
PEP Use in Hospitals in the United
States.  Analysis  of  data  from  NaSH  provides  information  on  the  use  of  PEP  following
occupational exposures in 47 hospitals in
the United States. A total of 11,784 exposures to blood and body fluids was reported
from June 1996 through November 2000 (CDC, unpublished data, 2001). For all
exposures with known sources, 6% were to HIV-positive sources, 74% to HIV-negative
sources, and 20% to sources with an unknown HIV status. Sixty-three percent of HCP
exposed to a known HIV-positive source started PEP, and 54% of HCP took it for at least
20
days, whereas 14% of HCP exposed to a source person subsequently found to be
HIV-negative initiated PEP, and 3% of those took it for at least 20 days.
Information  recorded  about  HIV  exposures  in  NaSH  indicates  that  46%  of  exposures
involving
an HIV-positive source warranted only a two-drug PEP regimen (i.e., the exposure was
to mucous membranes or skin or was a superficial percutaneous injury and the
source person did not have end-stage AIDS or acute HIV illness); however, 53% of
these
exposed HCP took >3 drugs (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). Similarly, the
National Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline (PEPline) reported that PEPline
staff recommended stopping or not starting PEP for approximately one half of the HCP
who consulted them about exposures (D. Bangsberg, San Francisco General
Hospital, unpublished data, September 1999). The observation that some HCP exposed
to
HIV-negative source persons take PEP from several days to weeks following
their exposures suggests that strategies be employed such as the use of a rapid
HIV antibody assay, which could minimize exposure to unnecessary PEP
(11). A recent study demonstrated that use of a rapid HIV test for evaluation of source
persons
after occupational exposures not only resulted in decreased use of PEP, but also was
cost-effective compared with use of the standard enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test
for source persons subsequently found to be HIV-negative
(160).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HCP POTENTIALLY EXPOSED TO HBV,
HCV, or HIV
Exposure prevention remains the primary strategy for reducing
occupational  bloodborne  pathogen  infections;  however,  occupational  exposures  will
continue
to occur. Health-care organizations should make available to their personnel a
system that includes written protocols for prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling,
treatment,  and  follow-up  of  occupational  exposures  that  might  place  HCP  at  risk  for
acquiring
a bloodborne infection. HCP should be educated concerning the risk for and
prevention  of  bloodborne  infections,  including  the  need  to  be  vaccinated  against
hepatitis
B (17,21,161--163). Employers are required to establish exposure-control plans
that include postexposure follow-up for their employees and to comply with
incident reporting requirements mandated by the 1992 OSHA bloodborne pathogen
standard  (2).  Access  to  clinicians  who  can  provide  postexposure  care  should  be
available
during all working hours, including nights and weekends. HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine,
and antiretroviral agents for HIV PEP should be available for timely administration
(i.e., either by providing access on-site or by creating linkages with other facilities
or providers to make them available off-site). Persons responsible for
providing postexposure management should be familiar with evaluation and treatment
protocols  and  the  facility's  plans  for  accessing  HBIG,  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  and
antiretroviral
drugs for HIV PEP.
HCP should be educated to report occupational exposures immediately after
they occur, particularly because HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine, and HIV PEP are most likely
to
be effective if administered as soon after the exposure as possible. HCP who are at
risk for occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens should be familiarized with
the principles of postexposure management as part of job orientation and ongoing
job training.
Hepatitis B Vaccination
Any person who performs tasks involving contact with blood,
blood-contaminated  body  fluids,  other  body  fluids,  or  sharps  should  be  vaccinated
against hepatitis B
(2,21). Prevaccination serologic screening for previous infection is not indicated for
persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk, unless the hospital or
health-care organization considers screening cost-effective.
Hepatitis B vaccine should always be administered by the intramuscular route
in the deltoid muscle with a needle 1--1.5 inches long. Hepatitis B vaccine can
be administered at the same time as other vaccines with no interference with
antibody response to the other vaccines
(164). If the vaccination series is interrupted after
the first dose, the second dose should be administered as soon as possible. The
second and third doses should be separated by an interval of at least 2 months. If only
the third dose is delayed, it should be administered when convenient. HCP who
have contact with patients or blood and are at ongoing risk for percutaneous injuries
should be tested 1--2 months after completion of the 3dose vaccination series for
      anti-HBs (21). Persons who do not respond to the primary vaccine series (i.e.,
      anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL)  should  complete  a  second  3-dose  vaccine  series  or  be
evaluated to determine
if they are HBsAg-positive. Revaccinated persons should be retested at the
completion  of  the  second  vaccine  series.  Persons  who  do  not  respond  to  an  initial
3-dose
vaccine series have a 30%--50% chance of responding to a second 3-dose series
(165). Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled regarding how
to prevent HBV transmission to others and regarding the need for medical
evaluation (12,163,166). Nonresponders to vaccination who are
      HBsAg-negative should
be considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled
regarding  precautions  to  prevent  HBV  infection  and  the  need  to  obtain  HBIG
prophylaxis for
any known or probable parenteral exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. Booster doses
of hepatitis B vaccine are not necessary, and periodic serologic testing to
monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series is not
recommended.  Any  blood  or  body  fluid  exposure  sustained  by  an  unvaccinated,
susceptible
person should lead to the initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
Treatment of an Exposure Site
Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood or body fluids should
be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes should be flushed with water.
No evidence exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by
squeezing  the  wound  further  reduces  the  risk  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission;
however,
the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g.,
bleach)  or  the  injection  of  antiseptics  or  disinfectants  into  the  wound  is  not
recommended.
Exposure Report
If an occupational exposure occurs, the circumstances and
postexposure  management  should  be  recorded  in  the  exposed  person's  confidential
medical
record (usually on a form the facility designates for this purpose) (Box 1). In
addition, employers should follow all federal (including OSHA) and state requirements
for recording and reporting occupational injuries and exposures.
Evaluation of the Exposure and the Exposure Source
Evaluation of the Exposure
The exposure should be evaluated for the potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and
HIV based on the type of body substance involved and the route and severity of
the exposure (Box 2). Blood, fluid containing visible blood, or other potentially
infectious fluid (including semen; vaginal secretions; and cerebrospinal,
      synovial,
pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids) or tissue can be infectious for
bloodborne viruses. Exposures to these fluids or tissue through a percutaneous injury
(i.e., needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through contact with
a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for bloodborne virus
transmission and require further evaluation. For HCV and HIV, exposure to a blood-filled
hollow needle or visibly bloody device suggests a higher risk exposure than exposure to
a needle that was most likely used for giving an injection. In addition, any direct
contact (i.e, personal protective equipment either was not present or was ineffective
in protecting skin or mucous membranes) with concentrated virus in a
research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that requires
clinical evaluation.
For skin exposure, follow-up is indicated only if it involves exposure to a body
fluid previously listed and evidence exists of compromised skin integrity (e.g.,
dermatitis,  abrasion,  or  open  wound).  In  the  clinical  evaluation  for  human  bites,
possible
exposure  of  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  must  be
considered. If
a bite results in blood exposure to either person involved, postexposure
follow-up should be provided.
Evaluation of the Exposure Source
The person whose blood or body fluid is the source of an occupational
exposure  should  be  evaluated  for  HBV,  HCV,  and  HIV  infection  (Box  3).  Information
available
in the medical record at the time of exposure (e.g., laboratory test results,
admitting  diagnosis,  or  previous  medical  history)  or  from  the  source  person,  might
confirm
or exclude bloodborne virus infection.
If the HBV, HCV, and/or HIV infection status of the source is unknown, the
source person should be informed of the incident and tested for serologic evidence
of bloodborne virus infection. Procedures should be followed for testing source
persons, including obtaining informed consent, in accordance with applicable state and
local laws. Any persons determined to be infected with HBV, HCV, or HIV should be
referred for appropriate counseling and treatment. Confidentiality of the source person
should be maintained at all times.
Testing to determine the HBV, HCV, and HIV infection status of an exposure
source should be performed as soon as possible. Hospitals, clinics and other sites
that manage exposed HCP should consult their laboratories regarding the
most appropriate test to use to expedite obtaining these results. An FDA-approved
rapid HIV-antibody test kit should be considered for use in this situation, particularly if
testing by EIA cannot be completed within 24--48 hours. Repeatedly reactive results by
EIA
or rapid HIV-antibody tests are considered to be highly suggestive of infection, whereas
a negative result is an excellent indicator of the absence of HIV antibody. Confirmation
of a reactive result by Western blot or immunofluorescent antibody is not necessary
to make initial decisions about postexposure management but should be done
to complete the testing process and before informing the source person.
Repeatedly reactive results by EIA for anti-HCV should be confirmed by a supplemental
test
(i.e., recombinant immunoblot assay [RIBA™] or HCV PCR). Direct virus assays (e.g.,
HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA or HCV RNA) for routine HIV or HCV screening
of source persons are not recommended.
If the exposure source is unknown or cannot be tested, information about
where and under what circumstances the exposure occurred should be
assessed
epidemiologically for the likelihood of transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
Certain situations as well as the type of exposure might suggest an increased or
decreased risk; an important consideration is the prevalence of HBV, HCV, or HIV in the
population group (i.e., institution or community) from which the contaminated source
material
is derived. For example, an exposure that occurs in a geographic area where
injection-drug  use  is  prevalent  or  involves  a  needle  discarded  in  a  drug-treatment
facility
would be considered epidemiologically to have a higher risk for transmission than
an exposure that occurs in a nursing home for the elderly.
Testing of needles or other sharp instruments implicated in an
exposure, regardless of whether the source is known or unknown, is not recommended.
The reliability and interpretation of findings in such circumstances are unknown,
and testing might be hazardous to persons handling the sharp instrument.
Examples of information to consider when evaluating an exposure source
for possible HBV, HCV, or HIV infection include laboratory information (e.g., previous
HBV,  HCV,  or  HIV  test  results  or  results  of  immunologic  testing  [e.g.,  CD4+  T-cell
count])
or liver enzymes (e.g., ALT), clinical symptoms (e.g., acute syndrome suggestive
of primary HIV infection or undiagnosed immunodeficiency disease), and history
of recent (i.e., within 3 months) possible HBV, HCV, or HIV exposures (e.g.,
injection-drug  use  or  sexual  contact  with  a  known  positive  partner).  Health-care
providers should
be aware of local and state laws governing the collection and release of HIV
serostatus information on a source person, following an occupational exposure.
If the source person is known to have HIV infection, available information about
this person's stage of infection (i.e., asymptomatic, symptomatic, or AIDS), CD4+
T-cell count, results of viral load testing, current and previous antiretroviral therapy,
and results of any genotypic or phenotypic viral resistance testing should be gathered
for consideration in choosing an appropriate PEP regimen. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of exposed HCP should be considered within 72 hours
postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or source person
becomes available.
If the source person is HIV seronegative and has no clinical evidence of AIDS
or symptoms of HIV infection, no further testing of the person for HIV infection
is indicated. The likelihood of the source person being in the "window period" of
HIV  infection  in  the  absence  of  symptoms  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome  is  extremely
small.
Management of Exposures to HBV
For percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood, several factors must
be considered when making a decision to provide prophylaxis, including the HBsAg
status of the source and the hepatitis B vaccination and vaccine-response status of
the exposed person. Such exposures usually involve persons for whom hepatitis
B vaccination is recommended. Any blood or body fluid exposure to an
unvaccinated person should lead to initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
The hepatitis B vaccination status and the vaccine-response status (if known) of
the exposed person should be reviewed. A summary of prophylaxis recommendations
for percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood according to the HBsAg status of
the exposure source and the vaccination and vaccine-response status of the
exposed person is included in this report (Table 3).
When HBIG is indicated, it should be administered as soon as possible
after exposure (preferably within 24 hours). The effectiveness of HBIG when
administered  >7  days  after  exposure  is  unknown.  When  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is
indicated, it
should also be administered as soon as possible (preferably within 24 hours) and can
be administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate site (vaccine should always
be administered in the deltoid muscle).
For exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated but have
not completed the vaccination series, vaccination should be completed as scheduled,
and HBIG should be added as indicated (Table 3). Persons exposed to
      HBsAg-positive
blood or body fluids who are known not to have responded to a primary vaccine
series should receive a single dose of HBIG and reinitiate the hepatitis B vaccine series
with the first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after
exposure. Alternatively, they should receive two doses of HBIG, one dose as soon as
possible  after  exposure,  and  the  second  dose  1  month  later.  The  option  of
administering
one dose of HBIG and reinitiating the vaccine series is preferred for nonresponders
who did not complete a second 3-dose vaccine series. For persons who
previously completed a second vaccine series but failed to respond, two doses of HBIG
are preferred.
Management of Exposures to HCV
Individual institutions should establish policies and procedures for testing HCP
for HCV after percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood and ensure that all
personnel
are familiar with these policies and procedures. The following are
recommendations for follow-up of occupational HCV exposures:
 For the source, perform testing for anti-HCV.
 For the person exposed to an HCV-positive source
    --- perform baseline testing for anti-HCV and ALT activity; and
   --- perform follow-up testing (e.g., at 4--6 months) for anti-HCV and ALT
activity (if earlier diagnosis of HCV infection is desired, testing for HCV RNA may
be performed at 4--6 weeks).
 Confirm all anti-HCV results reported positive by enzyme immunoassay
using  supplemental  anti-HCV  testing  (e.g.,  recombinant  immunoblot  assay  [RIBA™])
(13).
Health-care professionals who provide care to persons exposed to HCV in
the occupational setting should be knowledgeable regarding the risk for HCV infection
and appropriate counseling, testing, and medical follow-up.
IG and antiviral agents are not recommended for PEP after exposure to
HCV-positive blood. In addition, no guidelines exist for administration of therapy during
the acute phase of HCV infection. However, limited data indicate that antiviral
therapy might be beneficial when started early in the course of HCV infection. When
HCV infection is identified early, the person should be referred for medical management
to a specialist knowledgeable in this area.
Counseling for HCP Exposed to Viral Hepatitis
HCP exposed to HBV- or HCV-infected blood do not need to take any
special precautions to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up period
(12,13); however, they should refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or
semen. The exposed person does not need to modify sexual practices or refrain
from becoming pregnant. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she does not need
to discontinue.
No modifications to an exposed person's patient-care responsibilities
are necessary to prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to
      HBV-
or HCV-positive blood. If an exposed person becomes acutely infected with HBV,
the person should be evaluated according to published recommendations for infected
HCP (165). No recommendations exist regarding restricting the professional activities
of HCP with HCV infection (13). As recommended for all
      HCP, those who are
chronically infected with HBV or HCV should follow all recommended infection-control
practices, including standard precautions and appropriate use of hand washing,
protective barriers, and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp
instruments (162).
Management of Exposures to HIV
Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing of Exposed HCP
HCP exposed to HIV should be evaluated within hours (rather than days) after
their  exposure  and  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  baseline  (i.e.,  to  establish  infection
status
at
the time of exposure). If the source person is seronegative for HIV, baseline testing
or further follow-up of the exposed person normally is not necessary. Serologic
testing should be made available to all HCP who are concerned that they might have
been occupationally infected with HIV. For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the
evaluation also should include information about medications the exposed person might
be
taking and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances (i.e.,
pregnancy,  breast  feeding,  or  renal  or  hepatic  disease)  that  might  influence  drug
selection.
PEP for HIV
The following recommendations (Table 4 and Table 5) apply to situations when a
person has been exposed to a source person with HIV infection or when information
suggests the likelihood that the source person is HIV-infected. These recommendations
are based on the risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and on limited
data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most occupational HIV exposures
do not result in the transmission of HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully
considered when prescribing PEP. To assist with the initial management of an HIV
exposure, health-care facilities should have drugs for an initial PEP regimen selected
and available for use. When possible, these recommendations should be implemented
in consultation with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral therapy and
HIV transmission (Box 4).
Timing and Duration of PEP. PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The
interval within which PEP should be initiated for optimal efficacy is not known. Animal
studies have demonstrated the importance of starting PEP soon after an
exposure  (111,112,118).  If  questions  exist  about  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use  or
whether
to use a basic or expanded regimen, starting the basic regimen immediately rather
than delaying PEP administration is probably better. Although animal studies suggest
that PEP probably is substantially less effective when started more than 24--36
hours  postexposure  (112,119,122),  the  interval  after  which  no  benefit  is  gained  from
PEP
for humans is undefined. Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be
started  even  when  the  interval  since  exposure  exceeds  36  hours.  Initiating  therapy
after
a longer interval (e.g., 1 week) might be considered for exposures that represent
an increased risk for transmission. The optimal duration of PEP is unknown. Because
4 weeks of ZDV appeared protective in occupational and animal studies
(100,123), PEP probably should be administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
Use of PEP When HIV Infection Status of Source Person is
Unknown.  If  the  source  person's  HIV  infection  status  is  unknown  at  the  time  of
exposure, use of PEP should
be decided on a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in the source (Table 4 and
Table 5).
If these considerations suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of
the source person is pending, initiating a two-drug PEP regimen until laboratory
results  have  been  obtained  and  later  modifying  or  discontinuing  the  regimen
accordingly
is reasonable. The following are recommendations regarding HIV
postexposure prophylaxis:
 If indicated, start PEP as soon as possible after an exposure.
 Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 Administer PEP for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 If a source person is determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should be discontinued.
PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 The following discussion considers each of these concerns.
 Role of Pathogenesis in Considering Antiretroviral
Prophylaxis.  Information  about  primary  HIV  infection  indicates  that  systemic  infection
does not occur
immediately, leaving a brief window of opportunity during which postexposure
antiretroviral intervention might modify or prevent viral replication. In a primate model
of
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection, infection of dendritic-like cells occurred
at
the site of inoculation during the first 24 hours following mucosal exposure to
cell-free virus. Over the subsequent 24--48 hours, migration of these cells to regional
lymph nodes occurred, and virus was detectable in the peripheral blood within 5 days
(110). Theoretically, initiation of antiretroviral PEP soon after exposure might prevent
or inhibit systemic infection by limiting the proliferation of virus in the initial target cells
or lymph nodes.
 Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Animal
Studies. Data from animal studies have been difficult to interpret, in part, because of
problems identifying an
animal model that is comparable to humans. In early studies, differences in
controlled  variables  (e.g.,  choice  of  viral  strain  [based  on  the  animal  model  used],
inoculum
size, route of inoculation, time of prophylaxis initiation, and drug regimen)
made extrapolation of the results to humans difficult. Recently, refinements in
methodology have facilitated more relevant studies; in particular, the viral inocula used
in
animal studies have been reduced to levels more analogous to human exposures
but sufficient to cause infection in control animals
(111--113).
 These
 studies
 provide
 encouraging
 evidence
 of
 postexposure
chemoprophylactic efficacy.
 Studies among primates and in murine and feline animal models
have demonstrated that larger viral inocula decrease prophylactic efficacy
(114--117). In addition, delaying initiation, shortening the duration, or decreasing the
antiretroviral  dose  of  PEP,  individually  or  in  combination,  decreased  prophylactic
efficacy
(113,118--124).
 For
 example,
 when
 (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)
 adenine
(tenofovir)
was administered 48 hours before, 4 hours after, or 24 hours after intravenous
SIV inoculation to long-tailed macaques, a 4-week regimen prevented infection in
all treated animals (122). A subsequent study confirmed the efficacy of tenofovir
PEP when administered 24 hours after intravenous inoculation of a dose of SIV
that uniformly results in infection in untreated macaques. In the same study, protection
was incomplete if the tenofovir administration was delayed to 48 or 72 hours
postexposure or if the total duration of treatment was curtailed to 3 or 10 days
(123).
 Efficacy of Antiretrovirals for PEP in Human
Studies.  Little  information  exists  from  which  the  efficacy  of  PEP  in  humans  can  be
assessed. Seroconversion is
infrequent following an occupational exposure to HIV-infected blood; therefore, several
thousands of exposed HCP would need to enroll in a prospective trial to achieve the
statistical power necessary to directly demonstrate PEP efficacy
(125).
 In the retrospective case-control study of HCP, after controlling for other risk
factors for HIV transmission, use of ZDV as PEP was associated with a reduction in the
risk
of HIV infection by approximately 81% (95% CI = 43%--94%)
(100). Although the results of this study suggest PEP efficacy, its limitations include the
small number of
cases studied and the use of cases and controls from different cohorts.
 In a multicenter trial in which ZDV was administered to HIV-infected
pregnant women and their infants, the administration of ZDV during pregnancy, labor,
and delivery and to the infant reduced transmission by 67%
(126). Only part of the
protective effect of ZDV was explained by reduction of the HIV viral load in
the maternal blood, suggesting that ZDV prophylaxis, in part, involves a mechanism
other than the reduction of maternal viral burden
(127,128). Since 1998, studies have highlighted the importance of PEP for prevention of
perinatal HIV transmission.
In Africa, the use of ZDV in combination with lamivudine (3TC) decreased perinatal
HIV transmission by 50% when administered during pregnancy, labor, and for 1
week postpartum, and by 37% when started at the onset of labor and continued for 1
week postpartum (129). Studies in the United States and Uganda also have
demonstrated that rates of perinatal HIV transmission have been reduced with the use
of abbreviated PEP regimens started intrapartum or during the first 48--72 hours of
life (130--132).
 The limitations of all of these studies with animals and humans must be
considered when reviewing evidence of PEP efficacy. The extent to which data from
animal  studies  can  be  extrapolated  to  humans  is  largely  unknown,  and  the  exposure
route
for mother-to-infant HIV transmission is not similar to occupational exposures;
therefore, these findings might not be directly applicable to PEP in HCP.
 Reports of Failure of PEP. Failure of PEP to prevent HIV infection in HCP has
been reported in at least 21 instances
(78,133--139). In 16 of the cases, ZDV was used
alone as a single agent; in two cases, ZDV and didanosine (ddI) were used in
combination (133,138); and in three cases,
>3 drugs were used for PEP
(137--139).  Thirteen  of  the  source  persons  were  known  to  have  been  treated  with
antiretroviral therapy
before  the  exposure.  Antiretroviral  resistance  testing  of  the  virus  from  the  source
person
was performed in seven instances, and in four, the HIV infection transmitted was found
to have decreased sensitivity to ZDV and/or other drugs used for PEP. In addition
to possible exposure to an antiretroviral-resistant strain of HIV, other factors that
might have contributed to these apparent failures might include a high titer and/or
large inoculum exposure, delayed initiation and/or short duration of PEP, and possible
factors related to the host (e.g., cellular immune system responsiveness) and/or to the
source person's virus (e.g., presence of syncytia-forming strains)
(133). Details regarding the cases of PEP failure involving combinations of antiretroviral
agents are included in
this report (Table 1).
 
Antiretroviral Agents for PEP
 Antiretroviral agents from three classes of drugs are available for the treatment
of HIV infection. These agents include the nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTIs), nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), and
protease inhibitors (PIs). Only antiretroviral agents that have been approved by FDA
for treatment of HIV infection are discussed in these guidelines.
 Determining which agents and how many to use or when to alter a PEP regimen
is largely empiric. Guidelines for the treatment of HIV infection, a condition
usually involving a high total body burden of HIV, include recommendations for the use
of three drugs (140); however, the applicability of these recommendations to
PEP remains unknown. In HIV-infected patients, combination regimens have
proved  superior  to  monotherapy  regimens  in  reducing  HIV  viral  load,  reducing  the
incidence
of opportunistic infections and death, and delaying onset of drug resistance
(141,142).  A  combination  of  drugs  with  activity  at  different  stages  in  the  viral
replication cycle
(e.g., nucleoside analogues with a PI) theoretically could offer an additional preventive
effect in PEP, particularly for occupational exposures that pose an increased risk
of
transmission. Although the use of a three-drug regimen might be justified
for exposures that pose an increased risk of transmission, whether the potential
added  toxicity  of  a  third  drug  is  justified  for  lower-risk  exposures  is  uncertain.
Therefore,
the recommendations at the end of this document provide guidance for two- and
three-drug PEP regimens that are based on the level of risk for HIV transmission
represented by the exposure.
 NRTI combinations that can be considered for PEP include ZDV and 3TC, 3TC
and stavudine (d4T), and ddI and d4T. In previous PHS guidelines, a combination of
ZDV and 3TC was considered the first choice for PEP regimens
(3).  Because  ZDV  and  3TC  are  available  in  a  combination  formulation  (Combivir™,
manufactured by
Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC), the use of this combination might be
more convenient for HCP. However, recent data suggest that mutations associated with
ZDV and 3TC resistance might be common in some areas
(143).  Thus,  individual  clinicians  might  prefer  other  NRTIs  or  combinations  based  on
local knowledge and experience
in treating HIV infection and disease.
 The addition of a third drug for PEP following high-risk exposures is based
on demonstrated effectiveness in reducing viral burden in HIV-infected
persons. Previously, indinavir (IDV) or nelfinavir (NFV) were recommended as
first-choice agents for inclusion in an expanded PEP regimen
(5). Since the publication of the 1998 PEP guidelines, efavirenz
      (EFV), an NNRTI; abacavir (ABC), a potent NRTI;
and Kaletra™, a PI, have been approved by FDA. Although side effects might be
common with the NNRTIs, EFV might be considered for expanded PEP regimens,
especially when resistance to PIs in the source person's virus is known or suspected.
ABC
has been associated with dangerous hypersensitivity reactions but, with
careful monitoring, may be considered as a third drug for PEP. Kaletra, a combination
of lopinavir and ritonavir, is a potent HIV inhibitor that, with expert consultation, may
be considered in an expanded PEP regimen.
 Toxicity and Drug Interactions of Antiretroviral
Agents.  When  administering  PEP,  an  important  goal  is  completion  of  a  4-week  PEP
regimen when PEP is
indicated.  Therefore,  the  toxicity  profile  of  antiretroviral  agents,  including  the
frequency,
severity, duration, and reversibility of side effects, is a relevant consideration. All of
the antiretroviral agents have been associated with side effects (Table 2).
However, studies of adverse events have been conducted primarily with persons who
have advanced disease (and longer treatment courses) and who therefore might not
reflect the experience in persons who are uninfected
(144).
 Several primary side effects are associated with antiretroviral agents (Table
2). Side effects associated with many of the NRTIs are chiefly gastrointestinal
(e.g., nausea or diarrhea); however, ddI has been associated with cases of fatal and
nonfatal pancreatitis among HIV-infected patients treated for >4 weeks. The use of PIs
has
been associated with new onset diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia, diabetic
      ketoacidosis, exacerbation of preexisting diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia
(145--147). Nephrolithiasis has been associated with IDV use; however, the incidence of
this potential complication might be limited by drinking at least 48 ounces (1.5 L) of
fluid per 24-hour period (e.g., six 8- ounce glasses of water throughout the day)
(148). NFV has been associated with the development of diarrhea; however, this side
effect
might respond to treatment with antimotility agents that can be prescribed for use,
if necessary, at the time the drug is recommended for PEP. The NNRTIs have
been
associated with severe skin reactions, including life-threatening cases of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Hepatotoxicity, including
fatal hepatic necrosis, has occurred in patients treated with nevirapine (NVP);
some episodes began during the first few weeks of therapy (FDA, unpublished data,
2000). EFV has been associated with central nervous system side effects, including
dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, and abnormal dreaming.
 All of the approved antiretroviral agents might have potentially serious
drug interactions when used with certain other drugs (Appendix C). Careful evaluation
of concomitant medications used by an exposed person is required before PEP
is prescribed, and close monitoring for toxicity is also needed. Further information
about potential drug interactions can be found in the manufacturer's package insert.
 Toxicity Associated with PEP. Information from the National
Surveillance System for Health Care Workers (NaSH) and the HIV Postexposure Registry
indicates that nearly 50% of HCP experience adverse symptoms (e.g., nausea,
malaise, headache, anorexia, and headache) while taking PEP and that approximately
33%
stop taking PEP because of adverse signs and symptoms
(6,7,10,11). Some studies have demonstrated that side effects and discontinuation of
PEP are more common
among HCP taking three-drug combination regimens for PEP compared with HCP taking
two-drug combination regimens (7,10). Although similar rates of side effects
were observed among persons who took PEP after sexual or drug use exposures to HIV
in the San Francisco Post-Exposure Prevention Project, 80% completed 4 weeks
of therapy (149). Participants in the San Francisco Project were followed at 1, 2, 4, 26,
and 52 weeks postexposure and received medication adherence counseling;
most participants took only two drugs for PEP.
 Serious side effects, including nephrolithiasis, hepatitis, and pancytopenia
have been reported with the use of combination drugs for PEP
(6,7,150,151).  One  case  of  NVP-associated  fulminant  liver  failure  requiring  liver
transplantation and one case
of hypersensitivity syndrome have been reported in HCP taking NVP for HIV PEP
(152). Including these two cases, from March 1997 through September 2000, FDA
received reports of 22 cases of serious adverse events related to NVP taken for PEP
(153). These events included 12 cases of hepatotoxicity, 14 cases of skin reaction
(including one documented and two possible cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome), and
one
case of rhabdomyolysis; four cases involved both hepatotoxicty and skin reaction, and
one case involved both rhabdomyolysis and skin reaction.
 Resistance to Antiretroviral Agents. Known or suspected resistance of the
source virus to antiretroviral agents, particularly to agents that might be included in a
PEP regimen, is a concern for persons making decisions about PEP. Resistance to
HIV infection occurs with all of the available antiretroviral agents, and
cross-resistance within drug classes is frequent
(154). Recent studies have demonstrated an emergence of drug-resistant HIV among
source persons for occupational
exposures (143,155). A study conducted at seven U.S. sites during 1998--1999 found
that
16 (39%) of 41 source persons whose virus was sequenced had primary
genetic mutations associated with resistance to RTIs, and 4 (10%) had primary
mutations associated with resistance to PIs
(143). In addition, occupational transmission
of resistant HIV strains, despite PEP with combination drug regimens, has been
reported (137,139). In one case, a hospital worker became infected after an HIV
exposure despite a PEP regimen that included ddI, d4T, and NVP
(139). The transmitted HIV
contained two primary genetic mutations associated with resistance to NNRTIs
(the source person was taking EFV at the time of the exposure). Despite recent studies
and  case  reports,  the  relevance  of  exposure  to  a  resistant  virus  is  still  not  well
understood.
 Empiric decisions about the presence of antiretroviral drug resistance are
often difficult to make because patients generally take more than one antiretroviral
agent. Resistance should be suspected in source persons when they are experiencing
clinical progression of disease or a persistently increasing viral load, and/or decline in
CD4
T-cell count, despite therapy or a lack of virologic response to therapy.
However, resistance testing of the source virus at the time of an exposure is not
practical because the results will not be available in time to influence the choice of the
initial
PEP regimen. Furthermore, in this situation, whether modification of the PEP regimen
is necessary or will influence the outcome of an occupational exposure is unknown.
No data exist to suggest that modification of a PEP regimen after receiving results
from resistance testing (usually a minimum of 1--2 weeks) improves efficacy of PEP.
 Antiretroviral Drugs During Pregnancy. Data are limited on the
potential effects of antiretroviral drugs on the developing fetus or neonate
(156). Carcinogenicity and/or mutagenicity is evident in several in vitro screening tests
for ZDV and all other FDA-licensed NRTIs. The relevance of animal data to humans
is unknown; however, because teratogenic effects were observed in primates at
drug exposures similar to those representing human therapeutic exposure, the use of
EFV should be avoided in pregnant women
(140). IDV is associated with infrequent
side effects in adults (i.e., hyperbilirubinemia and renal stones) that could be
problematic  for  a  newborn.  Because  the  half-life  of  IDV  in  adults  is  short,  these
concerns might
be relevant only if the drug is administered shortly before delivery.
 In a recent study in France of perinatal HIV transmission, two cases of
progressive neurologic disease and death were reported in uninfected infants exposed
to ZDV
and 3TC (157). Laboratory studies of these children suggested mitochondrial
dysfunction.  In  a  careful  review  of  deaths  in  children  followed  in  U.S.  perinatal  HIV
cohorts,
no deaths attributable to mitochondrial disease have been found
(158).
 Recent reports of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women
treated throughout gestation with a combination of d4T and ddI have prompted
warnings about use of these drugs during pregnancy
(159).  Although  the  case-patients  were  HIV-infected  women  taking  the  drugs  for  >4
weeks, pregnant women and
their providers should be advised to consider d4T and ddI only when the benefits of
their use outweigh the risks.
 PEP Use in Hospitals in the United
States.  Analysis  of  data  from  NaSH  provides  information  on  the  use  of  PEP  following
occupational exposures in 47 hospitals in
the United States. A total of 11,784 exposures to blood and body fluids was reported
from June 1996 through November 2000 (CDC, unpublished data, 2001). For all
exposures with known sources, 6% were to HIV-positive sources, 74% to HIV-negative
sources, and 20% to sources with an unknown HIV status. Sixty-three percent of HCP
exposed to a known HIV-positive source started PEP, and 54% of HCP took it for at least
20
days, whereas 14% of HCP exposed to a source person subsequently found to be
HIV-negative initiated PEP, and 3% of those took it for at least 20 days.
Information  recorded  about  HIV  exposures  in  NaSH  indicates  that  46%  of  exposures
involving
an HIV-positive source warranted only a two-drug PEP regimen (i.e., the exposure was
to mucous membranes or skin or was a superficial percutaneous injury and the
source person did not have end-stage AIDS or acute HIV illness); however, 53% of
these
exposed HCP took >3 drugs (CDC, unpublished data, 2000). Similarly, the
National Clinicians' Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline (PEPline) reported that PEPline
staff recommended stopping or not starting PEP for approximately one half of the HCP
who consulted them about exposures (D. Bangsberg, San Francisco General
Hospital, unpublished data, September 1999). The observation that some HCP exposed
to
HIV-negative source persons take PEP from several days to weeks following
their exposures suggests that strategies be employed such as the use of a rapid
HIV antibody assay, which could minimize exposure to unnecessary PEP
(11). A recent study demonstrated that use of a rapid HIV test for evaluation of source
persons
after occupational exposures not only resulted in decreased use of PEP, but also was
cost-effective compared with use of the standard enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test
for source persons subsequently found to be HIV-negative
(160).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF HCP POTENTIALLY EXPOSED TO HBV,
HCV, or HIV
Exposure prevention remains the primary strategy for reducing
occupational  bloodborne  pathogen  infections;  however,  occupational  exposures  will
continue
to occur. Health-care organizations should make available to their personnel a
system that includes written protocols for prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling,
treatment,  and  follow-up  of  occupational  exposures  that  might  place  HCP  at  risk  for
acquiring
a bloodborne infection. HCP should be educated concerning the risk for and
prevention  of  bloodborne  infections,  including  the  need  to  be  vaccinated  against
hepatitis
B (17,21,161--163). Employers are required to establish exposure-control plans
that include postexposure follow-up for their employees and to comply with
incident reporting requirements mandated by the 1992 OSHA bloodborne pathogen
standard  (2).  Access  to  clinicians  who  can  provide  postexposure  care  should  be
available
during all working hours, including nights and weekends. HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine,
and antiretroviral agents for HIV PEP should be available for timely administration
(i.e., either by providing access on-site or by creating linkages with other facilities
or providers to make them available off-site). Persons responsible for
providing postexposure management should be familiar with evaluation and treatment
protocols  and  the  facility's  plans  for  accessing  HBIG,  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  and
antiretroviral
drugs for HIV PEP.
HCP should be educated to report occupational exposures immediately after
they occur, particularly because HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine, and HIV PEP are most likely
to
be effective if administered as soon after the exposure as possible. HCP who are at
risk for occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens should be familiarized with
the principles of postexposure management as part of job orientation and ongoing
job training.
Hepatitis B Vaccination
Any person who performs tasks involving contact with blood,
blood-contaminated  body  fluids,  other  body  fluids,  or  sharps  should  be  vaccinated
against hepatitis B
(2,21). Prevaccination serologic screening for previous infection is not indicated for
persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk, unless the hospital or
health-care organization considers screening cost-effective.
Hepatitis B vaccine should always be administered by the intramuscular route
in the deltoid muscle with a needle 1--1.5 inches long. Hepatitis B vaccine can
be administered at the same time as other vaccines with no interference with
antibody response to the other vaccines
(164). If the vaccination series is interrupted after
the first dose, the second dose should be administered as soon as possible. The
second and third doses should be separated by an interval of at least 2 months. If only
the third dose is delayed, it should be administered when convenient. HCP who
have contact with patients or blood and are at ongoing risk for percutaneous injuries
should be tested 1--2 months after completion of the 3dose vaccination series for
      anti-HBs (21). Persons who do not respond to the primary vaccine series (i.e.,
      anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL)  should  complete  a  second  3-dose  vaccine  series  or  be
evaluated to determine
if they are HBsAg-positive. Revaccinated persons should be retested at the
completion  of  the  second  vaccine  series.  Persons  who  do  not  respond  to  an  initial
3-dose
vaccine series have a 30%--50% chance of responding to a second 3-dose series
(165). Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled regarding how
to prevent HBV transmission to others and regarding the need for medical
evaluation (12,163,166). Nonresponders to vaccination who are
      HBsAg-negative should
be considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled
regarding  precautions  to  prevent  HBV  infection  and  the  need  to  obtain  HBIG
prophylaxis for
any known or probable parenteral exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. Booster doses
of hepatitis B vaccine are not necessary, and periodic serologic testing to
monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series is not
recommended.  Any  blood  or  body  fluid  exposure  sustained  by  an  unvaccinated,
susceptible
person should lead to the initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
Treatment of an Exposure Site
Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood or body fluids should
be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes should be flushed with water.
No evidence exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by
squeezing  the  wound  further  reduces  the  risk  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission;
however,
the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g.,
bleach)  or  the  injection  of  antiseptics  or  disinfectants  into  the  wound  is  not
recommended.
Exposure Report
If an occupational exposure occurs, the circumstances and
postexposure  management  should  be  recorded  in  the  exposed  person's  confidential
medical
record (usually on a form the facility designates for this purpose) (Box 1). In
addition, employers should follow all federal (including OSHA) and state requirements
for recording and reporting occupational injuries and exposures.
Evaluation of the Exposure and the Exposure Source
Evaluation of the Exposure
The exposure should be evaluated for the potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and
HIV based on the type of body substance involved and the route and severity of
the exposure (Box 2). Blood, fluid containing visible blood, or other potentially
infectious fluid (including semen; vaginal secretions; and cerebrospinal,
      synovial,
pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids) or tissue can be infectious for
bloodborne viruses. Exposures to these fluids or tissue through a percutaneous injury
(i.e., needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through contact with
a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for bloodborne virus
transmission and require further evaluation. For HCV and HIV, exposure to a blood-filled
hollow needle or visibly bloody device suggests a higher risk exposure than exposure to
a needle that was most likely used for giving an injection. In addition, any direct
contact (i.e, personal protective equipment either was not present or was ineffective
in protecting skin or mucous membranes) with concentrated virus in a
research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that requires
clinical evaluation.
For skin exposure, follow-up is indicated only if it involves exposure to a body
fluid previously listed and evidence exists of compromised skin integrity (e.g.,
dermatitis,  abrasion,  or  open  wound).  In  the  clinical  evaluation  for  human  bites,
possible
exposure  of  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  must  be
considered. If
a bite results in blood exposure to either person involved, postexposure
follow-up should be provided.
Evaluation of the Exposure Source
The person whose blood or body fluid is the source of an occupational
exposure  should  be  evaluated  for  HBV,  HCV,  and  HIV  infection  (Box  3).  Information
available
in the medical record at the time of exposure (e.g., laboratory test results,
admitting  diagnosis,  or  previous  medical  history)  or  from  the  source  person,  might
confirm
or exclude bloodborne virus infection.
If the HBV, HCV, and/or HIV infection status of the source is unknown, the
source person should be informed of the incident and tested for serologic evidence
of bloodborne virus infection. Procedures should be followed for testing source
persons, including obtaining informed consent, in accordance with applicable state and
local laws. Any persons determined to be infected with HBV, HCV, or HIV should be
referred for appropriate counseling and treatment. Confidentiality of the source person
should be maintained at all times.
Testing to determine the HBV, HCV, and HIV infection status of an exposure
source should be performed as soon as possible. Hospitals, clinics and other sites
that manage exposed HCP should consult their laboratories regarding the
most appropriate test to use to expedite obtaining these results. An FDA-approved
rapid HIV-antibody test kit should be considered for use in this situation, particularly if
testing by EIA cannot be completed within 24--48 hours. Repeatedly reactive results by
EIA
or rapid HIV-antibody tests are considered to be highly suggestive of infection, whereas
a negative result is an excellent indicator of the absence of HIV antibody. Confirmation
of a reactive result by Western blot or immunofluorescent antibody is not necessary
to make initial decisions about postexposure management but should be done
to complete the testing process and before informing the source person.
Repeatedly reactive results by EIA for anti-HCV should be confirmed by a supplemental
test
(i.e., recombinant immunoblot assay [RIBA™] or HCV PCR). Direct virus assays (e.g.,
HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA or HCV RNA) for routine HIV or HCV screening
of source persons are not recommended.
If the exposure source is unknown or cannot be tested, information about
where and under what circumstances the exposure occurred should be
assessed
epidemiologically for the likelihood of transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
Certain situations as well as the type of exposure might suggest an increased or
decreased risk; an important consideration is the prevalence of HBV, HCV, or HIV in the
population group (i.e., institution or community) from which the contaminated source
material
is derived. For example, an exposure that occurs in a geographic area where
injection-drug  use  is  prevalent  or  involves  a  needle  discarded  in  a  drug-treatment
facility
would be considered epidemiologically to have a higher risk for transmission than
an exposure that occurs in a nursing home for the elderly.
Testing of needles or other sharp instruments implicated in an
exposure, regardless of whether the source is known or unknown, is not recommended.
The reliability and interpretation of findings in such circumstances are unknown,
and testing might be hazardous to persons handling the sharp instrument.
Examples of information to consider when evaluating an exposure source
for possible HBV, HCV, or HIV infection include laboratory information (e.g., previous
HBV,  HCV,  or  HIV  test  results  or  results  of  immunologic  testing  [e.g.,  CD4+  T-cell
count])
or liver enzymes (e.g., ALT), clinical symptoms (e.g., acute syndrome suggestive
of primary HIV infection or undiagnosed immunodeficiency disease), and history
of recent (i.e., within 3 months) possible HBV, HCV, or HIV exposures (e.g.,
injection-drug  use  or  sexual  contact  with  a  known  positive  partner).  Health-care
providers should
be aware of local and state laws governing the collection and release of HIV
serostatus information on a source person, following an occupational exposure.
If the source person is known to have HIV infection, available information about
this person's stage of infection (i.e., asymptomatic, symptomatic, or AIDS), CD4+
T-cell count, results of viral load testing, current and previous antiretroviral therapy,
and results of any genotypic or phenotypic viral resistance testing should be gathered
for consideration in choosing an appropriate PEP regimen. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of exposed HCP should be considered within 72 hours
postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or source person
becomes available.
If the source person is HIV seronegative and has no clinical evidence of AIDS
or symptoms of HIV infection, no further testing of the person for HIV infection
is indicated. The likelihood of the source person being in the "window period" of
HIV  infection  in  the  absence  of  symptoms  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome  is  extremely
small.
Management of Exposures to HBV
For percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood, several factors must
be considered when making a decision to provide prophylaxis, including the HBsAg
status of the source and the hepatitis B vaccination and vaccine-response status of
the exposed person. Such exposures usually involve persons for whom hepatitis
B vaccination is recommended. Any blood or body fluid exposure to an
unvaccinated person should lead to initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
The hepatitis B vaccination status and the vaccine-response status (if known) of
the exposed person should be reviewed. A summary of prophylaxis recommendations
for percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood according to the HBsAg status of
the exposure source and the vaccination and vaccine-response status of the
exposed person is included in this report (Table 3).
When HBIG is indicated, it should be administered as soon as possible
after exposure (preferably within 24 hours). The effectiveness of HBIG when
administered  >7  days  after  exposure  is  unknown.  When  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is
indicated, it
should also be administered as soon as possible (preferably within 24 hours) and can
be administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate site (vaccine should always
be administered in the deltoid muscle).
For exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated but have
not completed the vaccination series, vaccination should be completed as scheduled,
and HBIG should be added as indicated (Table 3). Persons exposed to
      HBsAg-positive
blood or body fluids who are known not to have responded to a primary vaccine
series should receive a single dose of HBIG and reinitiate the hepatitis B vaccine series
with the first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after
exposure. Alternatively, they should receive two doses of HBIG, one dose as soon as
possible  after  exposure,  and  the  second  dose  1  month  later.  The  option  of
administering
one dose of HBIG and reinitiating the vaccine series is preferred for nonresponders
who did not complete a second 3-dose vaccine series. For persons who
previously completed a second vaccine series but failed to respond, two doses of HBIG
are preferred.
Management of Exposures to HCV
Individual institutions should establish policies and procedures for testing HCP
for HCV after percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood and ensure that all
personnel
are familiar with these policies and procedures. The following are
recommendations for follow-up of occupational HCV exposures:
 For the source, perform testing for anti-HCV.
 For the person exposed to an HCV-positive source
    --- perform baseline testing for anti-HCV and ALT activity; and
   --- perform follow-up testing (e.g., at 4--6 months) for anti-HCV and ALT
activity (if earlier diagnosis of HCV infection is desired, testing for HCV RNA may
be performed at 4--6 weeks).
 Confirm all anti-HCV results reported positive by enzyme immunoassay
using  supplemental  anti-HCV  testing  (e.g.,  recombinant  immunoblot  assay  [RIBA™])
(13).
Health-care professionals who provide care to persons exposed to HCV in
the occupational setting should be knowledgeable regarding the risk for HCV infection
and appropriate counseling, testing, and medical follow-up.
IG and antiviral agents are not recommended for PEP after exposure to
HCV-positive blood. In addition, no guidelines exist for administration of therapy during
the acute phase of HCV infection. However, limited data indicate that antiviral
therapy might be beneficial when started early in the course of HCV infection. When
HCV infection is identified early, the person should be referred for medical management
to a specialist knowledgeable in this area.
Counseling for HCP Exposed to Viral Hepatitis
HCP exposed to HBV- or HCV-infected blood do not need to take any
special precautions to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up period
(12,13); however, they should refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or
semen. The exposed person does not need to modify sexual practices or refrain
from becoming pregnant. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she does not need
to discontinue.
No modifications to an exposed person's patient-care responsibilities
are necessary to prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to
      HBV-
or HCV-positive blood. If an exposed person becomes acutely infected with HBV,
the person should be evaluated according to published recommendations for infected
HCP (165). No recommendations exist regarding restricting the professional activities
of HCP with HCV infection (13). As recommended for all
      HCP, those who are
chronically infected with HBV or HCV should follow all recommended infection-control
practices, including standard precautions and appropriate use of hand washing,
protective barriers, and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp
instruments (162).
Management of Exposures to HIV
Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing of Exposed HCP
HCP exposed to HIV should be evaluated within hours (rather than days) after
their  exposure  and  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  baseline  (i.e.,  to  establish  infection
status
at
the time of exposure). If the source person is seronegative for HIV, baseline testing
or further follow-up of the exposed person normally is not necessary. Serologic
testing should be made available to all HCP who are concerned that they might have
been occupationally infected with HIV. For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the
evaluation also should include information about medications the exposed person might
be
taking and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances (i.e.,
pregnancy,  breast  feeding,  or  renal  or  hepatic  disease)  that  might  influence  drug
selection.
PEP for HIV
The following recommendations (Table 4 and Table 5) apply to situations when a
person has been exposed to a source person with HIV infection or when information
suggests the likelihood that the source person is HIV-infected. These recommendations
are based on the risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and on limited
data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most occupational HIV exposures
do not result in the transmission of HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully
considered when prescribing PEP. To assist with the initial management of an HIV
exposure, health-care facilities should have drugs for an initial PEP regimen selected
and available for use. When possible, these recommendations should be implemented
in consultation with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral therapy and
HIV transmission (Box 4).
Timing and Duration of PEP. PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The
interval within which PEP should be initiated for optimal efficacy is not known. Animal
studies have demonstrated the importance of starting PEP soon after an
exposure  (111,112,118).  If  questions  exist  about  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use  or
whether
to use a basic or expanded regimen, starting the basic regimen immediately rather
than delaying PEP administration is probably better. Although animal studies suggest
that PEP probably is substantially less effective when started more than 24--36
hours  postexposure  (112,119,122),  the  interval  after  which  no  benefit  is  gained  from
PEP
for humans is undefined. Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be
started  even  when  the  interval  since  exposure  exceeds  36  hours.  Initiating  therapy
after
a longer interval (e.g., 1 week) might be considered for exposures that represent
an increased risk for transmission. The optimal duration of PEP is unknown. Because
4 weeks of ZDV appeared protective in occupational and animal studies
(100,123), PEP probably should be administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
Use of PEP When HIV Infection Status of Source Person is
Unknown.  If  the  source  person's  HIV  infection  status  is  unknown  at  the  time  of
exposure, use of PEP should
be decided on a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in the source (Table 4 and
Table 5).
If these considerations suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of
the source person is pending, initiating a two-drug PEP regimen until laboratory
results  have  been  obtained  and  later  modifying  or  discontinuing  the  regimen
accordingly
is reasonable. The following are recommendations regarding HIV
postexposure prophylaxis:
 If indicated, start PEP as soon as possible after an exposure.
 Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 Administer PEP for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 If a source person is determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should be discontinued.
PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 Exposure prevention remains the primary strategy for reducing
occupational  bloodborne  pathogen  infections;  however,  occupational  exposures  will
continue
to occur. Health-care organizations should make available to their personnel a
system that includes written protocols for prompt reporting, evaluation, counseling,
treatment,  and  follow-up  of  occupational  exposures  that  might  place  HCP  at  risk  for
acquiring
a bloodborne infection. HCP should be educated concerning the risk for and
prevention  of  bloodborne  infections,  including  the  need  to  be  vaccinated  against
hepatitis
B (17,21,161--163). Employers are required to establish exposure-control plans
that include postexposure follow-up for their employees and to comply with
incident reporting requirements mandated by the 1992 OSHA bloodborne pathogen
standard  (2).  Access  to  clinicians  who  can  provide  postexposure  care  should  be
available
during all working hours, including nights and weekends. HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine,
and antiretroviral agents for HIV PEP should be available for timely administration
(i.e., either by providing access on-site or by creating linkages with other facilities
or providers to make them available off-site). Persons responsible for
providing postexposure management should be familiar with evaluation and treatment
protocols  and  the  facility's  plans  for  accessing  HBIG,  hepatitis  B  vaccine,  and
antiretroviral
drugs for HIV PEP.
 HCP should be educated to report occupational exposures immediately after
they occur, particularly because HBIG, hepatitis B vaccine, and HIV PEP are most likely
to
be effective if administered as soon after the exposure as possible. HCP who are at
risk for occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens should be familiarized with
the principles of postexposure management as part of job orientation and ongoing
job training.
 
Hepatitis B Vaccination
 Any person who performs tasks involving contact with blood,
blood-contaminated  body  fluids,  other  body  fluids,  or  sharps  should  be  vaccinated
against hepatitis B
(2,21). Prevaccination serologic screening for previous infection is not indicated for
persons being vaccinated because of occupational risk, unless the hospital or
health-care organization considers screening cost-effective.
 Hepatitis B vaccine should always be administered by the intramuscular route
in the deltoid muscle with a needle 1--1.5 inches long. Hepatitis B vaccine can
be administered at the same time as other vaccines with no interference with
antibody response to the other vaccines
(164). If the vaccination series is interrupted after
the first dose, the second dose should be administered as soon as possible. The
second and third doses should be separated by an interval of at least 2 months. If only
the third dose is delayed, it should be administered when convenient. HCP who
have contact with patients or blood and are at ongoing risk for percutaneous injuries
should be tested 1--2 months after completion of the 3dose vaccination series for
      anti-HBs (21). Persons who do not respond to the primary vaccine series (i.e.,
      anti-HBs  <10  mIU/mL)  should  complete  a  second  3-dose  vaccine  series  or  be
evaluated to determine
if they are HBsAg-positive. Revaccinated persons should be retested at the
completion  of  the  second  vaccine  series.  Persons  who  do  not  respond  to  an  initial
3-dose
vaccine series have a 30%--50% chance of responding to a second 3-dose series
(165). Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled regarding how
to prevent HBV transmission to others and regarding the need for medical
evaluation (12,163,166). Nonresponders to vaccination who are
      HBsAg-negative should
be considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled
regarding  precautions  to  prevent  HBV  infection  and  the  need  to  obtain  HBIG
prophylaxis for
any known or probable parenteral exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. Booster doses
of hepatitis B vaccine are not necessary, and periodic serologic testing to
monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vaccine series is not
recommended.  Any  blood  or  body  fluid  exposure  sustained  by  an  unvaccinated,
susceptible
person should lead to the initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
 
Treatment of an Exposure Site
 Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood or body fluids should
be washed with soap and water; mucous membranes should be flushed with water.
No evidence exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid by
squeezing  the  wound  further  reduces  the  risk  of  bloodborne  pathogen  transmission;
however,
the use of antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g.,
bleach)  or  the  injection  of  antiseptics  or  disinfectants  into  the  wound  is  not
recommended.
 
Exposure Report
 If an occupational exposure occurs, the circumstances and
postexposure  management  should  be  recorded  in  the  exposed  person's  confidential
medical
record (usually on a form the facility designates for this purpose) (Box 1). In
addition, employers should follow all federal (including OSHA) and state requirements
for recording and reporting occupational injuries and exposures.
 
Evaluation of the Exposure and the Exposure Source
 
Evaluation of the Exposure
 The exposure should be evaluated for the potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and
HIV based on the type of body substance involved and the route and severity of
the exposure (Box 2). Blood, fluid containing visible blood, or other potentially
infectious fluid (including semen; vaginal secretions; and cerebrospinal,
      synovial,
pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, and amniotic fluids) or tissue can be infectious for
bloodborne viruses. Exposures to these fluids or tissue through a percutaneous injury
(i.e., needlestick or other penetrating sharps-related event) or through contact with
a mucous membrane are situations that pose a risk for bloodborne virus
transmission and require further evaluation. For HCV and HIV, exposure to a blood-filled
hollow needle or visibly bloody device suggests a higher risk exposure than exposure to
a needle that was most likely used for giving an injection. In addition, any direct
contact (i.e, personal protective equipment either was not present or was ineffective
in protecting skin or mucous membranes) with concentrated virus in a
research laboratory or production facility is considered an exposure that requires
clinical evaluation.
 For skin exposure, follow-up is indicated only if it involves exposure to a body
fluid previously listed and evidence exists of compromised skin integrity (e.g.,
dermatitis,  abrasion,  or  open  wound).  In  the  clinical  evaluation  for  human  bites,
possible
exposure  of  both  the  person  bitten  and  the  person  who  inflicted  the  bite  must  be
considered. If
a bite results in blood exposure to either person involved, postexposure
follow-up should be provided.
 
Evaluation of the Exposure Source
 The person whose blood or body fluid is the source of an occupational
exposure  should  be  evaluated  for  HBV,  HCV,  and  HIV  infection  (Box  3).  Information
available
in the medical record at the time of exposure (e.g., laboratory test results,
admitting  diagnosis,  or  previous  medical  history)  or  from  the  source  person,  might
confirm
or exclude bloodborne virus infection.
 If the HBV, HCV, and/or HIV infection status of the source is unknown, the
source person should be informed of the incident and tested for serologic evidence
of bloodborne virus infection. Procedures should be followed for testing source
persons, including obtaining informed consent, in accordance with applicable state and
local laws. Any persons determined to be infected with HBV, HCV, or HIV should be
referred for appropriate counseling and treatment. Confidentiality of the source person
should be maintained at all times.
 Testing to determine the HBV, HCV, and HIV infection status of an exposure
source should be performed as soon as possible. Hospitals, clinics and other sites
that manage exposed HCP should consult their laboratories regarding the
most appropriate test to use to expedite obtaining these results. An FDA-approved
rapid HIV-antibody test kit should be considered for use in this situation, particularly if
testing by EIA cannot be completed within 24--48 hours. Repeatedly reactive results by
EIA
or rapid HIV-antibody tests are considered to be highly suggestive of infection, whereas
a negative result is an excellent indicator of the absence of HIV antibody. Confirmation
of a reactive result by Western blot or immunofluorescent antibody is not necessary
to make initial decisions about postexposure management but should be done
to complete the testing process and before informing the source person.
Repeatedly reactive results by EIA for anti-HCV should be confirmed by a supplemental
test
(i.e., recombinant immunoblot assay [RIBA™] or HCV PCR). Direct virus assays (e.g.,
HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA or HCV RNA) for routine HIV or HCV screening
of source persons are not recommended.
 If the exposure source is unknown or cannot be tested, information about
where and under what circumstances the exposure occurred should be
assessed
epidemiologically for the likelihood of transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
Certain situations as well as the type of exposure might suggest an increased or
decreased risk; an important consideration is the prevalence of HBV, HCV, or HIV in the
population group (i.e., institution or community) from which the contaminated source
material
is derived. For example, an exposure that occurs in a geographic area where
injection-drug  use  is  prevalent  or  involves  a  needle  discarded  in  a  drug-treatment
facility
would be considered epidemiologically to have a higher risk for transmission than
an exposure that occurs in a nursing home for the elderly.
 Testing of needles or other sharp instruments implicated in an
exposure, regardless of whether the source is known or unknown, is not recommended.
The reliability and interpretation of findings in such circumstances are unknown,
and testing might be hazardous to persons handling the sharp instrument.
 Examples of information to consider when evaluating an exposure source
for possible HBV, HCV, or HIV infection include laboratory information (e.g., previous
HBV,  HCV,  or  HIV  test  results  or  results  of  immunologic  testing  [e.g.,  CD4+  T-cell
count])
or liver enzymes (e.g., ALT), clinical symptoms (e.g., acute syndrome suggestive
of primary HIV infection or undiagnosed immunodeficiency disease), and history
of recent (i.e., within 3 months) possible HBV, HCV, or HIV exposures (e.g.,
injection-drug  use  or  sexual  contact  with  a  known  positive  partner).  Health-care
providers should
be aware of local and state laws governing the collection and release of HIV
serostatus information on a source person, following an occupational exposure.
 If the source person is known to have HIV infection, available information about
this person's stage of infection (i.e., asymptomatic, symptomatic, or AIDS), CD4+
T-cell count, results of viral load testing, current and previous antiretroviral therapy,
and results of any genotypic or phenotypic viral resistance testing should be gathered
for consideration in choosing an appropriate PEP regimen. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of exposed HCP should be considered within 72 hours
postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or source person
becomes available.
 If the source person is HIV seronegative and has no clinical evidence of AIDS
or symptoms of HIV infection, no further testing of the person for HIV infection
is indicated. The likelihood of the source person being in the "window period" of
HIV  infection  in  the  absence  of  symptoms  of  acute  retroviral  syndrome  is  extremely
small.
 
Management of Exposures to HBV
 For percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood, several factors must
be considered when making a decision to provide prophylaxis, including the HBsAg
status of the source and the hepatitis B vaccination and vaccine-response status of
the exposed person. Such exposures usually involve persons for whom hepatitis
B vaccination is recommended. Any blood or body fluid exposure to an
unvaccinated person should lead to initiation of the hepatitis B vaccine series.
 The hepatitis B vaccination status and the vaccine-response status (if known) of
the exposed person should be reviewed. A summary of prophylaxis recommendations
for percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood according to the HBsAg status of
the exposure source and the vaccination and vaccine-response status of the
exposed person is included in this report (Table 3).
 When HBIG is indicated, it should be administered as soon as possible
after exposure (preferably within 24 hours). The effectiveness of HBIG when
administered  >7  days  after  exposure  is  unknown.  When  hepatitis  B  vaccine  is
indicated, it
should also be administered as soon as possible (preferably within 24 hours) and can
be administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate site (vaccine should always
be administered in the deltoid muscle).
 For exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated but have
not completed the vaccination series, vaccination should be completed as scheduled,
and HBIG should be added as indicated (Table 3). Persons exposed to
      HBsAg-positive
blood or body fluids who are known not to have responded to a primary vaccine
series should receive a single dose of HBIG and reinitiate the hepatitis B vaccine series
with the first dose of the hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after
exposure. Alternatively, they should receive two doses of HBIG, one dose as soon as
possible  after  exposure,  and  the  second  dose  1  month  later.  The  option  of
administering
one dose of HBIG and reinitiating the vaccine series is preferred for nonresponders
who did not complete a second 3-dose vaccine series. For persons who
previously completed a second vaccine series but failed to respond, two doses of HBIG
are preferred.
 
Management of Exposures to HCV
 Individual institutions should establish policies and procedures for testing HCP
for HCV after percutaneous or mucosal exposures to blood and ensure that all
personnel
are familiar with these policies and procedures. The following are
recommendations for follow-up of occupational HCV exposures:
 For the source, perform testing for anti-HCV.
 For the person exposed to an HCV-positive source
    --- perform baseline testing for anti-HCV and ALT activity; and
   --- perform follow-up testing (e.g., at 4--6 months) for anti-HCV and ALT
activity (if earlier diagnosis of HCV infection is desired, testing for HCV RNA may
be performed at 4--6 weeks).
 Confirm all anti-HCV results reported positive by enzyme immunoassay
using  supplemental  anti-HCV  testing  (e.g.,  recombinant  immunoblot  assay  [RIBA™])
(13).
Health-care professionals who provide care to persons exposed to HCV in
the occupational setting should be knowledgeable regarding the risk for HCV infection
and appropriate counseling, testing, and medical follow-up.
IG and antiviral agents are not recommended for PEP after exposure to
HCV-positive blood. In addition, no guidelines exist for administration of therapy during
the acute phase of HCV infection. However, limited data indicate that antiviral
therapy might be beneficial when started early in the course of HCV infection. When
HCV infection is identified early, the person should be referred for medical management
to a specialist knowledgeable in this area.
Counseling for HCP Exposed to Viral Hepatitis
HCP exposed to HBV- or HCV-infected blood do not need to take any
special precautions to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up period
(12,13); however, they should refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or
semen. The exposed person does not need to modify sexual practices or refrain
from becoming pregnant. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she does not need
to discontinue.
No modifications to an exposed person's patient-care responsibilities
are necessary to prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to
      HBV-
or HCV-positive blood. If an exposed person becomes acutely infected with HBV,
the person should be evaluated according to published recommendations for infected
HCP (165). No recommendations exist regarding restricting the professional activities
of HCP with HCV infection (13). As recommended for all
      HCP, those who are
chronically infected with HBV or HCV should follow all recommended infection-control
practices, including standard precautions and appropriate use of hand washing,
protective barriers, and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp
instruments (162).
Management of Exposures to HIV
Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing of Exposed HCP
HCP exposed to HIV should be evaluated within hours (rather than days) after
their  exposure  and  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  baseline  (i.e.,  to  establish  infection
status
at
the time of exposure). If the source person is seronegative for HIV, baseline testing
or further follow-up of the exposed person normally is not necessary. Serologic
testing should be made available to all HCP who are concerned that they might have
been occupationally infected with HIV. For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the
evaluation also should include information about medications the exposed person might
be
taking and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances (i.e.,
pregnancy,  breast  feeding,  or  renal  or  hepatic  disease)  that  might  influence  drug
selection.
PEP for HIV
The following recommendations (Table 4 and Table 5) apply to situations when a
person has been exposed to a source person with HIV infection or when information
suggests the likelihood that the source person is HIV-infected. These recommendations
are based on the risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and on limited
data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most occupational HIV exposures
do not result in the transmission of HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully
considered when prescribing PEP. To assist with the initial management of an HIV
exposure, health-care facilities should have drugs for an initial PEP regimen selected
and available for use. When possible, these recommendations should be implemented
in consultation with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral therapy and
HIV transmission (Box 4).
Timing and Duration of PEP. PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The
interval within which PEP should be initiated for optimal efficacy is not known. Animal
studies have demonstrated the importance of starting PEP soon after an
exposure  (111,112,118).  If  questions  exist  about  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use  or
whether
to use a basic or expanded regimen, starting the basic regimen immediately rather
than delaying PEP administration is probably better. Although animal studies suggest
that PEP probably is substantially less effective when started more than 24--36
hours  postexposure  (112,119,122),  the  interval  after  which  no  benefit  is  gained  from
PEP
for humans is undefined. Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be
started  even  when  the  interval  since  exposure  exceeds  36  hours.  Initiating  therapy
after
a longer interval (e.g., 1 week) might be considered for exposures that represent
an increased risk for transmission. The optimal duration of PEP is unknown. Because
4 weeks of ZDV appeared protective in occupational and animal studies
(100,123), PEP probably should be administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
Use of PEP When HIV Infection Status of Source Person is
Unknown.  If  the  source  person's  HIV  infection  status  is  unknown  at  the  time  of
exposure, use of PEP should
be decided on a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in the source (Table 4 and
Table 5).
If these considerations suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of
the source person is pending, initiating a two-drug PEP regimen until laboratory
results  have  been  obtained  and  later  modifying  or  discontinuing  the  regimen
accordingly
is reasonable. The following are recommendations regarding HIV
postexposure prophylaxis:
 If indicated, start PEP as soon as possible after an exposure.
 Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 Administer PEP for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 If a source person is determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should be discontinued.
PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 Health-care professionals who provide care to persons exposed to HCV in
the occupational setting should be knowledgeable regarding the risk for HCV infection
and appropriate counseling, testing, and medical follow-up.
 IG and antiviral agents are not recommended for PEP after exposure to
HCV-positive blood. In addition, no guidelines exist for administration of therapy during
the acute phase of HCV infection. However, limited data indicate that antiviral
therapy might be beneficial when started early in the course of HCV infection. When
HCV infection is identified early, the person should be referred for medical management
to a specialist knowledgeable in this area.
 
Counseling for HCP Exposed to Viral Hepatitis
 HCP exposed to HBV- or HCV-infected blood do not need to take any
special precautions to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up period
(12,13); however, they should refrain from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or
semen. The exposed person does not need to modify sexual practices or refrain
from becoming pregnant. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she does not need
to discontinue.
 No modifications to an exposed person's patient-care responsibilities
are necessary to prevent transmission to patients based solely on exposure to
      HBV-
or HCV-positive blood. If an exposed person becomes acutely infected with HBV,
the person should be evaluated according to published recommendations for infected
HCP (165). No recommendations exist regarding restricting the professional activities
of HCP with HCV infection (13). As recommended for all
      HCP, those who are
chronically infected with HBV or HCV should follow all recommended infection-control
practices, including standard precautions and appropriate use of hand washing,
protective barriers, and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp
instruments (162).
 
Management of Exposures to HIV
 
Clinical Evaluation and Baseline Testing of Exposed HCP
 HCP exposed to HIV should be evaluated within hours (rather than days) after
their  exposure  and  should  be  tested  for  HIV  at  baseline  (i.e.,  to  establish  infection
status
at
the time of exposure). If the source person is seronegative for HIV, baseline testing
or further follow-up of the exposed person normally is not necessary. Serologic
testing should be made available to all HCP who are concerned that they might have
been occupationally infected with HIV. For purposes of considering HIV PEP, the
evaluation also should include information about medications the exposed person might
be
taking and any current or underlying medical conditions or circumstances (i.e.,
pregnancy,  breast  feeding,  or  renal  or  hepatic  disease)  that  might  influence  drug
selection.
 
PEP for HIV
 The following recommendations (Table 4 and Table 5) apply to situations when a
person has been exposed to a source person with HIV infection or when information
suggests the likelihood that the source person is HIV-infected. These recommendations
are based on the risk for HIV infection after different types of exposure and on limited
data regarding efficacy and toxicity of PEP. Because most occupational HIV exposures
do not result in the transmission of HIV, potential toxicity must be carefully
considered when prescribing PEP. To assist with the initial management of an HIV
exposure, health-care facilities should have drugs for an initial PEP regimen selected
and available for use. When possible, these recommendations should be implemented
in consultation with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral therapy and
HIV transmission (Box 4).
 Timing and Duration of PEP. PEP should be initiated as soon as possible. The
interval within which PEP should be initiated for optimal efficacy is not known. Animal
studies have demonstrated the importance of starting PEP soon after an
exposure  (111,112,118).  If  questions  exist  about  which  antiretroviral  drugs  to  use  or
whether
to use a basic or expanded regimen, starting the basic regimen immediately rather
than delaying PEP administration is probably better. Although animal studies suggest
that PEP probably is substantially less effective when started more than 24--36
hours  postexposure  (112,119,122),  the  interval  after  which  no  benefit  is  gained  from
PEP
for humans is undefined. Therefore, if appropriate for the exposure, PEP should be
started  even  when  the  interval  since  exposure  exceeds  36  hours.  Initiating  therapy
after
a longer interval (e.g., 1 week) might be considered for exposures that represent
an increased risk for transmission. The optimal duration of PEP is unknown. Because
4 weeks of ZDV appeared protective in occupational and animal studies
(100,123), PEP probably should be administered for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 Use of PEP When HIV Infection Status of Source Person is
Unknown.  If  the  source  person's  HIV  infection  status  is  unknown  at  the  time  of
exposure, use of PEP should
be decided on a case-by-case basis, after considering the type of exposure and
the clinical and/or epidemiologic likelihood of HIV infection in the source (Table 4 and
Table 5).
If these considerations suggest a possibility for HIV transmission and HIV testing of
the source person is pending, initiating a two-drug PEP regimen until laboratory
results  have  been  obtained  and  later  modifying  or  discontinuing  the  regimen
accordingly
is reasonable. The following are recommendations regarding HIV
postexposure prophylaxis:
 If indicated, start PEP as soon as possible after an exposure.
 Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 Administer PEP for 4 weeks, if tolerated.
 If a source person is determined to be HIV-negative, PEP should be discontinued.
PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 PEP for Pregnant HCP. If the exposed person is pregnant, the evaluation of risk
of infection and need for PEP should be approached as with any other person who
has had an HIV exposure. However, the decision to use any antiretroviral drug
during pregnancy should involve discussion between the woman and her
health-care provider(s) regarding the potential benefits and risks to her and her fetus.
 Certain drugs should be avoided in pregnant women. Because teratogenic
effects were observed in primate studies, EFV is not recommended during pregnancy.
Reports of fatal lactic acidosis in pregnant women treated with a combination of d4T
and
ddI have prompted warnings about these drugs during pregnancy. Because of the risk
of hyperbilirubinemia in newborns, IDV should not be administered to pregnant
women shortly before delivery.
 
Recommendations for the Selection of Drugs for HIV PEP
 Health-care providers must strive to balance the risk for infection against
the potential toxicity of the agent(s) used when selecting a drug regimen for HIV
PEP. Because PEP is potentially toxic, its use is not justified for exposures that pose
a negligible risk for transmission (Table 4 and Table 5). Also, insufficient evidence exists
to support recommending a three-drug regimen for all HIV exposures. Therefore,
two regimens for PEP are provided (Appendix C): a "basic" two-drug regimen that
should be appropriate for most HIV exposures and an "expanded" three-drug regimen
that should be used for exposures that pose an increased risk for transmission (Table
4 and Table 5). When possible, the regimens should be implemented in consultation
with persons who have expertise in antiretroviral treatment and HIV transmission.
 Most HIV exposures will warrant a two-drug regimen using two
nucleoside analogues (e.g., ZDV and 3TC; or 3TC and d4T; or d4T and ddI). The addition
of a
third drug should be considered for exposures that pose an increased risk for
transmission.  Selection  of  the  PEP  regimen  should  consider  the  comparative  risk
represented by
the exposure and information about the exposure source, including history of
and response to antiretroviral therapy based on clinical response, CD4+ T-cell counts,
viral load measurements, and current disease stage. When the source person's virus
is known or suspected to be resistant to one or more of the drugs considered for the
PEP regimen, the selection of drugs to which the source person's virus is unlikely to
be resistant is recommended; expert consultation is advised. If this information is
not immediately available, initiation of PEP, if indicated, should not be delayed; changes
in the PEP regimen can be made after PEP has been started, as
appropriate. Reevaluation of the exposed person should be considered within 72
hours postexposure, especially as additional information about the exposure or
source person becomes available.
 
Follow-up of HCP Exposed to HIV
 Postexposure Testing. HCP with occupational exposure to HIV should
receive follow-up counseling, postexposure testing, and medical evaluation, regardless
of whether they receive PEP. HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least
6 months postexposure (e.g., at 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months). Extended HIV
follow-up (e.g., for 12 months) is recommended for HCP who become infected with
HCV following exposure to a source coinfected with HIV and HCV. Whether
extended follow-up is indicated in other circumstances (e.g., exposure to a source
coinfected  with  HIV  and  HCV  in  the  absence  of  HCV  seroconversion  or  for  exposed
persons with
a medical history suggesting an impaired ability to develop an antibody response
to acute infection) is unclear. Although rare instances of delayed HIV
seroconversion have been reported (167,168), the infrequency of this occurrence does
not
warrant adding to the anxiety level of the exposed persons by routinely extending the
duration of postexposure follow-up. However, this recommendation should not preclude
a decision to extend follow-up in an individual situation based on the clinical
judgement  of  the  exposed  person's  health-care  provider.  HIV  testing  should  be
performed on
any exposed person who has an illness that is compatible with an acute
retroviral syndrome, regardless of the interval since exposure. When HIV infection is
identified, the person should be referred to a specialist knowledgeable in the area of
HIV treatment and counseling for medical management.
 HIV-antibody testing with EIA should be used to monitor for seroconversion.
The routine use of direct virus assays (e.g., HIV p24 antigen EIA or tests for HIV RNA)
to detect infection in exposed HCP generally is not recommended
(169). The high rate of false-positive results of these tests in this setting could lead to
unnecessary
anxiety and/or treatment (170,171). Despite the ability of direct virus assays to detect
HIV infection a few days earlier than EIA, the infrequency of occupational
seroconversion and increased costs of these tests do not warrant their routine use in
this setting.
 HIV-antibody testing should be performed for at least 6 months postexposure.
 Direct virus assays for routine follow-up of HCP are not recommended.
 HIV testing should be performed on any exposed person who has an
illness compatible with an acute retroviral syndrome.
Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 Monitoring and Management of PEP
Toxicity. If PEP is used, HCP should be monitored for drug toxicity by testing at baseline
and again 2 weeks after starting
PEP. The scope of testing should be based on medical conditions in the exposed person
and the toxicity of drugs included in the PEP regimen. Minimally, lab monitoring for
toxicity should include a complete blood count and renal and hepatic function tests.
Monitoring for evidence of hyperglycemia should be included for HCP whose regimens
include any PI; if the exposed person is receiving IDV, monitoring for crystalluria,
hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and hepatitis also should be included. If toxicity is
noted, modification of the regimen should be considered after expert consultation;
further diagnostic studies may be indicated.
 Exposed HCP who choose to take PEP should be advised of the importance
of completing the prescribed regimen. Information should be provided to HCP
about potential drug interactions and the drugs that should not be taken with PEP, the
side effects of the drugs that have been prescribed, measures to minimize these
effects,
and the methods of clinical monitoring for toxicity during the follow-up period.
HCP should be advised that the evaluation of certain symptoms should not be delayed
(e.g., rash, fever, back or abdominal pain, pain on urination or blood in the urine,
or symptoms of hyperglycemia [increased thirst and/or frequent urination]).
 HCP who fail to complete the recommended regimen often do so because of
the side effects they experience (e.g., nausea and diarrhea). These symptoms often can
be managed with antimotility and antiemetic agents or other medications that target
the specific symptoms without changing the regimen. In other situations, modifying
the dose interval (i.e., administering a lower dose of drug more frequently throughout
the day, as recommended by the manufacturer), might facilitate adherence to
the regimen. Serious adverse events should be reported to FDA's MedWatch Program.
 Counseling and Education. Although HIV infection following an
occupational exposure occurs infrequently, the emotional effect of an exposure often is
substantial  (172--174).  In  addition,  HCP  are  given  seemingly  conflicting  information.
Although
HCP are told that a low risk exists for HIV transmission, a 4-week regimen of PEP might
be recommended, and they are asked to commit to behavioral measures (e.g.,
sexual abstinence or condom use) to prevent secondary transmission, all of which
influence their lives for several weeks to months
(172).  Therefore,  access  to  persons  who  are  knowledgeable  about  occupational  HIV
transmission and who can deal with the
many concerns an HIV exposure might generate for the exposed person is an
important element of postexposure management. HIV-exposed HCP should be advised
to use
the following measures to prevent secondary transmission during the follow-up
period, especially the first 6--12 weeks after the exposure when most HIV-infected
persons are expected to seroconvert: exercise sexual abstinence or use condoms to
prevent sexual transmission and to avoid pregnancy; and refrain from donating blood,
plasma, organs, tissue, or semen. If an exposed woman is breast feeding, she should
be counseled about the risk of HIV transmission through breast milk, and
discontinuation of breast feeding should be considered, especially for high-risk
exposures. Additionally, NRTIs are known to pass into breast milk, as is NVP; whether
this also
is true for the other approved antiretroviral drugs is unknown.
 The patient-care responsibilities of an exposed person do not need to be
modified, based solely on an HIV exposure, to prevent transmission to patients. If
HIV seroconversion is detected, the person should be evaluated according to
published recommendations for infected HCP
(175).
 Exposed HCP should be advised to seek medical evaluation for any acute
illness  that  occurs  during  the  follow-up  period.  Such  an  illness,  particularly  if
characterized
by fever, rash, myalgia, fatigue, malaise, or lymphadenopathy, might be indicative
of acute HIV infection but also might be indicative of a drug reaction or another
medical condition.
 For exposures for which PEP is considered appropriate, HCP should be
informed that a) knowledge about the efficacy of drugs used for PEP is limited; b)
experts recommend combination drug regimens because of increased potency and
concerns about drug-resistant virus; c) data regarding toxicity of antiretroviral drugs in
persons without HIV infection or in pregnant women are limited; d) although the
short-term toxicity of antiretroviral drugs is usually limited, serious adverse events have
occurred  in  persons  taking  PEP;  and  e)  any  or  all  drugs  for  PEP  may  be  declined  or
stopped
by the exposed person. HCP who experience HIV occupational exposures for which PEP
is
not recommended should be informed that the potential side effects and toxicity
of  taking  PEP  outweigh  the  negligible  risk  of  transmission  posed  by  the  type  of
exposure.
 Guidelines for counseling and educating HCP with HIV exposure include
 Exposed HCP should be advised to use precautions to prevent
secondary transmission during the follow-up period.
 For exposures for which PEP is prescribed, HCP should be informed
about possible drug toxicities and the need for monitoring, and possible
drug interactions.
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
*This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
References
 CDC. NIOSH alert: preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincinnati,
OH:  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC,  1999;  DHHS  publication  no.
(NIOSH)2000-108.
 Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 29 CFR Part
1910.1030.  Occupational  exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens;  final  rule.  Federal
Register
1991; 56:64004--182.
  CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupational exposure to
human immunodeficiency virus, including considerations regarding zidovudine
postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39(No. RR-1).
  CDC. Update: provisional Public Health Service recommendations for
chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468--72.
  CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health-care worker
exposures  to  HIV  and  recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis.  MMWR
1998;47(No. RR-7).
 Panlilio AL, Cardo DM, Campbell S, Srivastava P, NaSH Surveillance Group. Experience
of health care workers taking antiretroviral agents as postexposure prophylaxis
for occupational exposure to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Proceedings of the 1999 National
HIV Prevention Conference. Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Wang SA, Panlilio AL, Doi PA, et al. Experience of healthcare workers taking
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  occupational  HIV  exposures:  findings  of  the  HIV
postexposure
prophylaxis registry. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:780--5.
 Puro V, Ippolito G, Italian Registry PEP. Antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis
[Abstract  515].  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1999  National  HIV  Prevention  Conference.
Atlanta, GA, 1999.
 Parkin JM, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching AJ. Tolerability
and  side-effects  of  post-exposure  prophylaxis  for  HIV  infection  [Letter].  Lancet
2000;355:722--3.
 Jochimsen EM, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) use among health care workers (HCWs) after
occupational exposures to blood [Abstract W6-F]. In: Keynote addresses and abstracts
of the 4th
ICOH International Conference on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers.
Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Critchley SE, Srivastava PU, Campbell SR, Cardo DM, NaSH Surveillance
Group. Postexposure prophylaxis use among healthcare workers who were exposed to
HIV-negative source persons [Abstract P-S2-64]. In: Program and Abstracts of the
4th Decennial International Conference on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated
Infections.  Atlanta,  GA:  CDC  in  conjunction  with  the  10th  Annual  Meeting  of  SHEA,
2000:126.
  CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating transmission in
the United States through universal childhood vaccination: recommendations of
the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13).
  CDC. Recommendations for the prevention and control of hepatitis C virus
  (HCV)
infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-19).
  CDC. Management of possible sexual, injecting-drug--use, or other
nonoccupational  exposure  to  HIV,  including  considerations  related  to  antiretroviral
therapy: Public
Health Service statement. MMWR 1998;47(no. RR-17).
  CDC. Recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service Task Force on the use
of zidovudine to reduce perinatal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-11).
  CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings.
MMWR 1987;36(suppl no. 2S).
  CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in
health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377--82,387--8.
 Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus transmission
between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1989;8:870--5.
 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of human
immunodeficiency  virus  through  human  bites.  J  Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr
1993;6:402--6.
 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission of HIV-1 by human
bite [Letter]. Lancet 1996;347:1762--3.
  CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  and  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18).
 Chiarello LA, Gerberding JL. Human immunodeficiency virus in health care settings.
In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles
and  practice  of  infectious  diseases.  5th  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Churchill  Livingstone,
2000:3052--66.
 Cardo DM, Smith DK, Bell DM. Postexposure Management. In: Dolin R, Masur H, Saag
MS, eds. AIDS Therapy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1999:236--47.
 Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and management of
blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385--407.
 Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among health-care
workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical practice. New York, NY: Marcel
Dekker, 1993:295--307.
 Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen-positive inoculations:
use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:367--9.
 Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. Nonparenteral serum
hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972;220:963--6.
 Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an occupational hazard
to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395--400.
 Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health
care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324--6.
 Chaudhuri AKR, Follett EAC. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and health care
personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408.
 Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. Survival
of  hepatitis  B  virus  after  drying  and  storage  for  one  week  [Letter].  Lancet
1981;1:550--1.
 Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus. Semin Liver
Dis 1981;1:27--32.
 Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on environmental
surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455.
 Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmission of hepatitis B
virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 1979;140:513--6.
 Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among hospital
personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407--8.
 Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.
Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384--9.
 Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: a
report of an epidemic with further evidence on mechanisms of transmission. Am J
Epidemiol 1976;104:563--70.
 Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of environmental
control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235--52.
 Segal HE, Llewellyn CH, Irwin G, Bancroft WH, Boe GP, Balaban DJ. Hepatitis B antigen
and antibody in the U.S. Army: prevalence in health care personnel. Am J Pub
Health 1976;55:667--71.
 Denes AE, Smith JL, Maynard JE, Doto IL, Berquist KR, Finkel AJ. Hepatitis B infection
in physicians: results of a nationwide seroepidemiologic survey. JAMA 1978;239:210--2.
 Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus in hospital
personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 1982;115:26--39.
 West DJ. The risk of hepatitis B infection among health professionals in the
United States: a review. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:26--33.
  CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee
(ACIP) inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 1982;31:317--28.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee G C-Y, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis
B virus infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine.
Lancet 1983;2:1099--102.
 Stevens CE, Toy PT, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission in the
United States: prevention by passive-active immunization. JAMA 1985;253:1740--5.
 Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis B immune globulin
for prevention of perinatal transmission of the hepatitis B virus carrier state: final report
of
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135--41.
 Grady GF, Lee VA, Prince AM, et al. Hepatitis B immune globulin for accidental
exposures  among  medical  personnel:  final  report  of  a  multicenter  controlled  trial.  J
Infect
Dis 1978;138:625--38.
 Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. A randomized, double blind controlled trial
of the efficacy of immune serum globulin for the prevention of post-transfusion
hepatitis:
 a
 Veterans
 Administration
 cooperative
 study.
 Gastroenterology
1977;72:111--21.
 Prince AM, Szmuness W, Mann MK, et al. Hepatitis B "immune" globulin: effectiveness
in prevention of dialysis-associated hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1063--7.
 Greenberg DP. Pediatric experience with recombinant hepatitis B vaccines and
relevant safety and immunogenicity studies. Pediatr Inf Dis J 1993;12:438--45.
 Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Harley EJ, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine: demonstration of
efficacy in a controlled clinical trial in a high-risk population in the United States. N Engl
J
Med 1980;303:833--41.
 Francis DP, Hadler SC, Thompson SE, et al. The prevention of hepatitis B with
vaccine: report of the Centers for Disease Control multi-center efficacy trial among
homosexual men. Ann Intern Med 1982;97:362--6.
 Stevens CE, Alter HJ, Taylor PE, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine in patients receiving
hemodialysis: immunogenicity and efficacy. N Engl J Med 1984;311:496--501.
 André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine.
Am J Med 1989;87(suppl 3A):14S--20S.
 Zajac BA, West DJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM. Overview of clinical studies with
hepatitis B vaccine made by recombinant DNA. J Infect 1986;13(suppl A):39--45.
  Wise  RP,  Kiminyo  KP,  Salive  ME.  Hair  loss  after  routine  immunizations.  JAMA
1997;278:1176--8.
 Shaw FE, Graham DJ, Guess HA, et al. Postmarketing surveillance for neurologic
adverse  events  reported  after  hepatitis  B  vaccination:  experience  of  the  first  three
years. Am
J Epidemiol 1988;127:337--52.
 Chen D-S. Control of hepatitis B in Asia: mass immunization program in Taiwan.
In: Hollinger FB, Lemon SM, Margolis HS, eds. Viral hepatitis and liver disease.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1991:716--9.
 Niu MT, Rhodes P, Salive M, et al. Comparative safety of two recombinant hepatitis
B vaccines in children: data from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51:503--10.
 Ribera EF, Dutka AJ. Polyneuropathy associated with administration of hepatitis B
vaccine [Letter]. N Engl J Med 1983;309:614--5.
 Tuohy PG. Guillain-Barré syndrome following immunisation with synthetic hepatitis
B vaccine [Letter]. N Z Med J 1989;102:114--5.
 Herroelen L, de Keyser J, Ebinger G. Central-nervous-system demyelination
after immunisation with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1991;338:1174--5.
 Gross K, Combe C, Krüger K, Schattenkirchner M. Arthritis after hepatitis B
vaccination: report of three cases. Scand J Rheumatol 1995;24:50--2.
 Pope JE, Stevens A, Howson W, Bell DA. The development of rheumatoid arthritis
after recombinant hepatitis B vaccination. J Rheumatol 1998;25:1687--93.
 Hassan W, Oldham R. Reiter's syndrome and reactive arthritis in health care workers
after vaccination. Br Med J 1994;309:94.
 Grotto I, Mandel Y, Ephros M, Ashkenazi I, Shemer J. Major adverse reactions to
yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccines---a review. Vaccine 1998;16:329--34.
 Confavreux C, Suissa S, Saddier P, Bourdès V, Vukusic S, Vaccines in Multiple
Sclerosis Study Group. Vaccinations and the risk of relapse in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:319--26.
 Ascherio A, Zhang SM, Hernán MA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of
multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 2001;344:327--32.
 Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H. Hepatitis B vaccine and central
nervous system demyelinating diseases. Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board. Pediatr Infect
Dis
J 1999;18:23--4.
  CDC. Safety of therapeutic immune globulin preparations with respect to transmission
of human T-lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus infection.
MMWR 1986;35:231--3.
  CDC. Outbreak of hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin
administration---United States, October 1993--June 1994, MMWR 1994;43:505--9.
 Ellis EF, Henney CS. Adverse reactions following administration of human gamma
globulin. J Allerg 1969;43:45--54.
 Alter  MJ.  The  epidemiology  of  acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  C.  Clin  Liver  Dis
1997;1:559--68.
 Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr., Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy L, Kerley LM.
Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk of exposure and infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:745--50.
 Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
and Other Bloodborne Infections. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion after
occupational exposure in health care workers. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:273--7.
 Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in medical personnel
after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16:1109--14.
 Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. Transmission of
hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva [Letter]. Scand J Infect Dis 1993;25:270--1.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, Petrosillo N, et al. Simultaneous infection with HIV and hepatitis
C virus following occupational conjunctival blood exposure [Letter]. JAMA 1998;280:28.
 Davis GL, Lau J Y-N, Urdea MS, et al. Quantitative detection of hepatitis C virus RNA
with a solid-phase signal amplification method: definition of optimal conditions for
specimen  collection  and  clinical  application  in  interferon-treated  patients.  Hepatology
1994;19:1337--41.
 Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for hepatitis C
virus infection among health care personnel in a community hospital. Am J Infect
Control 1993;21:196--200.
 Niu MT, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Multicenter study of hepatitis C virus infection in
chronic hemodialysis patients and hemodialysis center staff members. Am J Kidney
Dis 1993;22:568--73.
 Hardy NM, Sandroni S, Danielson S, Wilson WJ. Antibody to hepatitis C virus
increases with time on hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1992;38:44--8.
 Niu MT, Alter MJ, Kristensen C, Margolis HS. Outbreak of hemodialysis-associated
non-A, non-B hepatitis and correlation with antibody to hepatitis C virus. Am J Kidney
Dis 1992;19:345--52.
 Favero MS, Alter MJ. The reemergence of hepatitis B virus infection in
hemodialysis centers. Semin Dial 1996;9:373--4.
 Knodell RG, Conrad ME, Ginsberg AL, Bell CJ, Flannery EPR. Efficacy of
prophylactic gamma-globulin in preventing non-A, non-B post-transfusion hepatitis.
Lancet 1976;1:557--61.
 Sanchez-Quijano A, Pineda JA, Lissen E, et al. Prevention of post-transfusion
non-A, non-B hepatitis by non-specific immunoglobulin in heart surgery patients.
Lancet 1988;1:1245--9.
 Krawczynski K, Alter MJ, Tankersley DL, et al. Effect of immune globulin on the
prevention of experimental hepatitis C virus infection. J Infect Dis 1996;173:822--8.
 Alter MJ. Occupational exposure to hepatitis C virus: a dilemma. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15:742--4.
 Peters M, Davis GL, Dooley JS, Hoofnagle JH. The interferon system in acute and
chronic viral hepatitis. Progress in Liver Diseases 1986;8:453--67.
 Fried MW, Hoofnagle JH. Therapy of hepatitis C. Semin Liver Dis 1995;15:82--91.
 Vogel W, Graziadei I, Umlauft F, et al. High-dose
interferon-a2b treatment prevents
chronicity in acute hepatitis C: a pilot study. Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(suppl 12):81S--85S.
 Quin JW. Interferon therapy for acute hepatitis C viral infection---a review by
meta-analysis. Aust N Z J Med 1997;27:611--7.
 Seeff LB, Hollinger FB, Alter HJ, et al. Long-term mortality and morbidity of
transfusion-associated non-A, non-B, and type C hepatitis: a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood
Institute collaborative study. Hepatology 2001;33:455--63.
 Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in
healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):9--15.
 Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G, Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV
Infection.  The  risk  of  occupational  human  immunodeficiency  virus  in  health  care
workers. Arch
Int Med 1993;153:1451--8.
  CDC. Update: human immunodeficiency virus infections in health-care workers
exposed to blood of infected patients. MMWR 1987;36:285--9.
 Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of nonparenteral
occupational exposures to blood and body fluids before and after universal precautions
training.
Am J Med 1991;90:145--53.
 Henderson DK, Fahey BJ, Willy M, et al. Risk for occupational transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) associated with clinical exposures: a
prospective evaluation. Ann Intern Med 1990;113:740--6.
 CDC. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human
Services, CDC, 2000:24. (vol 12, no. 1).
 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion
in health care workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485--90.
 Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efficacy of gloves in reducing blood
volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1993;168:1589--92.
 Pinto LA, Landay AL, Berzofsky JA, Kessler HA, Shearer GM. Immune response to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in healthcare workers occupationally exposed to
HIV-contaminated blood. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):21--4.
 Clerici M, Giorgi JV, Chou C-C, et al. Cell-mediated immune response to
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  type  1  in  seronegative  homosexual  men  with
recent
sexual exposure to HIV-1. J Infect Dis 1992;165:1012--9.
 Ranki A, Mattinen S, Yarchoan R, et al. T-cell response towards HIV in infected
individuals  with  and  without  zidovudine  therapy,  and  in  HIV-exposed  sexual  partners.
AIDS
1989;3:63--9.
 Cheynier R, Langlade-Demoyen P, Marescot M-R, et al. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses in the peripheral blood of children born to human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected mothers. Eur J Immunol 1992;22:2211--7.
 Kelker HC, Seidlin M, Vogler M, Valentine FT. Lymphocytes from some
long-term seronegative heterosexual partners of HIV-infected individuals proliferate in
response
to HIV antigens. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1992;8:1355--9.
 Langlade-Demoyen P, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Ferchal F, Oksenhendler E.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nef-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
noninfected
 heterosexual
 contact
 of
 HIV-infected
 patients.
 J
 Clin
 Invest
1994;93:1293--7.
 Rowland-Jones S, Sutton J, Ariyoshi K, et al. HIV-specific cytotoxic T-cells in
HIV-exposed but uninfected Gambian women. Nat Med 1995;1:59--64.
 D'Amico R, Pinto LA, Meyer P, et al. Effect of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis on
the development of HIV-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in HIV-exposed
healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:428--30.
 Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, et al. Cellular targets of infection and route of
viral dissemination after an intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus
into rhesus macaques. J Exp Med 1996;183:215--25.
 McClure HM, Anderson DC, Ansari AA, Fultz PN, Klumpp SA, Schinazi RF.
Nonhuman  primate  models  for  evaluation  of  AIDS  therapy.  In:  AIDS:  anti-HIV  agents,
therapies
and vaccines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990;616:287--98.
 Böttiger D, Johansson N-G, Samuelsson B, et al. Prevention of simian
immunodeficiency virus, SIVsm, or HIV-2 infection in cynomolgus monkeys by pre- and
postexposure administration of BEA-005. AIDS 1997;11:157--62.
 Otten RA, Smith DK, Adams DR, et al. Efficacy of postexposure prophylaxis
after intravaginal exposure of pig-tailed macaques to a human-derived retrovirus
(human immunodeficiency virus type 2). J Virol 2000;74:9771--5.
 Sinet M, Desforges B, Launay O, Colin J-N, Pocidalo J-J. Factors influencing
zidovudine efficacy when administered at early stages of Friend virus infection in mice.
Antiviral
Res 1991;16:163--71.
 Ruprecht RM, Bronson R. Chemoprevention of retroviral infection: success is
determined  by  virus  inoculum  strength  and  cellular  immunity.  DNA  Cell  Biol
1994;13:59--66.
 Fazely F, Haseltine WA, Rodger RF, Ruprecht RM. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis
with ZDV or ZDV combined with interferon-a: failure after inoculating rhesus monkeys
with
a high dose of SIV. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1991;4:1093--7.
 Böttiger D, Oberg B. Influence of the infectious dose of SIV on the acute infection
in cynomolgus monkeys and on the effect of treatment with 3'-fluorothymidine
[Abstract no. 81]. In: Symposium on Nonhuman Primate Models for AIDS. Seattle, WA,
1991.
 Martin LN, Murphey-Corb M, Soike KF, Davison-Fairburn B, Baskin GB. Effects of
initiation  of  3'-azido,3'-deoxythymidine (zidovudine)  treatment  at  different  times  after
infection
of rhesus monkeys with simian immunodeficiency virus. J Infect Dis 1993;168:825--35.
 Shih C-C, Kaneshima H, Rabin L, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis with
zidovudine suppresses human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in SCID-hu mice
in a
time-dependent manner. J Infect Dis 1991;163:625--7.
 Mathes LE, Polas PJ, Hayes KA, Swenson CL, Johnson S, Kociba GJ. Pre- and
postexposure  chemoprophylaxis:  evidence  that  3'-azido-3'dideoxythymidine  inhibits
feline
leukemia virus disease by a drug-induced vaccine response. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1992;36:2715--21.
 Tavares L, Roneker C, Johnston K, Lehrman SN, de Noronha F.
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine  in  feline  leukemia  virus-infected  cats:  a  model  for  therapy
and prophylaxis of
AIDS. Cancer Res 1987;47:3190--4.
 Tsai C-C, Follis KE, Sabo A, et al. Prevention of SIV infection in macaques by
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine. Science 1995;270:1197--9.
 Tsai C-C, Emau P, Follis KE, et al. Effectiveness of postinoculation
(R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl) adenine treatment for prevention of persistent
simian  immunodeficiency  virus  SIVmne  infection  depends  critically  on  timing  of
initiation
and duration of treatment. J Virol 1998;72:4265--73.
 Le Grand R, Vaslin B, Larghero J, et al. Post-exposure prophylaxis with highly
active antiretroviral therapy could not protect macaques from infection with SIV/HIV
chimera. AIDS 2000;14:1864--6.
 LaFon SW, Mooney BD, McMullen JP, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of the safety and efficacy of
retrovir® (zidovudine, ZDV) as a chemoprophylactic agent
in health care workers exposed to HIV [Abstract 489]. In: Program and abstracts of the
30th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Atlanta,
GA: American Society for Microbiology, 1990:167.
 Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment. N Engl J
Med 1994;331:1173--80.
 Sperling RS, Shapiro DE, Coombs RW, et al. Maternal viral load, zidovudine
treatment, and the risk of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from
mother
to infant. N Engl J Med 1996;335:1621--9.
 Shaffer N, Chuachoowong R, Mock PA, et al. Short-course zidovudine for perinatal
HIV-1  transmission  in  Bangkok,  Thailand:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Lancet
1999;353:
773--80.
 Saba J, PETRA Trial Study Team. Interim analysis of early efficacy of three short
ZDV/3TC  combination  regimens  to  prevent  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV-1:  the
PETRA
trial [Abstract S-7]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses
and Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human
Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases and CDC, 1999.
 Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine
prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J
Med 1998;339:1409--14.
 Musoke P, Guay LA, Bagenda D, et al. A phase I/II study of the safety and
pharmacokinetics  of  nevirapine  in  HIV-1-infected  pregnant  Ugandan  women  and  their
neonates
(HIVNET 006). AIDS 1999;13:479--86.
 Guay LA, Musoke P, Fleming T, et al. Intrapartum and neonatal single-dose
nevirapine compared with zidovudine for prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV-1
in Kampala, Uganda: HIVNET 012 randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:795--802.
 Jochimsen EM. Failures of zidovudine postexposure prophylaxis. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):52--5.
 Pratt RD, Shapiro JF, McKinney N, Kwok S, Spector SA. Virologic characterization
of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in a health care worker
following needlestick injury. J Infect Dis 1995;172:851--4.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Infections professionnelles par le V.I.H. en France chez le personnel
de  santé---le  point  au  30  juin  1995.  Bulletin  Épidémiologique  Hebdomadiaire
1995;44:193--4.
 Weisburd G, Biglione J, Arbulu MM, Terrazzino JC, Pesiri A. HIV seroconversion after
a work place accident and treated with zidovudine [Abstract Pub.C.1141]. In: Abstracts
of  the  XI  International  Conference  on  AIDS.  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada,
1996:460.
 Perdue B, Wolderufael D, Mellors J, Quinn T, Margolick J. HIV-1 transmission by
a needlestick injury despite rapid initiation of four-drug postexposure prophylaxis
[Abstract 210]. In: Program and abstracts of the 6th Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. Chicago, IL: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in
scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
CDC, 1999:107.
 Lot F, Abiteboul D. Occupational HIV infection in France [Abstract WP-25]. In:
Keynote addresses and abstracts of the 4th ICOH International Conference on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers. Montreal, Canada, 1999.
 Beltrami EM, Luo C-C, Dela Torre N, Cardo DM. HIV transmission after an
occupational  exposure  despite  postexposure  prophylaxis  with  a  combination  drug
regimen
[Abstract  P-S2-62].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  4th  Decennial  International
Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections in conjunction with the 10th
Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:125--6.
 Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-infected adults and adolescents. Available at
<http://hivatis.org/trtgdlns.html>. Accessed May 9, 2001.
 Manion DJ, Hirsch MS. Combination chemotherapy for human immunodeficiency
virus-1. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):76--80.
 Lafeuillade A, Poggi C, Tamalet C, Profizi N, Tourres C, Costes O. Effects of a
combination
 of
 zidovudine,
 didanosine,
 and
 lamivudine
 on
 primary
 human
immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1051--5.
 Beltrami EM, Cheingsong R, Respess R, Cardo DM. Antiretroviral drug resistance in
HIV-infected source patients for occupational exposures to healthcare workers [Abstract
P-S2-70]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial International Conference
on Nosocomial and Healthcare-Associated Infections. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:128.
 Struble KA, Pratt RD, Gitterman SR. Toxicity of antiretroviral agents. Am J
Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):65--7.
 Food and Drug Administration. Protease inhibitors may increase blood glucose in
HIV patients. FDA Medical Bulletin 1997;27(2).
 Dever LL, Oruwari PA, O'Donovan CA, Eng RHK. Hyperglycemia associated with
protease inhibitors in HIV-infected patients [Abstract LB-4]. In: Abstracts of the 37th
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy. Toronto, Ontario,
Canada: American Society for Microbiology, 1997.
 Dubé MP, Johnson DL, Currier JS, Leedom JM. Protease
inhibitor-associated hyperglycaemia [Letter]. Lancet 1997;350:713--4.
 Abramowicz M, ed. New drugs for HIV infection. The Medical Letter on Drugs
and Therapeutics 1996;38:35--7.
 Martin JN, Roland ME, Bamberger JD, et al. Postexposure prophylaxis after sexual
or drug use exposure to HIV: final results from the San Francisco Post-Exposure
Prevention  (PEP)  Project  [Abstract  196].  In:  Program  and  abstracts  of  the  7th
Conference
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections. San Francisco, CA: Foundation
for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific collaboration with the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and CDC, 2000:112.
 Steger KA, Swotinsky R, Snyder S, Craven DE. Recent experience with
post-exposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  with  combination  antiretrovirals  for  occupational
exposure (OE)
to HIV [Abstract 480]. In: Program and abstracts of the 35th annual meeting of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Alexandria, VA: Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 1997:161.
 Henry K, Acosta EP, Jochimsen E. Hepatotoxicity and rash associated with
zidovudine and zalcitabine chemoprophylaxis [Letter]. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:855.
 Johnson S, Baraboutis JG; Sha BE, Proia LA, Kessler HA. Adverse effects associated
with use of nevirapine in HIV postexposure prophylaxis for 2 health care workers
[Letters]. JAMA 2000;284:2722--3.
 CDC. Serious adverse events attributed to nevirapine regimens for
postexposure  prophylaxis  after  HIV  exposures---worldwide,  1997--2000.  MMWR
2001;49:1153--6.
 Hirsch MS, Brun-Vézinet F, D'Aquila RT, et al. Antiretroviral drug resistance testing
in adult HIV-1 infection: recommendations of an international AIDS Society---USA
panel. JAMA 2000;283:2417--26.
 Tack PC, Bremer JW, Harris AA, Landay AL, Kessler HA. Genotypic analysis of
HIV-1  isolates  to  identify  antiretroviral  resistance  mutations  from  source  patients
involved
in health care worker occupational exposures [Letter]. JAMA 1999;281:1085--6.
  CDC. Public Health Service task force recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs
in pregnant women infected with HIV-1 for maternal health and for reducing perinatal
HIV-1 transmission in the United States. MMWR 1998;47(RR-2).
 Blanche S, Tardieu M, Rustin P, et al. Persistent mitochondrial dysfunction and
perinatal exposure to antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. Lancet 1999;354:1084--9.
 Smith ME, US Nucleoside Safety Review Working Group. Ongoing nucleoside
safety review of HIV exposed children in US studies [Abstract 96]. In: Final program and
abstracts for the Second Conference on Global Strategies for the Prevention of HIV
Transmission  from  Mothers  to  Infants.  Montreal,  Canada:  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences, 1999:49.
 Food and Drug Administration. Important drug warning. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/2001/zerit&videx_letter.htm>.  Accessed  May  9,
2001.
 Veeder AV, McErlean M, Putnam K, Caldwell WC, Venezia RA. The impact of a rapid HIV
test to limit unnecessary post exposure prophylaxis following occupational
exposures [Abstract P-S2-66]. In: Program and Abstracts of the 4th Decennial
International  Conference  on  Nosocomial  and  Healthcare-Associated  Infections  in
conjunction
with the 10th Annual Meeting of SHEA. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2000:127.
  CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers. MMWR 1989;38(No. S-6).
 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for
isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:54--80.
  CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures.
MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8).
 Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, Relyveld EH, Barres JL, DiopMar I, Chiron JP.
Simultaneous  administration  of  diphtheriatetanuspertussispolio  and  hepatitis  B
vaccines in
a simplified immunization program: immune response to diphtheria toxoid, tetanus
toxoid, pertussis, and hepatitis B surface antigen. Infect Immun 1986;51:784--7.
 Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE, et al. Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986;315:209--14.
  CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors of blood,
plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C. MMWR
1991;40(No. RR-4):1--17.
 Ridzon R, Gallagher K, Ciesielski C, et al. Simultaneous transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus from a needle-stick injury. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:919--22.
 Ciesielski CA, Metler RP. Duration of time between exposure and seroconversion
in healthcare workers with occupationally acquired infection with human
immunodeficiency virus. Am J Med 1997;102(suppl 5B):115--6.
 Busch MP, Satten GA. Time course of viremia and antibody seroconversion
following  human  immunodeficiency  virus  exposure.  Am  J  Med  1997;102(suppl
5B):117--24.
 Rich JD, Merriman NA, Mylonakis E, et al. Misdiagnosis of HIV infection by HIV-1
plasma viral load testing: a case series. Ann Intern Med 1999;130:37--9.
 Roland ME, Elbeik TA, Martin JN, et al. HIV-1 RNA testing by bDNA and PCR
in asymptomatic patients following sexual exposure to HIV [Abstract 776]. In: Program
and abstracts of the 7th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections.
San Francisco, CA: Foundation for Retrovirology and Human Health in scientific
collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases  and  CDC,
2000:220.
 Gerberding JL, Henderson DK. Management of occupational exposures to
bloodborne
 pathogens:
 hepatitis
 B
 virus,
 hepatitis
 C
 virus,
 and
 human
immunodeficiency virus.
Clin Inf Dis 1992;14:1179--85.
 Armstrong K, Gorden R, Santorella G. Occupational exposures of health care
workers (HCWs) to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV): stress reactions and
counseling interventions. Soc Work Health Care 1995;21:61--80.
 Henry K, Campbell S, Jackson B, et al. Long-term follow-up of health care workers
with
 work-site
 exposure
 to
 human
 immunodeficiency
 virus
 [Letter].
 JAMA
1990;263:1765.
 AIDS/TB Committee of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.
Management of healthcare workers infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus,
human immunodeficiency virus, or other bloodborne pathogens. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:349--63.
Table 1Return to top.
Table 2Return to top.
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
Box 4Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Page converted: 7/2/2001
 
Occupational Exposure Management Resources
 Several resources are available that provide guidance to HCP regarding
the management of occupational exposures. These resources include PEPline;
the Needlestick! website; the Hepatitis Hotline; CDC (receives reports of
occupationally  acquired  HIV  infections  and  failures  of  PEP);  the  HIV  Antiretroviral
Pregnancy
Registry; FDA (receives reports of unusual or severe toxicity to antiretroviral agents);
and
the HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service (Box 5).
 *This interagency working group comprised representatives of CDC, the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), the Health Resources and Services Administration, and
the National Institutes of Health. Information included in these recommendations may
not  represent  FDA  approval  or  approved  labeling  for  the  particular  product  or
indications
in question. Specifically, the terms "safe" and "effective" may not be synonymous with
the FDA-defined legal standards for product approval.
 Box 1Return to top.
 Box 2Return to top.
 Box 3Return to top.
Table 3Return to top.
Table 4Return to top.
Table 5Return to top.
 Box 4Return to top.
 Table 5
Return to top.
 Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 7/2/2001 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 7/2/2001
 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5011a1.htm
