Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / October 18, 2019 / 68(41);919–927 On October 11,
2019, this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. David A. Siegel, MD1;
Tara  C.  Jatlaoui,  MD1;  Emily  H.  Koumans,  MD1;  Emily  A.  Kiernan,  DO2,3;  Mark  Layer,
MD3,4; Jordan E. Cates, PhD5,6; Anne Kimball, MD6,7; David N. Weissman, MD8; Emily
E.  Petersen,  MD1;  Sarah  Reagan-Steiner,  MD9;  Shana  Godfred-Cato,  DO10;  Danielle
Moulia,  MPH5,11;  Erin  Moritz,  PhD4;  Jonathan  D.  Lehnert,  MPH9;  Jane  Mitchko,  MEd1;
Joel  London,  MPH1;  Sherif  R.  Zaki,  MD9;  Brian  A.  King,  PhD1;  Christopher  M.  Jones,
PharmD, DrPH12; Anita Patel, PharmD5; Dana Meaney Delman, MD10; Ram Koppaka,
MD,  PhD5;  Lung  Injury  Response  Clinical  Working  Group;  Lung  Injury  Response
Epidemiology/Surveillance Group (View author affiliations) What is already known about
this  topic?  Forty-nine  states,  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  one  U.S.  territory  have
reported  1,299  cases  of  lung  injury  associated  with  the  use  of  electronic  cigarette
(e-cigarette),  or  vaping,  products.  Twenty-six  deaths  have  been  reported  from  21
states. What is added by this report? Based on the most current data, CDC’s updated
interim  guidance  provides  a  framework  for  health  care  providers  in  their  initial
assessment,  evaluation,  management,  and  follow-up  of  persons  with  symptoms  of
e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  product  use  associated  lung  injury  (EVALI).  What  are  the
implications  for  public  health  practice?  Rapid  recognition  by  health  care  providers  of
patients with EVALI and an increased understanding of treatment considerations could
reduce  morbidity  and  mortality  associated  with  this  injury.  Views  equals  page  views
plus PDF downloads Box 1 Box 2 Box 3 CDC, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
state  and  local  health  departments,  and  public  health  and  clinical  partners  are
investigating a multistate outbreak of lung injury associated with the use of electronic
cigarette
 (e-cigarette),
 or
 vaping,
 products.
 In
 late
 August,
 CDC
 released
recommendations  for  health  care  providers  regarding  e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  product
use associated lung injury (EVALI) based on limited data from the first reported cases
(1,2). This report summarizes national surveillance data describing clinical features of
more  recently  reported  cases  and  interim  recommendations  based  on  these  data  for
U.S.  health  care  providers  caring  for  patients  with  suspected  or  known  EVALI.  It
provides  interim  guidance  for  1)  initial  clinical  evaluation;  2)  suggested  criteria  for
hospital  admission  and  treatment;  3)  patient  follow-up;  4)  special  considerations  for
groups  at  high  risk;  and  5)  clinical  and  public  health  recommendations.  Health  care
providers  evaluating  patients  suspected  to  have  EVALI  should  ask  about  the  use  of
e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  products  in  a  nonjudgmental  and  thorough  manner.  Patients
suspected to have EVALI should have a chest radiograph (CXR), and hospital admission
is recommended for patients who have decreased blood oxygen (O2) saturation (<95%)
on  room  air  or  who  are  in  respiratory  distress.  Health  care  providers  should  consider
empiric  use  of  a  combination  of  antibiotics,  antivirals,  or  steroids  based  upon  clinical
context.  Evidence-based  tobacco  product  cessation  strategies,  including  behavioral
counseling, are recommended to help patients discontinue use of e-cigarette, or vaping,
products. To reduce the risk of recurrence, patients who have been treated for EVALI
should not use e-cigarette, or vaping, products. CDC recommends that persons should
not  use  e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  products  that  contain  tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC).  At
present,  CDC  recommends  persons  consider  refraining  from  using  e-cigarette,  or
vaping,  products  that  contain  nicotine.  Irrespective  of  the  ongoing  investigation,
e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  products  should  never  be  used  by  youths,  young  adults,  or
women who are pregnant. Persons who do not currently use tobacco products should
not start using e-cigarette, or vaping, products. As of October 8, 2019, 49 states, the
District of Columbia, and one territorial health department have reported 1,299 cases of
EVALI to CDC, with 26 deaths reported from 21 states (median age of death = 49 years,
range = 17–75 years). Among 1,043 patients with available data on age and sex, 70%
were male, and the median age was 24 years (range = 13–75 years); 80% were aged
<35  years,  and  15%  were  aged  <18  years.  Among  573  patients  who  reported
information  on  substances  used  in  e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  products  in  the  90  days
preceding  symptom  onset,  76%  reported  using  THC-containing  products,  and  58%
reported
 using
 nicotine-containing
 products;
 32%
 reported
 exclusive
 use
 of
THC-containing  products,  and  13%  reported  exclusive  use  of  nicotine-containing
products.*  No  single  compound  or  ingredient  has  emerged  as  the  cause  of  these
injuries  to  date,  and  there  might  be  more  than  one  cause.  Available  data  suggest
THC-containing  products  play  a  role  in  this  outbreak,  but  the  specific  chemical  or
chemicals  responsible  for  EVALI  have  not  yet  been  identified,  and  nicotine-containing
products  have  not  been  excluded  as  a  possible  cause.  Ongoing  federal  and  state
investigations have provided information about the clinical characteristics of cases and
a surveillance case definition for confirmed and probable cases has been developed (1);
this  case  definition†  is  not  intended  to  guide  clinical  care.  To  inform  CDC’s  updated
interim  clinical  guidance,  on  October  2,  2019,  CDC  obtained  individual  expert
perspectives  on  the  evaluation  and  treatment  of  patients  with  suspected  EVALI.
Discussions  occurred  with  nine  national  experts  in  adult  and  pediatric  pulmonary
medicine  and  critical  care  who  were  designated  by  professional  medical  societies  to
participate (Lung Injury Response Clinical Working Group). Evidence supporting CDC’s
recommendations include data from medical abstractions reported to CDC, previously
published  case  series  (3–5),  and  the  aforementioned  individual  expert  opinions.  Top
EVALI  is  considered  a  diagnosis  of  exclusion  because,  at  present,  no  specific  test  or
marker exists for its diagnosis (Box 1). Health care providers should consider multiple
etiologies,  including  the  possibility  of  EVALI  and  concomitant  infection.  In  addition,
health  care  providers  should  evaluate  alternative  diagnoses  as  suggested  by  clinical
findings  and  medical  history  (e.g.,  cardiac,  gastrointestinal,  rheumatologic,  and
neoplastic  processes;  environmental  or  occupational  exposures;  or  causes  of  acute
respiratory  distress  syndrome)  (6).  Patient  history.  Based  upon  medical  chart
abstraction  data  submitted  to  CDC,  95%  (323/339)  of  patients  diagnosed  with  EVALI
initially  experienced  respiratory  symptoms  (e.g.,  cough,  chest  pain,  and  shortness  of
breath),  and  77%  (262/339)  had  gastrointestinal  symptoms  (e.g.,  abdominal  pain,
nausea,  vomiting,  and  diarrhea).  Gastrointestinal  symptoms  preceded  respiratory
symptoms  in  some  patients  (1–3).  Respiratory  or  gastrointestinal  symptoms  were
accompanied by constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, and weight loss among
85%  (289/339)  of  patients  (Table).  All  health  care  providers  evaluating  patients  for
EVALI should ask about the use of e-cigarette, or vaping, products and ideally should
ask about types of substances used (e.g., THC, cannabis [oil, dabs], nicotine, modified
products  or  the  addition  of  substances  not  intended  by  the  manufacturer);  product
source, specific product brand and name; duration and frequency of use, time of last
use; product delivery system, and method of use (aerosolization, dabbing, or dripping).
Empathetic,  nonjudgmental,  and  private  questioning  of  patients  regarding  sensitive
information  to  assure  confidentiality  should  be  employed.  Standardized  approaches
should  be  used  for  interviewing  adolescents.  Resources  exist  to  guide  patient
interviews, including those of adolescents.§ In some situations, asking questions over
the  course  of  the  hospitalization  or  during  follow-up  visits  might  elicit  additional
information about exposures, especially as trust is established between the patient and
clinicians.  Physical  examination.  For  patients  who  report  the  use  of  e-cigarette,  or
vaping,  products,  physical  examination  should  include  vital  signs  and  pulse-oximetry.
Tachycardia was reported in 55% (169/310) of patients and tachypnea in 45% (77/172);
O2  saturation  <95%  at  rest  on  room  air  was  present  for  57%  (143/253)  of  patients
reported  to  CDC  (Table),  underscoring  the  need  for  routine  pulse-oximetry.  Among
patients identified to date, pulmonary findings on auscultation exam have often been
unremarkable, even among patients with severe lung injury (personal communication,
Lung  Injury  Response  Clinical  Working  Group,  October  2,  2019).  Laboratory  testing.
Laboratory  testing  should  be  guided  by  clinical  findings.  A  respiratory  virus  panel,
including  influenza  testing  during  influenza  season,  should  be  strongly  considered.
Additional  testing  should  be  based  on  published  guidelines  for  evaluation  of
community-acquired pneumonia.¶ Infectious diseases to consider include Streptococcus
pneumoniae,  Legionella  pneumophila,  Mycoplasma  pneumoniae,  endemic  mycoses,
and  opportunistic  infections;  the  likelihood  of  infection  by  any  of  these  varies  by
geographic  prevalence  and  patient  medical  history.  Other  abnormal  laboratory  tests
reported in patients with EVALI include elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, serum
inflammatory  markers  (C-reactive  protein,  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate  [ESR]),  and
liver transaminases. In a report of initial patients from Illinois and Wisconsin, 87% had a
WBC  >11,000/mm3  and  93%  had  an  ESR  >30mm/hr;  50%  of  patients  had  elevated
liver transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase or alanine aminotransferase >35 U/L)
(3).  However,  at  this  time,  these  tests  cannot  be  used  to  distinguish  EVALI  from
infectious  etiologies.  In  all  patients,  providers  should  consider  conducting,  with
informed  consent,  urine  toxicology  testing,  including  testing  for  THC.  Imaging.
Radiographic  findings  consistent  with  EVALI  include  pulmonary  infiltrates  on  CXR  and
opacities on chest computed tomography (CT) scan (1,7). A CXR should be obtained on
all patients with a history of e-cigarette, or vaping, product use who have respiratory or
gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly when accompanied by decreased O2 saturation
(<95%). Chest CT might be useful when the CXR result does not correlate with clinical
findings  or  to  evaluate  severe  or  worsening  disease,  complications  such  as
pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum, or other illnesses in the differential diagnosis,
such as pneumonia or pulmonary embolism. In some cases, chest CT has demonstrated
findings such as bilateral ground glass opacities despite a normal or nondiagnostic CXR
(3). Among patients with abnormal CXR findings and a clinical picture consistent with
EVALI, a chest CT scan might not be necessary for diagnosis. The decision to obtain a
chest  CT  should  be  made  on  a  case-by-case  basis  depending  on  the  clinical
circumstances. Consultation with specialists. Consultation with several specialists might
be  necessary  to  optimize  patient  management.  For  patients  being  evaluated  for
possible EVALI, consideration should be given to consultation with a pulmonologist, who
can  help  guide  further  evaluation,  recommend  empiric  treatment,  and  review  the
indications
 for
 bronchoscopy.
 The
 decision
 to
 perform
 bronchoscopy
 and
bronchoalveolar  lavage  (BAL)  to  rule  out  alternative  diagnoses  such  as  pulmonary
infection  should  be  made  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  The  value  of  staining  BAL  cells  or
fresh  lung  biopsy  tissue  for  lipid-laden  macrophages  (e.g.,  using  oil  red  O  or  Sudan
Black) in the evaluation of EVALI remains unknown. In addition, there should be a low
threshold  for  consulting  with  critical  care  physicians,  because,  based  upon  data
submitted to CDC, 47% (159/342) of patients were admitted to an intensive care unit
and 22% (74/338) required endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation (Table);
critical  care  physicians  should  be  consulted  to  determine  optimal  management  of
respiratory failure. Consultation with medical toxicology, infectious disease, psychology,
psychiatry, addiction medicine, and other specialists should be considered as warranted
by patient circumstances. Top Admission criteria and outpatient management. Several
factors should be considered when deciding whether to admit a patient with potential
EVALI to the hospital (Box 2). Among 1,002 cases reported to CDC with available data
as  of  October  8,  96%  of  patients  were  hospitalized.  Patients  with  suspected  EVALI
should be admitted if they have decreased O2 saturation (<95%) on room air, are in
respiratory  distress,  or  have  comorbidities  that  compromise  pulmonary  reserve.
Consider  modifying  factors  such  as  altitude  to  guide  interpretation  of  measured  O2
saturation.  Outpatient  management  of  suspected  EVALI  might  be  considered  on  a
case-by-case basis for patients who are clinically stable, have less severe injury, and for
whom follow-up within 24–48 hours of initial evaluation can be assured. Candidates for
outpatient management should have normal O2 saturation (≥95%), reliable access to
care,  and  strong  social  support  systems.  For  these  patients,  empiric  use  of
antimicrobials,  including  antivirals,  if  indicated,  should  be  considered.  Some  patients
who initially had mild symptoms experienced a rapid worsening of symptoms within 48
hours. In Illinois and Wisconsin, 72% of patients had either an outpatient or emergency
department  visit  before  seeking  additional  medical  care  that  resulted  in  hospital
admission (3). Health care providers should instruct all patients to seek medical care
promptly if respiratory symptoms worsen. Medical treatment. Corticosteroids might be
helpful  in  treating  this  injury.  Several  case  reports  describe  improvement  with
corticosteroids,  likely  because  of  a  blunting  of  the  inflammatory  response  (3–5).  In  a
series of patients in Illinois and Wisconsin, 92% of 50 patients received corticosteroids;
the  medical  team  documented  in  65%  of  46  patient  notes  that  “respiratory
improvement  was  due  to  the  use  of  glucocorticoids”  (3).  Among  140  cases  reported
nationally  to  CDC  that  received  corticosteroids,  82%  of  patients  improved  (Table).
However,  the  natural  progression  of  this  injury  is  not  known,  and  it  is  possible  that
patients  might  recover  without  corticosteroids  or  by  avoiding  use  of  e-cigarette,  or
vaping,  products.  In  some  circumstances,  it  would  be  advisable  to  withhold
corticosteroids  while  evaluating  patients  for  infectious  etiologies,  such  as  fungal
pneumonia,  that  might  worsen  with  corticosteroid  treatment.  Nevertheless,  because
the diagnosis remains one of exclusion, aggressive empiric therapy with corticosteroids,
antimicrobial, and antiviral therapy might be warranted for patients with severe illness.
A range of corticosteroid doses, durations, and taper plans might be considered on a
case-by-case  basis.  Whenever  possible,  decisions  on  the  use  of  corticosteroids  and
dosing regimen should be made in consultation with a pulmonologist. Early initiation of
antimicrobial  treatment  for  community-acquired  pneumonia  in  accordance  with
established guidelines** should be strongly considered given the overlapping of signs
and  symptoms  in  these  conditions.  During  influenza  season,  health  care  providers
should  consider  influenza  in  all  patients  with  suspected  EVALI.  Antivirals  should  be
considered  in  accordance  with  established  guidelines.††  Decisions  on  initiation  or
discontinuation  of  treatment  should  be  based  on  specific  clinical  features  and,  when
appropriate, in consultation with specialists. Follow-up from hospital admission. Patients
discharged from the hospital after inpatient treatment for EVALI should have a follow-up
visit no later than 1–2 weeks after discharge that includes pulse-oximetry, and clinicians
should  consider  repeating  the  CXR.  Additional  follow-up  testing  1–2  months  after
discharge that might include spirometry, diffusion capacity testing, and CXR should be
considered.  Long-term  effects  and  the  risk  of  recurrence  of  EVALI  are  not  known.
Whereas many patients’ symptoms resolved, clinicians report that some patients have
relapsed  during  corticosteroid  tapers  after  hospitalization,  underscoring  the  need  for
close follow-up (personal communication, Lung Injury Response Clinical Working Group,
October 2, 2019). Some patients have had persistent hypoxemia (O2 saturation <95%),
requiring  home  oxygen  at  discharge  and  might  need  ongoing  pulmonary  follow-up.
Patients  treated  with  high-dose  corticosteroids  might  require  care  from  an
endocrinologist to monitor adrenal function. It is unknown if patients with a history of
EVALI are at higher risk for severe complications of influenza or other respiratory viral
infections  if  they  are  infected  simultaneously  or  after  recovering  from  lung  injury.
Health care providers should emphasize the importance of annual vaccination against
influenza for all persons >6 months of age, including patients with a history of EVALI. In
addition,  administration  of  pneumococcal  vaccine  should  be  considered  according  to
current  guidelines.§§  Addressing  exposures.  Advising  patients  to  discontinue  use  of
e-cigarette, or vaping, products should be an integral part of the care approach during
an  inpatient  admission  and  should  be  re-emphasized  during  outpatient  follow-up.
Cessation  of  e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  products  might  speed  recovery  from  this  injury;
resuming use of e-cigarette, or vaping, products has the potential to cause recurrence
of  symptoms  or  lung  injury.  Evidence-based  tobacco  product  cessation  strategies
include behavioral counseling and FDA-approved cessation medications.¶¶ For patients
who
 have
 addiction
 to
 THC-containing
 or
 nicotine-containing
 products,
cognitive-behavioral  therapy,  contingency  management,  motivational  enhancement
therapy,  and  multidimensional  family  therapy  have  been  shown  to  help,  and
consultation  with  addiction  medicine  services  should  be  considered  (8–10).  Special
considerations  for  groups  at  high  risk.  Patients  with  certain  characteristics  or
comorbidities,  including  older  age,  history  of  cardiac  or  lung  disease,  or  pregnancy,
might  be  at  higher  risk  for  more  severe  outcomes.  Among  reported  cases  (Table),
patients  aged  >50  years  experienced  the  highest  percentage  of  endotracheal
intubation and mechanical ventilation (54%) and the longest mean inpatient stays (15
days). The mean first recorded O2 saturations among those who did and did not require
intubation were 87% and 92%, respectively (data not shown). Among those with and
without past cardiac disease, 31% and 21%, respectively, required intubation (Table).
Special  consideration  might  need  to  be  given  to  patients  aged  >50  years,  because
these patients might require longer duration of hospitalization and have a higher risk of
intubation (Figure). Rapid identification of exposure, a high index of suspicion of EVALI,
initiation  of  corticosteroids,  and  specialist  consultations  might  be  lifesaving  in  this
patient  population.  Additional  data  might  identify  other  groups  at  high  risk,  provide
important  information  about  disparities  in  outcomes,  and  help  guide  clinical  care.
Certain patients, such as adolescents and young adults, might benefit from specialized
services, such as addiction treatment services and providers who have experience with
counseling  and  behavioral  health  follow-up.  Top  Reporting  cases  to  state,  local,
territorial,  or  tribal  health  departments  is  critical  for  accurate  surveillance  of  EVALI.
Reporting  cases  and  obtaining  and  sending  products,  devices,  and  clinical  and
pathologic specimens for testing, can help health departments and CDC determine the
cause or causes of these lung injuries.*** CDC is developing International Classification
of  Diseases,  Tenth  Edition,  Clinical  Modification  coding  guidance  for  health  care
encounters
 related
 to
 EVALI.
 Updates,
 when
 available,
 can
 be
 found
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/lunginjury  (Box  3).  Public  health  recommendations.  At  this  time,
FDA and CDC have not identified the cause or causes of the lung injuries among EVALI
cases,  and  the  only  commonality  among  all  cases  is  that  patients  report  the  use  of
e-cigarette, or vaping, products. This outbreak might have more than one cause, and
many  different  substances  and  product  sources  are  still  under  investigation.  To  date,
national  and  state  data  suggest  that  products  containing  THC,  particularly  those
obtained off the street or from other informal sources (e.g., friends, family members, or
illicit  dealers),  are  linked  to  most  of  the  cases  and  play  a  major  role  in  the  outbreak
(11,12).  Therefore,  CDC  recommends  that  persons  should  not  use  e-cigarette,  or
vaping, products that contain THC. Persons should not buy any type of e-cigarette, or
vaping, products, particularly those containing THC, off the street. Persons should not
modify or add any substances to e-cigarette, or vaping, products that are not intended
by  the  manufacturer,  including  products  purchased  through  retail  establishments.
Given  that  the  exclusive  use  of  nicotine-containing  products  has  been  reported  by  a
small  percentage  of  persons  with  EVALI,  and  that  many  persons  with  EVALI  report
combined  use  of  THC-  and  nicotine-containing  products,  the  possibility  that
nicotine-containing products play a role in this outbreak cannot be excluded. Therefore,
at present, CDC continues to recommend that persons consider refraining from using
e-cigarette, or vaping, products that contain nicotine. If adults are using e-cigarette, or
vaping,  products  to  quit  cigarette  smoking,  they  should  not  return  to  smoking
cigarettes; they should use evidence-based treatments, including health care provider
counseling  and  FDA-approved  medications.†††  If  persons  continue  to  use  these
products, they should carefully monitor themselves for symptoms and see a health care
provider  immediately  if  symptoms  develop.  Irrespective  of  the  ongoing  investigation,
e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  products  should  never  be  used  by  youths,  young  adults,  or
women who are pregnant. There is no safe tobacco product, and the use of any tobacco
products, including e-cigarettes, carries a risk. Therefore, persons who do not currently
use  tobacco  products  should  not  start  using  e-cigarette,  or  vaping,  products.  This
investigation is ongoing. CDC will continue to work in collaboration with FDA and state
and local partners to investigate cases and to update guidance, as appropriate, as new
data emerges from this complex outbreak. Top State and local health department staff
members.  Anne  Griffiths,  MD,  ,  Pediatric  Pulmonary  Medicine,  Children’s  Minnesota;
Annette  Esper,  MD,  Emory  University;  Carolyn  S.  Calfee,  MD,  Pulmonary  and  Critical
Care Medicine, University of California, San Francisco; Don Hayes, Jr., MD, Nationwide
Children’s Hospital and The Ohio State University; Devika R. Rao, MD, Department of
Pediatrics,  Division  of  Respiratory  Medicine  UT  Southwestern  Medical  Center;  Dixie
Harris, MD, Intermountain Healthcare; Lincoln S. Smith, MD, University of Washington
and Seattle Children’s Hospital; Scott Aberegg, MD; Sean J. Callahan, MD, University of
Utah  Rashid  Njai,  Office  of  the  Director,  Deputy  Director  for  Non-Infectious  Diseases,
CDC;  Jennifer  Adjemian;  Macarena  Garcia;  Kathleen  Hartnett;  Kristen  Marshall;  Aaron
Kite  Powell,  Center  for  Surveillance,  Epidemiology,  and  Laboratory  Services,  CDC;
Adebola  Adebayo;  Minal  Amin;  Michelle  Banks;  Jordan  Cates,  National  Center  for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; Maeh Al-Shawaf; Lauren Boyle-Estheimer;
Peter  Briss;  Gyan  Chandra;  Karen  Chang;  Jennifer  Chevinsky;  Katelyn  Chiang;  Pyone
Cho; Carla Lucia DeSisto; Lindsey Duca; Sumera Jiva; Charlotte Kaboré; John Kenemer;
Akaki  Lekiachvili;  Maureen  Miller;  Yousra  Mohamoud;  Cria  Perrine;  Mays  Shamout;
Lauren Zapata, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
CDC; Francis Annor; Vaughn Barry; Amy Board; Mary E. Evans; Allison Gately; Brooke
Hoots;  Cassandra  Pickens;  Tia  Rogers;  Alana  Vivolo-Kantor,  National  Center  for  Injury
Prevention and Control, CDC; Alissa Cyrus, Office of Minority Health and Health Equity,
CDC; Tegan Boehmer; Emily Glidden; Arianna Hanchey; Angela Werner; Shideh Ebrahim
Zadeh, National Center for Environmental Health, CDC; Donna Pickett, National Center
for  Health  Statistics,  CDC;  Victoria  Fields;  Michelle  Hughes;  Varsha  Neelam;  Kevin
Chatham-Stephens,  National  Center  on  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental  Disabilities,
CDC;  Kevin  O’Laughlin;  Mary  Pomeroy,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic
Infectious Diseases, CDC; Sukhshant K. Atti, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, CDC and Emory University School of Medicine; Jennifer Freed; Jona Johnson;
Eva  McLanahan,  Agency  for  Toxic  Substances  and  Disease  Registry;  Kate  Varela,
National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health;  Jennifer  Layden,  Illinois
Department  of  Public  Health;  Jonathan  Meiman,  Wisconsin  Department  of  Health
Services; Nicole M. Roth, Eagle Medical Services; Diane Browning, Northrop Grumman;
Augustina  Delaney;  Samantha  Olson,  G2S  Corporation;  Dessica  F.  Hodges,  Student
Worksite Program volunteer; Raschelle Smalley, Student Worksite Experience Program
volunteer; Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists Vaping-Associated Pulmonary
Injury  (VAPI)  Epidemiology  Task  Force  Top  Corresponding  author:  David  A.  Siegel,
dsiegel@cdc.gov, 770-488-4426. Top 1National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion, CDC; 2Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, CDC;
3Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  4National  Center  for
Environmental  Health,  CDC;  5National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory
Diseases,  CDC;  6Epidemic  Intelligence  Service,  CDC;  7National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,
Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; 8National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, CDC; 9National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC;
10National  Center  on  Birth  Defects  and  Developmental  Disabilities,  CDC;  11General
Dynamics Information Technology; 12National Center for Injury Prevention and Control,
CDC. Top 
 All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of  Medical
Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts
of  interest  were  disclosed.  All  members  of  the  Lung  Injury  Response  Clinical  Working
Group  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal
Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. Carolyn S. Calfee reports a
grant from the  FDA/NIH (Tobacco Center of Regulatory Science [TCORS]) for a project
entitled  Impact  of  Different  E-cigarette  Characteristics  on  Acute  Lung  Injury;  a  grant
from  GlaxoSmithKline  for  an  observational  study  on  sepsis  and  ARDS  biomarkers;  a
grant  and  personal  fees  from  Bayer  for  an  observational  study  on  pulmonary
hypertension  in  ARDS  and  for  medical  consultation;  and  personal  fees  from
Roche/Genentech  for  consultation  on  potential  therapies  for  ARDS,  and  personal  fees
from  Prometic,  CSL  Behring,  and  Quark  for  serving  on  medical  advisory  boards  for
ARDS.
 No
 other
 potential
 conflicts
 of
 interest
 were
 disclosed.
 Top
 *
https://www.cdc.gov/lunginjury.
 †
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/assets/2019-Lung-Injury-Su
rveillance-Case-Definition-508.pdf.
 §
 https://www.aafp.org/afp/2017/0101/p29.pdf;
https://depts.washington.edu/dbpeds/Screening%20Tools/HEADSS.pdf.
 ¶
https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/full/10.1164/rccm.201908-1581ST#readcube-epdf;
https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/53/7/e25/424286/.
 **
https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/full/10.1164/rccm.201908-1581ST#readcube-epdf;
https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/53/7/e25/424286/.
 ††
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-clinicians.htm;
https://www.idsociety.org/practice-guideline/influenza/.
 §§
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6337a4.htm?s_cid.
 ¶¶
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/quit-smoking/index.html?s_cid.
 ***
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-disease/health-
departments/index.html.
 †††
https://www.aafp.org/dam/AAFP/documents/patient_care/tobacco/pharmacologic-guide.
pdf. Top Top Top Abbreviation: E-cigarette = electronic cigarette.* For cases that had
full  medical  chart  abstraction  data  available.†  Surveillance  data  through  October  3,
2019,  from  the  following  29  U.S  states:  Alabama,  Delaware,  Georgia,  Hawaii,  Idaho,
Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Kentucky,  Maine,  Maryland,  Minnesota,  Mississippi,
Missouri, Montana, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island,
South  Carolina,  South  Dakota,  Texas,  Vermont,  Washington,  West  Virginia,  and
Wisconsin.§ Patients with missing data were excluded from denominators for selected
characteristics.¶ Self-reported fever, chills, and unexpected weight loss.** Heart failure,
heart
 attack,
 or
 other
 heart
 conditions.
 Top
 *
https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/full/10.1164/rccm.201908-1581ST#readcube-epdf;
https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/53/7/e25/424286/.
 †
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-clinicians.htm;
https://www.idsociety.org/practice-guideline/influenza/.  §  Substance  Abuse  and  Mental
Health
 Services
 Administrations
 treatment
 locator
(https://www.samhsa.gov/find-treatment)to  find  treatment  in  your  area  or  call
1–800–662-HELP
 (4357).
 ¶
 https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/vaccinations.htm.
 **
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6337a4.htm?s_cid.
 Top
Abbreviation:  E-cigarette  =  electronic  cigarette.  *  Data  reported  through  October  3,
2019, from the following 29 states: Alabama, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois,
Indiana,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Kentucky,  Maine,  Maryland,  Minnesota,  Mississippi,  Missouri,
Montana,  Nevada,  New  Jersey,  New  Mexico,  Oklahoma,  Oregon,  Rhode  Island,  South
Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Vermont, Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. †
95%
 confidence
 intervals
 indicated
 by
 error
 bars.
 Top
 *
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-disease/health
care-providers/index.html.
 †
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-disease/health-
departments/index.html.
 §
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information/e-cigarettes/severe-lung-disease/health-
departments/index.html. Top Suggested citation for this article: Siegel DA, Jatlaoui TC,
Koumans EH, et al.  Update: Interim Guidance for Health Care Providers Evaluating and
Caring for Patients with Suspected E-cigarette, or Vaping, Product Use Associated Lung
Injury — United States, October 2019. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2019;68:919–927.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6841e3. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6841e3.htm
