A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Updates  to  the  Guideline  for  Isolation
Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of  Infectious  Agents  in  Healthcare  Settings
(2007). Changes: The Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee voted
to make updates and clarifications to Recommendation VI.F.3. and Appendix A, Table 5.
See Infection Prevention and Control of Monkeypox in Healthcare Settings See Interim
Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for Measles in Healthcare Settings
Update:  The  Type  of  Precaution  for  Gastroenteritis,  Noroviruses,  in  Appendix  A:  Type
and Duration of Precautions Recommended for Selected Infections and Conditions was
updated  from  "Standard"  to  "Contact  +  Standard"  to  align  with  Guideline  for  the
Prevention  and  Control  of  Norovirus  Gastroenteritis  Outbreaks  in  Healthcare  Settings
(2011).  This  update  aligns  with  and  clarifies  the  2013  Updated  Recommendations  for
use  of  VariZIG.  Update:  For  susceptible  exposed  persons  for  whom  vaccine  is
contraindicated,  provide  varicella  zoster  immune  globulin  as  soon  as  possible  after
exposure  and  within  10  days.  See  Updated  Recommendations  for  Use  of  VariZIG  —
United States, 2013. Correction: For recommendation VI.C.1.c., the pressure differential
changed from ≥ 12.5 to ≥ 2.5. Update: Current recommendations can be found at CDC
Tdap / Td ACIP Vaccine Recommendations. Changes: Updates and clarifications made to
the table in Appendix A: Type and Duration of Precautions Recommended for Selected
Infections and Conditions. Update: The Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee (HICPAC) voted to change the recommendation of isolation for persons with
mumps  from  9  days  to  5  days  based  on  this  2008  MMWR  report.  Changes  to  this
guideline:  Update:  The  recommendations  in  this  guideline  for  Ebola  has  been
superseded  by  these  CDC  documents:  See  CDC's  Ebola  Virus  Disease  website  for
current  information  on  how  Ebola  virus  is  transmitted.  Update:  Recommendations  for
healthcare workers can be found at Ebola for Clinicians. CDC provides information on
infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among
healthcare workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/updates.html
