  Sarah Schillie, MD1; Trudy V. Murphy, MD1; Nancy Fenlon2; Stephen Ko, MD3; John W.
Ward,  MD1   Infants  born  to  hepatitis  B-infected  mothers  receive  postexposure
prophylaxis  to  reduce  their  risk  for  perinatal  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)  infection  (1).
Postexposure  prophylaxis  consists  of  hepatitis  B  (HepB)  vaccine  and  hepatitis  B
immune globulin administered within 12 hours of birth, followed by completion of the
3-dose  or  4-dose  HepB  vaccine  series  (1).  Postvaccination  serologic  testing  (PVST)
assesses  an  infant's  response  to  HepB  vaccination  and  has  typically  occurred  at  age
9–18  months  (1).  This  report  provides  a  CDC  update  recommending  shortening  the
interval  for  PVST  from  age  9–18  months  to  age  9–12  months.  Providers  should  order
PVST  (consisting  of  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  [HBsAg]  and  antibody  to  HBsAg
[anti-HBs])  for  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers  at  age  9–12  months  (or  1–2
months  after  the  final  dose  of  the  vaccine  series,  if  the  series  is  delayed).  This
recommendation  was  prompted  by  the  discontinuation  of  production  of  Hib/HepB
vaccine  (Comvax)  and  new  data  from  the  Enhanced  Perinatal  Hepatitis  B  Prevention
Program supporting PVST 1–2 months after receipt of the last HepB vaccine dose, and
at  age  ≥9  months.  An  estimated  25,000  infants  are  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers
each year in the United States (2). Perinatal HBV infection, acquired in utero or during
delivery, results in chronic HBV infection in 90% of infected infants (1). Approximately
25% of infants with HBV infection acquired perinatally will die prematurely as a result of
complications  of  cirrhosis  or  liver  cancer  (1).  Before  the  widespread  availability  of
postexposure  prophylaxis,  up  to  90%  of  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers
developed HBV infection (1). Postexposure prophylaxis is highly effective in preventing
perinatal HBV transmission. In recent years in the United States, approximately 1% of
infants receiving postexposure prophylaxis develop infection (3). PVST consists of two
tests: measurement of HBsAg and anti-HBs (1). Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers
who  are  HBsAg  negative  with  anti-HBs  levels  ≥10  mIU/mL  after  having  received  a
complete,  3-dose  or  4-dose  HepB  vaccine  series  are  identified  as  vaccine  responders
and  considered  seroprotected  (4,5).  Infants  who  are  HBsAg  negative  with  anti-HBs
levels  <10  mIU/mL  require  revaccination  with  a  second  3-dose  HepB  vaccine  series,
followed  by  retesting  for  anti-HBs  1–2  months  after  the  final  vaccine  dose  (4).  
Postvaccination  seroprotection  is  achieved  in  98%  of  healthy  full-term  infants  who
received  a  3-dose  or  4-dose  HepB  vaccine  series,  although  it  is  lower  among  infants
with birthweights <4.4 lbs (<2,000 g) (5). Vaccine efficacy studies have demonstrated
protection against acute and chronic hepatitis B disease in immunocompetent vaccine
responders  (6).  Anti-HBs  levels  following  vaccination  decline  over  time  (6).
Immunocompetent  persons  who  achieve  an  anti-HBs  level  ≥10  mIU/mL  1–2  months
after a complete HepB series remain protected, even if anti-HBs levels decline to <10
mIU/mL  beyond  that  time,  presumably  because  of  persistent  cellular  immunity  (7).
HepB  vaccine  doses  subsequent  to  the  monovalent  HepB  vaccine  birth  dose  are
administered  as  either  monovalent  or  combination  vaccine  (1).  Before  December  31,
2014,  two  combination  vaccines  containing  recombinant  HBsAg  were  available  in  the
United States for infants aged ≥6 weeks: 1) Hib/HepB vaccine (Comvax, Merck and Co,
Inc.)  and  2)  DTaP-HepB-IPV  vaccine  (Pediarix,  GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals)  (1).
Hib/HepB  vaccine  (Comvax)  production  has  been  discontinued.  For  infants  born  to
HBsAg-positive  mothers,  the  final  dose  of  the  HepB  vaccine  series  is  administered  at
age  6  months  when  monovalent  or  DTaP-HepB-IPV  vaccine  (Pediarix)  is  used  to
complete the series (1). When Hib/HepB vaccine (Comvax) was used to complete the
series, the final dose was administered at age 12–15 months (1).  The optimal timing for
PVST to detect a vaccine response generally is 1–2 months after the final dose of the
HepB vaccine series (1). Results of tests for HBsAg can be transiently positive for 1–18
days after vaccination. PVST should be performed no earlier than age 9 months to avoid
detection  of  passive  anti-HBs  from  hepatitis  B  immune  globulin  administered  at  birth
and to maximize the likelihood of detecting late HBV infection (1).  In developing this
update  to  shorten  the  interval  for  PVST  to  age  9–12  months,  CDC  subject  matter
experts reviewed the shortened interval with professionals from academia and public
health and considered existing (8) and new data (9) on anti-HBs levels among infants
born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers.  Among  348  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers
enrolled in the Enhanced Surveillance: Perinatal Hepatitis B Program in Dallas County,
Texas,  PVST  performed  at  4–7  months  and  8–11  months  after  the  final  vaccine  dose
was associated with lower anti-HBs levels (odds ratios = 1.8 and 4.4, respectively; 95%
confidence intervals = 1.2–2.8 and 1.3–14.5, respectively), when compared with PVST
1–3  months  after  vaccination  (8).  In  a  study  analyzing  data  collected  from  8,105
HBsAg-negative  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers  enrolled  in  the  Enhanced
Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Program in five U.S. jurisdictions during 2008–2013, the
percentages of tested infants with anti-HBs levels <10 mIU/mL at ages 1–2 months, 3–4
months,  5–6  months,  7–8  months,  9–10  months,  11–12  months,  13–14  months  and
15–16  months  after  the  final  HepB  vaccine  dose  were  2%  (31  of  1573),  2.8%  (86  of
3,110),  5.1%  (91  of  1,769),  7.8%  (55  of  705),  9.3%  (43  of  463),  13.3%  (32  of  240),
16.3%  (21  of  129)  and  21.6%  (25  of  116),  respectively  (p<0.01,  Mantel-Haenszel
chi-square)  (Figure)  (9).  Nearly  one  fourth  (22.3%)  of  infants  underwent  PVST  >6
months  after  the  final  vaccine  dose  (9).  For  most  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive
mothers, PVST at age 9–12 months provides opportunities for testing at two well-child
visits (i.e., 9-month and 12-month visits). An added benefit of a shortened interval to
PVST  is  a  reduction  in  the  period  during  which  nonresponders  are  at  risk  for
transmission  from  close  contacts  with  HBV  infection.  Earlier  PVST  enables  prompt
revaccination  of  those  infants  needing  revaccination  with  a  second  3-dose  HepB
vaccine  series  to  attain  protective  anti-HBs  levels.  A  shortened  interval  might  also
increase adherence with recommendations for timely completion of PVST and conserve
public health resources involved in providing case management services (1). In light of
the  lower  measured  anti-HBs  levels  (but  continued  protection)  with  increasing  time
following vaccination, PVST occurring at increasing intervals after the final vaccine dose
could result in misclassification of some infants as vaccine nonresponders and therefore
lead to unnecessary revaccination (9). Because nonresponding infants receive a second
3-dose  HepB  vaccine  series  followed  by  retesting  of  anti-HBs,  testing  soon  after
completion of the initial vaccine series reduces the possibility for misclassification and
unnecessary  revaccination  (9).  The  PVST  interval  after  the  final  dose  in  the  primary
HepB  series  no  longer  needs  to  extend  to  18  months  to  accommodate  infants
completing their vaccination series with Hib/HepB vaccine (Comvax). Although no data
are available, CDC subject matter experts postulate that harm will not occur as a result
of a shortened PVST interval. PVST (consisting of HBsAg and anti-HBs) for infants born
to  HBsAg-positive  mothers  should  be  performed  at  age  9–12  months,  or  1–2  months
after the final dose of the HepB vaccine series if completion of the series is delayed. 
1Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB
Prevention,  CDC;  2Immunization  Services  Division,  National  Center  for  Immunization
and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 3Boston University School of Public Health and School
of  Medicine,  Massachusetts.  Corresponding  author:  Sarah  Schillie,  sschillie@cdc.gov,
404-718-8608. Summary What recommendations are being reviewed? Postvaccination
serologic testing (PVST) is recommended for infants born to hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg)-positive mothers at age 9–18 months. PVST consists of testing for HBsAg and
antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs). Why are the recommendations being reviewed now? With
the  discontinuation  of  Hib/HepB  vaccine  (Comvax),  the  hepatitis  B  vaccine  series  for
infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers  will  usually  be  completed  at  age  6  months,
allowing PVST at age 9–12 months. New data from the Enhanced Perinatal Hepatitis B
Prevention  Program  are  available  that  show  that  lower  detectable  levels  of  anti-HBs
were associated with increased intervals between receipt of the last vaccine dose and
PVST.  What is the new recommendation? Considering the lower levels of anti-HBs with
increasing  time  since  completing  vaccination  and  the  extent  of  unnecessary
revaccination, PVST, consisting of testing for HBsAg and anti-HBs, should be ordered at
age 9–12 months (or 1–2 months after the final dose of the vaccine series, if delayed)
for infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers. FIGURE. Proportion of infants with anti-HBs
≥10  mIU/mL  with  increasing  interval  from  final  vaccine  dose*  Source:  Reprinted  with
permission  of  publisher  from:  Ko  SC,  Schillie  SF,  Walker  T,  et  al.  Hepatitis  B  vaccine
response  among  infants  born  to  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen-positive  women.  Vaccine
2014;32:2127–33.   *p<0.01,  Mantel-Haenszel  chi  square.  Alternate  Text:  The  figure
above is a bar chart showing the proportion of infants with anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL with
increasing interval from final vaccine dose.
                 Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and
does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6439a6.htm
