Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Urethritis,  as  characterized  by  urethral  inflammation,  can
result from either infectious or noninfectious conditions. Symptoms, if present, include
dysuria,  urethral  pruritis,  and  mucoid,  mucopurulent,  or  purulent  discharge.  Signs  of
urethral  discharge  on  examination  can  also  be  present  among  persons  without
symptoms.  Although  N.  gonorrhoeae  and  C.  trachomatis  are  well  established  as
clinically  important  infectious  causes  of  urethritis,  M.  genitalium  has  been  strongly
associated with urethritis and, less commonly, prostatitis (691–697). If POC diagnostic
tools  (e.g.,  Gram,  methylene  blue  [MB],  or  gentian  violet  [GV]  stain  microscopy)  are
unavailable, drug regimens effective against both gonorrhea and chlamydia should be
administered.  Further  testing  to  determine  the  specific  etiology  is  recommended  for
preventing  complications,  reinfection,  and  transmission  because  a  specific  diagnosis
might  improve  treatment  compliance,  delivery  of  risk-reduction  interventions,  and
partner services. Both chlamydia and gonorrhea are reportable to health departments.
NAATs are preferred for detecting C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae, and urine is the
preferred  specimen  for  males  (553).  NAAT-based  tests  for  diagnosing  T.  vaginalis
among men with urethritis have not been cleared by FDA; however, laboratories have
performed the CLIA-compliant validation studies (698) needed to provide such testing.
Multiple  organisms  can  cause  infectious  urethritis.  The  presence  of  gram-negative
intracellular diplococci (GNID) or purple intracellular diplococci (MB or GV) on urethral
smear is indicative of presumed gonococcal infection, which is frequently accompanied
by  chlamydial  infection.  Nongonococcal  urethritis  (NGU),  which  is  diagnosed  when
microscopy  of  urethral  secretions  indicate  inflammation  without  GNID  or  MB  or  GV
purple  intracellular  diplococci,  is  caused  by  C.  trachomatis  in  15%–40%  of  cases;
however, prevalence varies by age group, with a lower proportion of disease occurring
among  older  men  (699).  Documentation  of  chlamydial  infection  as  NGU  etiology  is
essential  because  of  the  need  for  partner  referral  for  evaluation  and  treatment  to
prevent complications of chlamydia, especially for female partners. Complications of C.
trachomatis–associated  NGU  among  males  include  epididymitis,  prostatitis,  and
reactive arthritis. M. genitalium is associated with symptoms of urethritis and urethral
inflammation  and  accounts  for  15%–25%  of  NGU  cases  in  the  United  States
(691–693,696,697,700).  Among  men  with  symptoms  of  urethritis,  M.  genitalium  was
detected  in  11%  of  those  with  urethritis  in  Australia  (701),  12%–15%  in  the  United
Kingdom (702–704), 15% in South Africa (696), 19% in China (705), 21% in Korea, 22%
in Japan (706), and 28.7% in the United States (range: 20.4%–38.8%) (697). Data are
inconsistent regarding other Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma species as etiologic agents of
urethritis  (707).  The  majority  of  men  with  Ureaplasma  infections  do  not  have  overt
disease unless a high organism load is present. T. vaginalis can cause urethritis among
heterosexual  men;  however,  the  prevalence  varies  substantially  by  U.S.  geographic
region, age, and sexual behavior and within specific populations. Studies among men
with and without overt urethritis in developed countries document relatively low rates
of  T.  vaginalis  in  the  Netherlands  (0.5%)  (708),  Japan  (1.3%)  (706,709),  the  United
States (2.4%) (710), and the United Kingdom (3.6%) (703). Studies in other countries
have documented higher rates, such as in Croatia (8.2%) (711) and Zimbabwe (8.4%)
(712),  particularly  among  symptomatic  patients.  Neisseria  meningitidis  can  colonize
mucosal  surfaces  and  cause  urethritis  (713).  Urogenital  N.  meningitidis  rates  and
duration  of  carriage,  prevalence  of  asymptomatic  and  symptomatic  infection,  and
modes  of  transmission  have  not  been  systematically  described;  however,  studies
indicate  that  N.  meningitidis  can  be  transmitted  through  oral-penile  contact  (i.e.,
fellatio)  (714–716).  N.  meningitidis  has  similar  colony  morphology  appearance  on
culture and cannot be distinguished from N. gonorrhoeae on Gram stain. Identification
of  N.  meningitidis  as  the  etiologic  agent  with  presumed  gonococcal  urethritis  on  the
basis of Gram stain but negative NAAT for gonorrhea requires a confirmation by culture.
Meningococcal urethritis is treated with the same antimicrobial regimens as gonococcal
urethritis.  Although  evidence  is  limited  regarding  the  risk  for  sexual  transmission  or
recurrent infections with meningococcal urethritis, treatment of sex partners of patients
with meningococcal urethritis with the same antimicrobial regimens as for exposure to
gonococcal infection can be considered. No indication exists for treating persons with N.
meningitidis identified in their oropharynx when not also associated with symptomatic
urethritis.  In  other  instances,  NGU  can  be  caused  by  HSV,  Epstein-Barr  virus,  and
adenovirus (699) acquired by fellatio (i.e., oral-penile contact). In a retrospective review
of  80  cases  of  HSV  urethritis  in  Australia  (717),  the  majority  of  infections  were
associated with HSV-1 with clinical findings of meatitis (62%), genital ulceration (37%),
and  dysuria  (20%).  Adenovirus  can  present  with  dysuria,  meatal  inflammation,  and
conjunctivitis  (718).  Enteric  bacteria  have  been  identified  as  an  uncommon  cause  of
NGU  and  might  be  associated  with  insertive  anal  intercourse  (699).  Other  bacterial
pathogens  have  been  implicated  as  potential  causes  of  clinical  urethritis,  either  in
clustered  case  series  or  as  sporadic  cases  such  as  Haemophilus  influenzae  and
Haemophilus parainfluenzae (719–723). Haemophilus was identified in 12.6% of cases
among  413  men  (mostly  MSM  reporting  insertive  oral  sex)  (724),  and  high  rates  of
azithromycin resistance (39.5%) were identified among Haemophilus urethritis patients
(725). Individual case reports have linked NGU to multiple bacterial species, including
Corynebacterium
 propinquum
 (726),
 Kurthia
 gibsonii
 (727),
 Corynebacterium
glucuronolyticum  (728,729),  Corynebacterium  striatrium  (730),  Aerococcus  urinae
(731), and Neisseria elongata (732). Diagnostic testing and treatment for less-common
organisms  are  reserved  for  situations  in  which  these  infections  are  suspected  (e.g.,
sexual partner with trichomoniasis, urethral lesions, or severe dysuria and meatitis) or
when  NGU  is  not  responsive  to  recommended  therapy.  Even  in  settings  that  provide
comprehensive  diagnostic  testing,  etiology  can  remain  obscure  in  half  of  cases.
Idiopathic NGU was reported in 772 (59%) of 1,295 first presentations of NGU among
men  seeking  sexual  health  services  in  Australia  (701).  In  a  case-control  study  of  211
men with NGU symptoms in Denmark, no identifiable pathogen was identified in 24% of
acute  cases  and  33%  of  chronic  cases  (733).  NGU’s  importance  if  not  caused  by  a
defined  pathogen  is  uncertain;  neither  complications  (e.g.,  urethral  stricture  or
epididymitis) nor adverse outcomes among sex partners have been identified in these
cases.  Associations  between  NGU  and  insertive  anal  and  oral  exposure  have  been
reported (734), as have higher rates of BV-associated Leptotrichia or Sneathia species
among  heterosexual  men  with  urethritis  (735).  These  studies  increase  concern  for
possible undetected infectious rectal or vaginal pathogens, or alternatively, a transient
reactive dysbiosis after exposure to a new microbiome or even a noninfectious reactive
etiology  (736).  Clinicians  should  attempt  to  obtain  objective  evidence  of  urethral
inflammation.  If  POC  diagnostic  tests  (e.g.,  Gram  stain  or  MB  or  GV  microscopy)  are
unavailable, urethritis can be documented on the basis of any of the following signs or
laboratory tests: Men evaluated in settings in which Gram stain or MB or GV smear is
unavailable  who  meet  at  least  one  criterion  for  urethritis  (i.e.,  urethral  discharge,
positive  leukocyte  esterase  test  on  first  void  urine,  or  microscopic  examination  of
first-void urine sediment with ≥10 WBCs/HPF) should be tested for C. trachomatis and
N. gonorrhoeae by NAATs and treated with regimens effective against gonorrhea and
chlamydia.  If  symptoms  are  present  but  no  evidence  of  urethral  inflammation  is
present, NAATs for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae might identify infections (739).
Persons with chlamydia or gonorrhea should receive recommended treatment, and sex
partners  should  be  referred  for  evaluation  and  treatment.  If  none  of  these  clinical
criteria  are  present,  empiric  treatment  of  men  with  symptoms  of  urethritis  is
recommended only for those at high risk for infection who are unlikely to return for a
follow-up  evaluation  or  test  results.  Such  men  should  be  treated  with  drug  regimens
effective  against  gonorrhea  and  chlamydia.  NGU  is  a  nonspecific  diagnosis  that  can
have various infectious etiologies. C. trachomatis has been well established as an NGU
etiology;  however,  prevalence  varies  across  populations  and  accounts  for  <50%  of
overall  cases  (712,740–742).  M.  genitalium  is  estimated  to  account  for  10%–25%  of
cases  (696,697,701,703,704,706,733,743),  and  T.  vaginalis  for  1%–8%  of  cases
depending on population and location (703,706,708,710,712). Other etiologies include
different  bacteria,  such  as  Haemophilus  species  (724,725),  N.  meningitidis  (713,716),
HSV  (706,717),  and  adenovirus  (744).  However,  even  when  extensive  testing  is
performed,  no  pathogens  are  identified  in  approximately  half  of  cases  (701,733).
Clinical  presentation  can  include  urethral  discharge,  irritation,  dysuria,  or  meatal
pruritus  (697,743,745).  NGU  is  confirmed  for  symptomatic  men  when  diagnostic
evaluation of urethral secretions indicates inflammation, without evidence of diplococci
by Gram, MB, or GV smear on microscopy (712,746,747). Visible discharge or secretions
can be collected by a swab without inserting it into the urethra; if no visible secretions,
the swab can be inserted into the urethral meatus and rotated, making contact with the
urethral  wall  before  removal.  If  microscopy  is  unavailable,  urine  testing  for  leukocyte
esterase can be performed on first-void urine, and microscopic examination of sediment
from  a  spun  first-void  urine  demonstrating  ≥10  WBCs/HPF  has  a  high  negative
predictive value. All men who have suspected or confirmed NGU should be tested for
chlamydia and gonorrhea by using NAATs. A specific diagnosis can potentially reduce
complications, reinfection, and transmission. M. genitalium testing should be performed
for  men  who  have  persistent  or  recurrent  symptoms  after  initial  empiric  treatment.
Testing for T. vaginalis should be considered in areas or among populations with high
prevalence,  in  cases  where  a  partner  is  known  to  be  infected,  or  for  men  who  have
persistent  or  recurrent  symptoms  after  initial  empiric  treatment.  Ideally,  treatment
should be pathogen based; however, diagnostic information might not be immediately
available. Presumptive treatment should be initiated at NGU diagnosis. Doxycycline is
highly  effective  for  chlamydial  urethral  infections  and  is  also  effective  for  chlamydial
infections  of  the  rectum;  it  also  has  some  activity  against  M.  genitalium.  In  contrast,
reports  have  increased  of  azithromycin  treatment  failures  for  chlamydial  infection
(748,749),  and  the  incidence  of  macrolide  resistance  in  M.  genitalium  also  has  been
rapidly  rising  (697,702,705,750,751).  Pharmacokinetic  data  indicate  that  changing
azithromycin dosing from a single-dose strategy to a multiday strategy might protect
against  inducing  resistance  in  M.  genitalium  infections  (745,752)  (see  Mycoplasma
genitalium). Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 7 days Azithromycin 1 g, orally
in a single dose
OR
Azithromycin  500  mg  orally  in  a  single  dose;  then  250  mg  orally  daily  for  4  days  To
maximize compliance with recommended therapies, medications should be dispensed
on-site at the clinic, and, regardless of the number of doses involved in the regimen,
the first dose should be directly observed. Erythromycin is no longer recommended for
NGU because of its gastrointestinal side effects and dosing frequency. Levofloxacin is
no  longer  recommended  for  NGU  because  of  its  inferior  efficacy,  especially  for  M.
genitalium. To minimize transmission and reinfections, men treated for NGU should be
instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until they and their partners have been
treated (i.e., until completion of a 7-day regimen and symptoms have resolved or for 7
days  after  single-dose  therapy).  Men  with  NGU  should  be  tested  for  HIV  and  syphilis.
Men  should  be  provided  their  testing  results  obtained  as  part  of  the  NGU  evaluation.
Those  with  a  specific  diagnosis  of  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  or  trichomoniasis  should  be
offered partner services and instructed to return 3 months after treatment for repeat
testing  because  of  high  rates  of  reinfection,  regardless  of  whether  their  sex  partners
were  treated  (136,137,753,754)  (see  Chlamydial  Infections;  Gonococcal  Infections;
Trichomoniasis). If symptoms persist or recur after therapy completion, men should be
instructed  to  return  for  reevaluation  and  should  be  tested  for  M.  genitalium  and  T.
vaginalis. Symptoms alone, without documentation of signs or laboratory evidence of
urethral inflammation, are insufficient basis for retreatment. Providers should be alert
to the possible diagnosis of chronic prostatitis or chronic pelvic pain syndrome in men
experiencing  persistent  perineal,  penile,  or  pelvic  pain  or  discomfort;  voiding
symptoms; pain during or after ejaculation; or new-onset premature ejaculation lasting
for >3 months. Men with persistent pain should be referred to a urologist with expertise
in pelvic pain disorders. All sex partners of men with NGU within the preceding 60 days
should be referred for evaluation and testing and presumptive treatment with a drug
regimen  effective  against  chlamydia.  All  partners  should  be  evaluated  and  treated
according to the management section for their respective pathogen; EPT could be an
alternate approach if a partner is unable to access timely care. To avoid reinfection, sex
partners  should  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  partners  are
treated. The objective diagnosis of persistent or recurrent NGU should be made before
considering  additional  antimicrobial  therapy.  Symptomatic  recurrent  or  persistent
urethritis  might  be  caused  by  treatment  failure  or  reinfection  after  successful
treatment.  Among  men  who  have  persistent  symptoms  after  treatment  without
objective  signs  of  urethral  inflammation,  the  value  of  extending  the  duration  of
antimicrobials  has  not  been  demonstrated.  Treatment  failure  for  chlamydial  urethritis
has  been  estimated  at  6%–12%  (755).  The  most  common  cause  of  persistent  or
recurrent  NGU  is  M.  genitalium,  especially  after  doxycycline  therapy  (756,757).
Treatment failure for M. genitalium is harder to determine because certain men achieve
clinical cure (i.e., resolution of symptoms) but can still have detectable M. genitalium in
urethral specimens (758). The initial step in recurrent urethritis is assessing compliance
with  treatment  or  potential  reexposure  to  an  untreated  sex  partner  (697,743).  If  the
patient did not comply with the treatment regimen or was reexposed to an untreated
partner,  retreatment  with  the  initial  regimen  can  be  considered.  If  therapy  was
appropriately  completed  and  no  reexposure  occurred,  therapy  is  dependent  on  the
initial  treatment  regimen.  Ideally,  diagnostic  testing  among  men  with  recurrent  or
persistent  symptoms,  including  those  with  gonorrhea,  chlamydia,  M.  genitalium,  and
trichomoniasis, can be used to guide further management decisions. T. vaginalis is also
known  to  cause  urethritis  among  men  who  have  sex  with  women.  In  areas  where  T.
vaginalis  is  prevalent,  men  who  have  sex  with  women  with  persistent  or  recurrent
urethritis  should  be  tested  for  T.  vaginalis  and  presumptively  treated  with
metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose or tinidazole 2 g orally in a single dose; their
partners  should  be  referred  for  evaluation  and  treatment,  if  needed.  If  T.  vaginalis  is
unlikely (MSM with NGU or negative T. vaginalis NAAT), men with recurrent NGU should
be tested for M. genitalium by using an FDA-cleared NAAT. Treatment for M. genitalium
includes a two-stage approach, ideally using resistance-guided therapy. If M. genitalium
resistance testing is available it should be performed, and the results should be used to
guide therapy (see Mycoplasma genitalium). If M. genitalium resistance testing is not
available, doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 7 days followed by moxifloxacin
400 mg orally once daily for 7 days should be used. The rationale for this approach is
that  although  not  curative,  doxycycline  decreases  the  M.  genitalium  bacterial  load,
thereby  increasing  likelihood  of  moxifloxacin  success  (759).  Higher  doses  of
azithromycin  have  not  been  effective  for  M.  genitalium  after  azithromycin  treatment
failures. Men with persistent or recurrent NGU after treatment for M. genitalium or T.
vaginalis should be referred to an infectious disease or urology specialist. NGU might
facilitate HIV transmission (760). Persons with NGU and HIV infection should receive the
same  treatment  regimen  as  those  who  do  not  have  HIV.  Two  major  diagnostic  signs
characterize  cervicitis:  1)  a  purulent  or  mucopurulent  endocervical  exudate  visible  in
the endocervical canal or on an endocervical swab specimen (commonly referred to as
mucopurulent  cervicitis),  and  2)  sustained  endocervical  bleeding  easily  induced  by
gentle passage of a cotton swab through the cervical os. Either or both signs might be
present. Cervicitis frequently is asymptomatic; however, certain women might report an
abnormal vaginal discharge and intermenstrual vaginal bleeding (e.g., especially after
sexual  intercourse).  The  criterion  of  using  an  increased  number  of  WBCs  on
endocervical Gram stain in the diagnosis of cervicitis has not been standardized; it is
not sensitive, has a low positive predictive value for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae
infections, and is not available in most clinical settings (297,761). Leukorrhea, defined
as  >10  WBCs/HPF  on  microscopic  examination  of  vaginal  fluid,  might  be  a  sensitive
indicator of cervical inflammation with a high negative predictive value (i.e., cervicitis is
unlikely  in  the  absence  of  leukorrhea)  (762,763).  Finally,  although  the  presence  of
gram-negative intracellular diplococci on Gram stain of endocervical exudate might be
specific for diagnosing gonococcal cervical infection when evaluated by an experienced
laboratorian,  it  is  not  a  sensitive  indicator  of  infection  (764).  C.  trachomatis  or  N.
gonorrhoeae  is  the  most  common  etiology  of  cervicitis  defined  by  diagnostic  testing.
Trichomoniasis,  genital  herpes  (especially  primary  HSV-2  infection),  or  M.  genitalium
(761,765–768)  also  have  been  associated  with  cervicitis.  However,  in  many  cases  of
cervicitis,  no  organism  is  isolated,  especially  among  women  at  relatively  low  risk  for
recent  acquisition  of  these  STIs  (e.g.,  women  aged  >30  years)  (769).  Limited  data
indicate that BV and frequent douching might cause cervicitis (770–772). The majority
of persistent cases of cervicitis are not caused by reinfection with C. trachomatis or N.
gonorrhoeae;  other  factors  might  be  involved  (e.g.,  persistent  abnormality  of  vaginal
flora,  M.  genitalium,  douching  or  exposure  to  other  types  of  chemical  irritants,
dysplasia,  or  idiopathic  inflammation  in  the  zone  of  ectopy).  Available  data  do  not
indicate  an  association  between  group  B  streptococcus  colonization  and  cervicitis
(773,774). No specific evidence exists for a role for Ureaplasma parvum or Ureaplasma
urealyticum in cervicitis (707,761,765,775,776). Because cervicitis might be a sign of
upper genital tract infection (e.g., endometritis), women should be assessed for signs of
PID and tested for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae with NAAT on vaginal, cervical, or
urine  samples  (553)  (see  Chlamydial  Infections;  Gonococcal  Infections).  Women  with
cervicitis  also  should  be  evaluated  for  concomitant  BV  and  trichomoniasis.  Because
sensitivity  of  microscopy  for  detecting  T.  vaginalis  is  relatively  low  (approximately
50%),  symptomatic  women  with  cervicitis  and  negative  wet-mount  microscopy  for
trichomonads  should  receive  further  testing  (i.e.,  NAAT,  culture,  or  other  FDA-cleared
diagnostic  test)  (see  Trichomoniasis).  Testing  for  M.  genitalium  with  the  FDA-cleared
NAAT can be considered. Although HSV-2 infection has been associated with cervicitis,
the utility of specific testing (i.e., PCR or culture) for HSV-2 is unknown. Testing for U.
parvum,  U.  urealyticum,  Mycoplasma  hominis,  or  genital  culture  for  group  B
streptococcus  is  not  recommended.  Multiple  factors  should  affect  the  decision  to
provide  presumptive  therapy  for  cervicitis.  Presumptive  treatment  with  antimicrobials
for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae should be provided for women at increased risk
(e.g.,  those  aged  <25  years  and  women  with  a  new  sex  partner,  a  sex  partner  with
concurrent partners, or a sex partner who has an STI), if follow-up cannot be ensured,
or  if  testing  with  NAAT  is  not  possible.  Trichomoniasis  and  BV  should  be  treated  if
detected  (see  Bacterial  Vaginosis;  Trichomoniasis).  For  women  at  lower  risk  for  STIs,
deferring  treatment  until  results  of  diagnostic  tests  are  available  is  an  option.  If
treatment  is  deferred  and  C.  trachomatis  and  N.  gonorrhoeae  NAATs  are  negative,  a
follow-up  visit  to  determine  whether  the  cervicitis  has  resolved  can  be  considered.
Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2 times/day for 7 days * Consider concurrent treatment for
gonococcal infection if the patient is at risk for gonorrhea or lives in a community where
the prevalence of gonorrhea is high (see Gonococcal Infections). Azithromycin 1 g orally
in a single dose To minimize transmission and reinfection, women treated for cervicitis
should  be  instructed  to  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their  partners
have  been  treated  (i.e.,  until  completion  of  a  7-day  regimen  or  for  7  days  after
single-dose  therapy)  and  symptoms  have  resolved.  Women  who  receive  a  cervicitis
diagnosis  should  be  tested  for  syphilis  and  HIV  in  addition  to  other  recommended
diagnostic  tests.  Women  receiving  treatment  should  return  to  their  provider  for  a
follow-up  visit  to  determine  whether  cervicitis  has  resolved.  For  women  who  are
untreated, a follow-up visit gives providers an opportunity to communicate test results
obtained as part of the cervicitis evaluation. Providers should treat on the basis of any
positive  test  results  and  determine  whether  cervicitis  has  resolved.  Women  with  a
specific diagnosis of chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis should be offered partner
services and instructed to return in 3 months after treatment for repeat testing because
of high rates of reinfection, regardless of whether their sex partners were treated (753).
If  symptoms  persist  or  recur,  women  should  be  instructed  to  return  for  reevaluation.
Management of sex partners of women treated for cervicitis should be tailored for the
specific infection identified or suspected. All sex partners during the previous 60 days
should  be  referred  for  evaluation,  testing,  and  presumptive  treatment  if  chlamydia,
gonorrhea,  or  trichomoniasis  was  identified.  EPT  and  other  effective  partner  referral
strategies  are  alternative  approaches  for  treating  male  partners  of  women  who  have
chlamydial  or  gonococcal  infection  (125–127)  (see  Partner  Services).  To  avoid
reinfection,  sex  partners  should  abstain  from  sexual  intercourse  until  they  and  their
partners are treated. Women with persistent or recurrent cervicitis despite antimicrobial
therapy should be reevaluated for possible reexposure or treatment failure. If relapse or
reinfection  with  a  specific  infection  has  been  excluded,  BV  is  not  present,  and  sex
partners  have  been  evaluated  and  treated,  management  options  for  persistent
cervicitis  are  undefined.  In  addition,  the  usefulness  of  repeated  or  prolonged
administration  of  antimicrobial  therapy  for  persistent  symptomatic  cervicitis  remains
unknown.  The  etiology  of  persistent  cervicitis,  including  the  potential  role  of  M.
genitalium (777), is unclear. M. genitalium might be considered for cases of cervicitis
that  persist  after  azithromycin  or  doxycycline  therapy  in  which  reexposure  to  an
infected  partner  or  medical  nonadherence  is  unlikely.  Among  women  with  persistent
cervicitis who were previously treated with doxycycline or azithromycin, testing for M.
genitalium  can  be  considered  and  treatment  initiated  on  the  basis  of  results  of
diagnostic  testing  (318)  (see  Mycoplasma  genitalium).  For  women  with  persistent
symptoms that are clearly attributable to cervicitis, referral to a gynecologic specialist
can  be  considered  for  evaluation  of  noninfectious  causes  (e.g.,  cervical  dysplasia  or
polyps)  (778).  Women  with  cervicitis  and  HIV  infection  should  receive  the  same
treatment regimen as those who do not have HIV. Cervicitis can increase cervical HIV
shedding,  and  treatment  reduces  HIV  shedding  from  the  cervix  and  thereby  might
reduce  HIV  transmission  to  susceptible  sex  partners  (779–783).  Diagnosis  and
treatment of cervicitis for pregnant women should follow treatment recommendations
for  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  (see  Chlamydial  Infections,  Special  Considerations,
Pregnancy;  Gonococcal  Infections,  Special  Considerations,  Pregnancy).  According  to
U.S.  Medical  Eligibility  Criteria  for  Contraceptive  Use,  2016,  leaving  an  IUD  in  place
during  treatment  for  cervicitis  is  advisable  (58).  However,  current  recommendations
specify that an IUD should not be placed if active cervicitis is diagnosed (59). Next
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/urethritis-and-cervicitis.htm
