Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  January  24,  2020  /  69(3);77–83  Fiona  P.  Havers,
MD1; Pedro L. Moro, MD2; Paul Hunter, MD3; Susan Hariri, PhD1; Henry Bernstein, DO4
(View  author  affiliations)  What  is  already  known  about  this  topic?  Repeat  doses  of
tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine at 5-
and 10-year intervals are safe and immunogenic. What is added by this report? ACIP
recommendations  have  been  updated  to  allow  either  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids
(Td) vaccine or Tdap to be used for the decennial Td booster, tetanus prophylaxis for
wound  management,  and  for  additional  required  doses  in  the  catch-up  immunization
schedule if a person has received at least 1 Tdap dose. What are the implications for
public health practice? Allowing either Tdap or Td to be used in situations where Td only
was previously recommended increases provider point-of-care flexibility. Views equals
page views plus PDF downloads Since 2005, a single dose of tetanus toxoid, reduced
diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine has been recommended by the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for adolescents and adults (1,2).
After receipt of Tdap, booster doses of tetanus and diphtheria toxoids (Td) vaccine are
recommended  every  10  years  or  when  indicated  for  wound  management.  During  the
October 2019 meeting of ACIP, the organization updated its recommendations to allow
use of either Td or Tdap where previously only Td was recommended. These situations
include  decennial  Td  booster  doses,  tetanus  prophylaxis  when  indicated  for  wound
management in persons who had previously received Tdap, and for multiple doses in
the  catch-up  immunization  schedule  for  persons  aged  ≥7  years  with  incomplete  or
unknown vaccination history. Allowing either Tdap or Td to be used in situations where
Td  only  was  previously  recommended  increases  provider  point-of-care  flexibility.  This
report  updates  ACIP  recommendations  and  guidance  regarding  the  use  of  Tdap
vaccines (3). Top Two Tdap vaccines are licensed for use in the United States. Boostrix
(GlaxoSmithKline)  is  approved  for  a  single  dose  in  persons  aged  ≥10  years;  Adacel
(Sanofi Pasteur) is approved for persons aged 10–64 years. Since 2005, a single booster
dose of Tdap has been recommended for children and adolescents aged 11–18 years
and  adults  aged  19–64  years  (1,2)  to  increase  protection  against  tetanus,  diphtheria,
and pertussis. Booster doses of Td have been recommended every 10 years (decennial
vaccination)  to  ensure  continued  protection  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria.  These
recommendations were expanded to include a single dose of Tdap for adults aged ≥65
years in 2012 (although only one Tdap product is approved for use in persons aged ≥65
years, either vaccine administered to a person aged ≥65 years is considered valid) (4).
Pregnant women are recommended to receive a dose of Tdap during each pregnancy to
prevent  pertussis  in  infants  too  young  for  routine  vaccination  (off-label  use*)  (3).  If  a
tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  is  indicated  for  wound  management,  Td  has  been
recommended  for  nonpregnant  persons  aged  ≥7  years  who  had  previously  received
Tdap.  For  pregnant  women,  Tdap  is  recommended  in  this  setting.  For  previously
unvaccinated  persons  aged  ≥7  years,  a  3-dose  catch-up  immunization  schedule
included only 1 dose of Tdap, preferably as the first dose in the series (off-label use in
children  aged  7–9  years),  and  2  subsequent  Td  doses  at  specified  intervals  (5).  No
further  doses  of  Tdap  were  routinely  recommended,  with  two  exceptions:  pregnant
women should receive Tdap during each pregnancy (off-label use), and children aged
7–10 years who received Tdap as part of the catch-up schedule were recommended to
receive  the  routine  adolescent  Tdap  booster  dose  at  age  11–12  years  (1,2).  In  2010,
ACIP  evaluated  the  safety  of  administering  Tdap  at  intervals  <5  years  after  Td
administration (6,7) and recommended that the dose of Tdap, when indicated, should
not  be  delayed  and  should  be  administered  regardless  of  the  interval  since  the  last
tetanus  or  diphtheria  toxoid–containing  vaccine.  In  2013,  ACIP  reviewed  the  most
recent  safety  and  immunogenicity  data  available  at  that  time  to  inform  their
recommendations  regarding  a  second  routine  dose  of  Tdap.  ACIP  concluded  that  a
second dose of Tdap would be safe and immunogenic at 5- or 10-year intervals (8–12).
However,  antipertussis  antibodies  decline  rapidly  after  the  first  year  (10,13–20),  and
vaccine effectiveness studies indicated that pertussis protection begins to wane within
2–4 years after receipt of a single Tdap dose (21–23). This likely limits the impact of a
second  dose  of  Tdap  on  the  overall  burden  of  pertussis  in  the  United  States  (24).  In
addition,  Tdap  vaccines  have  an  uncertain  role  in  prevention  of  transmission  and  in
herd  protection  (25,26).  ACIP  concluded  that  the  data  did  not  support  a  general
recommendation  for  a  routine  second  dose  of  Tdap,  given  the  likely  limited  public
health  impact  (27).  In  January  2019,  FDA  approved  Adacel  for  a  second  Tdap  dose  if
administered  ≥8  years  after  the  first  Tdap  dose  and  for  use  for  tetanus  prophylaxis
when  indicated  for  wound  management  if  ≥5  years  have  elapsed  since  the  previous
receipt of any tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine (28). In light of the new indication for a
second dose of Adacel and evidence of Tdap being used frequently in place of Td (29),
ACIP reassessed current Tdap recommendations. In October 2019, ACIP recommended
that either Tdap or Td vaccines could be used in situations where only Td vaccine had
been recommended previously. This report provides recommendations for the use of Td
or  Tdap  for  the  decennial  Td  booster,  tetanus  prophylaxis  when  indicated  for  wound
management,  and  catch-up  immunization  schedule  for  persons  aged  ≥7  years  with
incomplete or unknown vaccination history. Top Beginning in September 2018, the ACIP
Pertussis Vaccines Work Group participated in monthly telephone conferences to review
Tdap vaccination recommendations. A search of clinical trials published during January
2013–June  2019  that  examined  Tdap  vaccination  in  adolescents  and  adults  who  had
previously received Tdap was performed, so the work group could review data that had
not previously been reviewed by ACIP. Because of limited data on the use of >1 Tdap
dose in the catch-up immunization schedule, the work group also considered published
and unpublished safety data on receipt of >1 Tdap dose within a 12-month period in
both  pregnant  women  and  nonpregnant  adolescents  and  adults.  Data  from  public
sector  orders  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2019),  commercial  insurance  claims  (Truven
Health  Analytics,  unpublished  data,  2019),  and  a  published  study  from  the  Vaccine
Safety Datalink (VSD) (29) were analyzed to assess stakeholders’ values attributed to
perceived  benefits  and  harms,  acceptability,  and  implementation  considerations
regarding use of Tdap in place of Td. Summaries of evidence, including the evidence to
recommendations
 framework
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/tdap-etr.html)
 and
 assessment
 of
programmatic considerations, were presented to ACIP at the October 2018, June 2019,
and  October  2019  meetings.  Proposed  recommendations  were  presented  to  the
committee  at  the  October  2019  meeting,  and,  after  a  public  comment  period,  were
approved by the voting members as follows: either Td or Tdap should be allowed for
use in situations where only Td is currently recommended for the decennial Td booster,
tetanus  prophylaxis  for  wound  management,  and  catch-up  vaccination,  including  in
pregnant  women  (14  voted  in  favor,  and  none  opposed).  Top  Safety  and
immunogenicity. Two clinical trials found no increased risk for adverse events among
adults who received Tdap, compared with those who received Td 10 years after receipt
of  the  initial  Tdap  dose  (30,31).  In  addition,  the  proportion  of  persons  with
seroprotective  levels  of  antibodies  to  tetanus  and  diphtheria  was  similar  in  the  Tdap
and Td groups. Another clinical trial compared adults receiving a second dose of Tdap 9
years  after  their  initial  Tdap  dose  with  adults  receiving  Tdap  for  the  first  time  as  a
control group (32). Solicited adverse events, the most frequent of which were injection
site pain, fatigue, and headache, were higher in the groups receiving a second dose of
Tdap.  Grade  3  adverse  events,  defined  in  this  study  as  redness  and  swelling  with
diameter  >50  mm,  pain,  headaches,  fatigue,  gastrointestinal  symptoms  preventing
normal activity, and fever with temperature >104°F(40°C), were similar in both groups.
A retrospective VSD study identified 68,915 adolescents and adults who had received
an  initial  dose  of  Tdap  and  then  received  another  Td-containing  vaccine,  either  a
second  Tdap  (61,394,  89%)  or  Td  (7,521,  11%).  There  was  no  statistically  significant
increase in medical visits for cellulitis, limb swelling, pain in limb, seizure, cranial nerve
disorders,  paralytic  syndromes,  encephalopathy,  encephalitis,  or  meningitis  among
those who received a subsequent dose of Tdap compared with those who received Td
(29).  Data  on  the  use  of  >1  Tdap  dose  in  the  catch-up  immunization  schedule  are
limited. One double-blind, randomized controlled clinical trial enrolled 460 adults aged
≥40 years who had not received a diphtheria or tetanus vaccination for ≥20 years or
who had an unknown vaccination history. Subjects were randomized to receive either 3
doses of a Tdap formulation; 1 Tdap-inactivated polio vaccine combination dose, which
is not licensed in the United States, followed by 2 Td doses; or 3 Td doses at 0, 1, and 6
months. There was no significant difference in adverse events for subjects receiving 3
Tdap doses, compared with those receiving 3 Td doses, and no significant differences in
diphtheria and tetanus seroprotection rates among the three groups (33). An analysis of
data  collected  as  part  of  a  published  VSD  retrospective  study  (29)  identified  13,599
persons  who  had  received  an  initial  dose  of  Tdap  and  then  received  another
Td-containing  vaccine  within  12  months  of  the  previous  Tdap  dose,  either  a  second
Tdap (11,687, 86%) or Td (1,912, 16%). There was no elevated risk for medical visits for
adverse events among those who received a subsequent dose of Tdap compared with
those who received Td (CDC/VSD, unpublished data, 2019). Among 34,804 reports to
the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) (34) following receipt of Tdap in
nonpregnant and pregnant persons of all ages during January 1, 1990–June 30, 2019,
88 (0.3%) persons had received multiple Tdap doses spaced ≤12 months apart. Among
this small group of reports, 21 (24%) were associated with adverse events, the most
frequent of which was injection site reactions (8, 38%) (CDC, unpublished data, 2019).
There  are  no  published  data  comparing  rates  of  adverse  events  among  pregnant
women who received multiple doses of Tdap during a single pregnancy with those who
received a single Tdap dose and additional Td doses for catch-up vaccination. A cohort
study examining reactogenicity of Tdap in pregnant women included only eight study
participants who received >1 Tdap dose within a 12-month period; none experienced
severe reactions or fever (35). A VSD study examining safety of Tdap during pregnancy
identified  187  women  who  had  received  >1  Tdap  dose  during  a  single  pregnancy
among  633,542  singleton  pregnancies  screened  for  potential  study  inclusion  (36).
Although these 187 women were excluded from the published study, the authors found
similar rates of adverse birth outcomes (i.e., small for gestational age, preterm delivery,
and low birthweight) in these women compared with women who had received a single
Tdap  dose  in  pregnancy  (29,155).  Among  these  187  women  who  received  >1  Tdap
dose during pregnancy, one had a medically attended acute adverse event, which was
diagnosed as limb pain and swelling 7 days after vaccination. One woman received 3
Tdap doses during a single pregnancy; she did not experience any adverse events, and
her baby was born at term (CDC, unpublished data, 2019). Acceptability to patients and
providers. Analysis of commercial insurance claims indicated that Tdap claims were 12
times  as  high  as  Td  claims  in  adults  aged  19–64  years  during  2017  (Truven  Health
Analytics,  unpublished  data,  2019).  In  the  same  year,  there  were  approximately  10
times the number of Tdap doses (441,075) as Td doses (41,881) ordered by providers
for  adults  as  public  sector  purchases  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2019).  These  data,  in
addition to the one published VSD study (29) documented that Tdap was widely used in
place  of  Td  by  clinicians  in  the  United  States  and  suggested  acceptability  to  both
patients and health care providers. Health impact and economic considerations. Tdap
costs  more  than  Td  (37).  The  population-level  effectiveness  and  economic  impact  of
replacing  Td  with  Tdap  has  been  modeled  and  previously  reviewed  by  ACIP  (24).
However,  this  analysis  and  an  updated  model  of  the economic  impact  of  substituting
Tdap  for  the  decennial  Td  booster  demonstrated  that  estimates  of  cost  effectiveness
are  dependent  on  values  for  parameters  with  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty,  including
pertussis incidence, illness severity, initial vaccine effectiveness, duration of protection,
and  the  impact  of  Tdap  on  herd  protection  (38).  Coupling  such  uncertainty  with  the
evidence for notable widespread use of Tdap in place of Td, programmatic issues were
the  main  consideration  in  the  decision-making  process.  Top  In  2013,  ACIP  did  not
support a general recommendation for a routine second dose of Tdap; the rationale was
described in previously published guidance (3). In 2019, ACIP again concluded that in
light  of  the  higher  cost  of  Tdap  relative  to  Td  and  uncertainty  about  the  impact  that
receipt of multiple Tdap doses would have on pertussis control and transmission, there
continues to be insufficient evidence to preferentially recommend that Tdap replace Td.
However, given the reassuring safety profile and evidence of widespread use of Tdap in
place of Td, to allow providers more flexibility, either Tdap or Td was recommended for
use  in  situations  when  previously  only  Td  was  recommended.  ACIP  recommends  that
either Td or Tdap be used for the decennial Td booster, tetanus prophylaxis for wound
management, and for additional required doses in the catch-up immunization schedule
if  a  person  has  received  at  least  1 Tdap  dose.  Top  Persons  aged  11–18 years.  These
persons should receive a single dose of Tdap, preferably at a preventive care visit at
age  11–12  years.  To  ensure  continued  protection  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria,  1
booster dose of either Td or Tdap should be administered every 10 years throughout
life.  Persons  aged  ≥19  years.  Regardless  of  the  interval  since  their  last  tetanus  or
diphtheria toxoid–containing vaccine, persons aged ≥19 years who have never received
a dose of Tdap should receive 1 dose of Tdap. To ensure continued protection against
tetanus  and  diphtheria,  booster  doses  of  either  Td  or  Tdap  should  be  administered
every  10  years  throughout  life.  Pregnant  women.  No  change  has  been  made  to  the
recommendations  for  routine  Tdap  immunization  during  pregnancy.  Pregnant  women
should receive 1 dose of Tdap during each pregnancy, irrespective of their history of
receiving  the  vaccine.  Tdap  should  be  administered  at  27–36  weeks’  gestation,
preferably during the earlier part of this period, although it may be administered at any
time during pregnancy (3,5). Top A tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine is indicated for
wound
 management
 when
 >5
 years
 have
 passed
 since
 the
 last
 tetanus
toxoid–containing vaccine dose. If a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine is indicated for
persons  aged  ≥11  years,  Tdap  is  preferred  for  persons  who  have  not  previously
received Tdap or whose Tdap history is unknown. If a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine
is indicated for a pregnant woman, Tdap should be used. For nonpregnant persons with
documentation  of  previous  Tdap  vaccination,  either  Td  or  Tdap  may  be  used  if  a
tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  is  indicated.  Complete  information  on  tetanus
prophylaxis  and  the  use  of  tetanus  immunoglobulin  when  indicated  for  wound
management  is  available  at  https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/rr/rr6702a1.htm.
Top Persons aged 7–18 years. If persons aged 7–18 years have never been vaccinated
against pertussis, tetanus, or diphtheria, these persons should receive a series of three
tetanus and diphtheria toxoid–containing vaccines, which includes at least 1 Tdap dose.
The preferred schedule is 1 dose of Tdap, followed by 1 dose of either Td or Tdap ≥4
weeks afterward, and 1 dose of either Td or Tdap 6–12 months later. Persons aged 7–18
years  who  are  not  fully  immunized  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  should  receive  1
dose of Tdap, preferably as the first dose in the catch-up series; if additional tetanus
toxoid–containing doses are required, either Td or Tdap may be used. The vaccination
series does not need to be restarted for those with incomplete DTaP history, regardless
of  the  time  that  has  elapsed  between  doses.  The  catch-up  schedule  and  minimum
intervals
 between
 doses
 are
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html.  Persons  aged  ≥19
years.  If  persons  aged  ≥19  years  have  never  been  vaccinated  against  pertussis,
tetanus,  or  diphtheria,  these  persons  should  receive  a  series  of  three  tetanus  and
diphtheria  toxoid–containing  vaccines,  which  includes  at  least  1  Tdap  dose.  The
preferred schedule is 1 dose of Tdap, followed by 1 dose of either Td or Tdap at least 4
weeks afterward, and 1 dose of either Td or Tdap 6–12 months later. Persons aged ≥19
years  who  are  not  fully  immunized  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  should  receive  1
dose of Tdap, preferably as the first dose in the catch-up series; if additional tetanus
toxoid–containing  doses  are  required,  either  Td  or  Tdap  may  be  used.  Top  Pregnant
women  who  have  completed  the  childhood  immunization  schedule  and  were  last
vaccinated  >10  years  previously  should  receive  a  booster  dose  of  tetanus
toxoid–containing vaccine to prevent neonatal tetanus. The risk for neonatal tetanus is
minimal  if  a  previously  unvaccinated  woman  has  received  at  least  2  properly  spaced
doses of a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine during pregnancy; at least 1 of the doses
administered  during  pregnancy  should  be  Tdap,  administered  according  to  published
guidance (3). If >1 dose is needed, either Td or Tdap may be used. The 3-dose primary
series should be completed at the recommended intervals. Top Catch-up immunization.
For persons aged 7–9 years who receive a dose of Tdap as part of the catch-up series,
an adolescent Tdap dose should be administered at age 11–12 years. If a Tdap dose is
administered at age ≥10 years, the Tdap dose may count as the adolescent Tdap dose.
Top Persons aged ≥7 years. DTaP is not indicated for persons aged ≥7 years. If DTaP is
administered inadvertently to a fully vaccinated† child aged 7–9 years, an adolescent
Tdap  dose  should  be  administered  at  age  11–12  years.  If  DTaP  is  administered
inadvertently to an undervaccinated child aged 7–9 years, this dose should count as the
Tdap dose of the catch-up series, and the child should receive an adolescent Tdap dose
at age 11–12 years. If DTaP is administered inadvertently to a person aged ≥10 years,
this  dose  should  count  as  the  adolescent  Tdap  dose  routinely  administered  at  age
11–12 years. Fully vaccinated children aged 7–10 years. If a fully vaccinated child aged
7–9 years receives Tdap, the Tdap dose should not be counted as valid. The adolescent
Tdap  dose  should  be  administered  as  recommended  when  this  child  is  aged  11–12
years. The preferred age at administration for the adolescent Tdap dose is 11–12 years.
However,  if  Tdap  is  administered  at  age  10  years,  the  Tdap  dose  may  count  as  the
adolescent  Tdap  dose.  Top  Off-label  indications  based  on  age  and  pregnancy  status
have  not  changed  (Table).  New  off-label  indications  for  Adacel  would  include  any
additional  routine  or  catch-up  Td  dose  beyond  a  second  dose  administered  ≥8  years
after  an  initial  Tdap  dose,  if  not  given  for  wound  prophylaxis  within  the  specified
guidance.  Any  additional  doses  of  Boostrix  administered  beyond  the  single  licensed
dose  are  considered  off-label.  The  work  group  did  not  find  any  reason  to  distinguish
between  these  two  products  in  making  its  recommendations.  Contraindications  and
precautions.  Contraindications  and  precautions  are  unchanged  from  previous
recommendations  (3).  Reporting  of  vaccine  adverse  reactions.  Adverse  events
occurring after administration of any vaccine should be reported to VAERS. Reports can
be submitted to VAERS online, by fax, or by mail. Additional information about VAERS is
available by telephone (1-800-822-7967) or online (https://vaers.hhs.gov). Top ACIP will
continue  to  review  data  on  Td  and  Tdap  as  they  become  available,  examine  the
necessity and frequency of booster doses for protection against tetanus and diphtheria,
and consider any needed policy changes. As with all vaccines, CDC will use VAERS and
VSD to monitor adverse events following immunization. Top Members of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP; member roster for August 2018–October
2019 is available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/committee/members.html); ACIP
Pertussis  Vaccines  Work  Group;  Amanda  Cohn,  Jessica  MacNeil,  National  Center  for
Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;  Maria  Cano,  Paige  Marquez,  Lakshmi
Panagiotakopoulos,  Immunization  Safety  Office,  Division  of  Healthcare  Quality
Promotion,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;
Michael L. Jackson, Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle,
Washington.  Chair:  Henry  Bernstein,  Zucker  School  of  Medicine  at  Hofstra/Northwell
Cohen Children’s Medical Center. ACIP member: Paul Hunter, University of Wisconsin.
Liaison  representatives:  Oliver  Baclic,  Public  Health  Agency  of  Canada;  Carol  Baker,
Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America;  David  Cope,  American  Academy  of  Family
Physicians;  Vinita  Dubey,  National  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  (Canada);
Sandra  Fryhofer,  American  Medical  Association,  American  College  of  Physicians;
Christine Hahn, Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists; Carol Hayes, American
College  of  Nurse  Midwives;  Flor  Munoz,  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics;  Stephanie
Schauer,  American  Immunization  Managers;  David  J.  Weber,  Society  for  Healthcare
Epidemiology  of  America.  Consultants:  Kathryn  Edwards,  Vanderbilt  University;  Sarah
Long, Drexel University. Ex officio members: Xin-Xing Gu, National Institutes of Health;
Ann  Schwartz,  Susan  Wollersheim,  Food  and  Drug  Administration.  CDC  lead:  Fiona
Havers.  CDC  contributors:  Anna  Acosta,  Nicole  Brown,  Mark  Freedman,  LeAnne  Fox,
Susan Hariri, Pedro Moro, Tami Skoff, Lucia Tondella. Top Corresponding author: Fiona
P.  Havers,  fhavers@cdc.gov,  404-639-5062.  Top  1Division  of  Bacterial  Diseases,
National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;  2Division  Of
Healthcare  Quality  Promotion,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious
Diseases, CDC; 3Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin; 4Zucker School of
Medicine  at  Hofstra/Northwell  Cohen  Children’s  Medical  Center,  New  Hyde  Park,  New
York.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of
Medical Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential
conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *  Off-label  use  is  the  use  of  pharmaceutical
drugs for an unapproved indication or in an unapproved age group, dosage, or route of
administration. † Fully vaccinated is defined as having received 5 valid doses of DTaP or
4  valid  doses  of  DTaP  if  the  fourth  dose  was  administered  on  or  after  the  fourth
birthday. Top Top Abbreviations: DTaP = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular
pertussis  vaccine;  Td  =  tetanus  and  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid.*  Persons  with
incomplete  or  unknown  vaccination  history  should  receive  a  single  dose  of  Tdap,
preferably  as  the  first  dose  of  the  3-dose  catch-up  series;  if  additional  tetanus
toxoid–containing  doses  are  needed,  either  Td  or  Tdap  vaccine  may  be  used.†  Both
Tdap  vaccines  may  be  administered  during  pregnancy  with  the  same  intervals  and
restrictions (vaccine specific) as would apply to a nonpregnant person.§ Package inserts
for
 indications
 and
 intervals
 for
 wound
 management
 are
 available
 at
https://www.fda.gov/media/119862/download
 (Adacel)
 and
https://www.fda.gov/media/124002/download (Boostrix). Top Suggested citation for this
article:  Havers  FP,  Moro  PL,  Hunter  P,  Hariri  S,  Bernstein  H.  Use  of  Tetanus  Toxoid,
Reduced
 Diphtheria
 Toxoid,
 and
 Acellular
 Pertussis
 Vaccines:
 Updated
Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  —  United
States,
 2019.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2020;69:77–83.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6903a5. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6903a5.htm
