Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  August  25,  2023  /  72(34);920–925  Jefferson  M.
Jones,  MD1;  Katherine  E.  Fleming-Dutra,  MD1;  Mila  M.  Prill,  MSPH1;  Lauren  E.  Roper,
MPH1; Oliver Brooks, MD2; Pablo J. Sánchez, MD3; Camille N. Kotton, MD4; Barbara E.
Mahon, MD1; Sarah Meyer, MD5; Sarah S. Long, MD6; Meredith L. McMorrow, MD1 (View
author affiliations) What is already known about this topic? In July 2023, the Food and
Drug  Administration  approved  nirsevimab,  a  long-acting  monoclonal  antibody,  for
prevention of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) lower respiratory tract disease in infants.
What  is  added  by  this  report?  On  August  3,  2023,  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization  Practices  recommended  nirsevimab  for  infants  aged  <8  months  born
during or entering their first RSV season and for infants and children aged 8–19 months
who  are  at  increased  risk  of  severe  RSV  disease  entering  their  second  RSV  season.
What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?  Nirsevimab  can  prevent  severe
RSV disease among infants and children aged <20 months at increased risk for severe
RSV disease. Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) is the leading cause of hospitalization among U.S. infants. In July 2023, the Food
and Drug Administration approved nirsevimab, a long-acting monoclonal antibody, for
passive  immunization  to  prevent  RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection
among  infants  and  young  children.  Since  October  2021,  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  Maternal  and  Pediatric  RSV  Work  Group  has  reviewed
evidence on the safety and efficacy of nirsevimab among infants and young children.
On August 3, 2023, ACIP recommended nirsevimab for all infants aged <8 months who
are  born  during  or  entering  their  first  RSV  season  and  for  infants  and  children  aged
8–19 months who are at increased risk for severe RSV disease and are entering their
second RSV season. On the basis of pre–COVID-19 pandemic patterns, nirsevimab could
be administered in most of the continental United States from October through the end
of  March.  Nirsevimab  can  prevent  severe  RSV  disease  among  infants  and  young
children at increased risk for severe RSV disease. Top In July 2023, the Food and Drug
Administration  (FDA)  approved  nirsevimab  (Beyfortus,  Sanofi  and  AstraZeneca),  a
long-acting  monoclonal  antibody,  for  the  prevention  of  respiratory  syncytial  virus
(RSV)–associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  (LRTI)  among  infants  and  children
aged <24 months (1).* Nirsevimab is administered as a 1-dose intramuscular injection
shortly before or during the RSV season (typically fall through spring).† Since October
2021, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Maternal and Pediatric
RSV  Work  Group  (Work  Group)  has  reviewed  data  on  RSV  among  infants  and  young
children  and  evidence  regarding  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  nirsevimab,  and  assessed
the quality of the efficacy and safety evidence using the Grading of Recommendations,
Assessment, Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) framework (2,3). The Evidence to
Recommendation  (EtR)  Framework  was  used  to  develop  recommendations  (4,5).
Evidence  regarding  potential  use  of  nirsevimab  was  presented  to  ACIP  at  meetings
during June 2022–August 2023. On August 3, 2023, ACIP recommended nirsevimab for
infants aged <8 months who are born during or entering their first RSV season and for
infants and children aged 8–19 months who are at increased risk for severe RSV disease
and  are  entering  their  second  RSV  season.  RSV  infection  is  the  leading  cause  of
hospitalization among U.S. infants (6); most children are infected during the first year of
life, and nearly all have been infected by age 2 years (7,8). Infants with RSV infection
frequently  develop  bronchiolitis,  an  LRTI  that  can  be  severe  and  result  in
hospitalization.  Approximately  50,000–80,000  RSV-associated  hospitalizations  (9,10)
and  100–300  RSV-associated  deaths  (11,12)  occur  annually  among  U.S.  infants  and
children aged <5 years. The rate of RSV-associated hospitalization among infants born
at ≤30 weeks’ gestation (premature) is three times that of term infants (13). Premature
infants  also  have  higher  rates  of  RSV-associated  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  admission
(14). Although prematurity is a recognized risk factor for RSV-associated hospitalization,
RSV  is  also  the  leading  cause  of  hospitalization  among  healthy  term  infants.  An
estimated  79%  of  infants  and  children  aged  <2  years  hospitalized  with  RSV  have  no
underlying  medical  conditions  (13).  Before  licensure  of  nirsevimab,  the  only
FDA-approved  product  to  prevent  severe  RSV  disease  among  infants  and  young
children  was  palivizumab,  another  monoclonal  antibody.  However,  the  American
Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP)  recommends  palivizumab  only  for  children  with  certain
underlying  medical  conditions  (comprising  <5%  of  all  infants),  and  its  use  is  further
limited by high cost and the requirement for monthly dosing (15,16). Top Since October
2021,  the  Work  Group  has  conducted  a  systematic  literature  search  and  reviewed
available  evidence  regarding  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  nirsevimab  (2,3).  The  Work
Group considered a priori outcomes that were critical or important to policy decisions.§
For infants born during or entering their first RSV season, evidence regarding efficacy
and safety was derived from multicountry trials¶ that randomized infants, in a 2:1 ratio,
to receive nirsevimab or placebo; a phase 2b trial that enrolled 1,453 preterm infants
born at 29–34 weeks’ gestation (phase 2b trial) (17); and a phase 3 trial that enrolled
3,012 late preterm and term infants born at ≥35 weeks’ gestation (phase 3 trial) (18).**
For  children  at  increased  risk  for  severe  disease  entering  their  second  RSV  season,
evidence  regarding  efficacy  and  safety  was  obtained  from  a  multicountry  trial  that
randomized children to receive nirsevimab or palivizumab (19). The Work Group used
the  GRADE  approach  to  assess  the  certainty  of  evidence  for  outcomes  related  to
nirsevimab, rated on a scale of very low to high certainty (2,3). The Work Group then
used the EtR Framework to guide its deliberations on recommendation of nirsevimab,
reviewing data on the public health problem, benefits and harms, value to the target
population, acceptability to key stakeholders, feasibility, resource use, and equity (4,5).
Top Among infants aged <8 months who were born during or entering their first RSV
season,  efficacy  was  evaluated  through  150  days  after  injection.  For  the  GRADE
assessment,  results  from  the  phase  3  and  phase  2b  trials  were  pooled  (17,18).  Only
infants  who  received  the  recommended  dose  of  nirsevimab  were  included  in  pooled
estimates.††  Pooled  efficacy  in  preventing  medically  attended  RSV-associated  LRTI§§
was 79.0% (95% CI = 68.5%–86.1%; 31 of 2,579 in nirsevimab arm and 80 of 1,293 in
placebo  arm),  efficacy  in  preventing  RSV-associated  LRTI  with  hospitalization  was
80.6%  (95%  CI  =  62.3%–90.1%;  12  of  2,579  in  nirsevimab  arm  and  33  of  1,293  in
placebo arm), and efficacy in preventing RSV-associated LRTI with ICU admission was
90.0%  (95%  CI  =  16.4%–98.8%;  one  of  2,579  in  nirsevimab  arm  and  six  of  1,293  in
placebo  arm).  No  deaths  attributable  to  RSV  were  reported  in  either  trial.¶¶  The
incidence  of  serious  adverse  events***  was  not  increased  in  the  nirsevimab  arm
compared with that in the placebo arm.††† The overall evidence certainty using GRADE
criteria was rated as moderate. The GRADE evidence profile and supporting evidence
for
 the
 EtR
 Framework
 are
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/nirsevimab-season1-rsv-infants-children.
html
 and
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/nirsevimab-season1-rsv-infants-children-
etr.html.  Among  infants  at  increased  risk  for  severe  disease  who  are  entering  their
second RSV season, evidence was derived from a single trial that enrolled 615 preterm
infants born at <35 weeks’ gestation who were eligible to receive palivizumab and 310
infants with either chronic lung disease requiring medical intervention within 6 months
of randomization or hemodynamically significant congenital heart disease (CHD) (19).
Participants were randomized to receive nirsevimab or palivizumab.§§§ Efficacy against
medically  attended  RSV-associated  LRTI  was  extrapolated  from  pharmacokinetic
data.¶¶¶ Nirsevimab concentration levels among infants and children aged ≤24 months
with  chronic  lung  disease  or  CHD  who  received  200  mg  nirsevimab  entering  their
second  RSV  season  were  comparable  to  levels  among  those  who  received  50  mg  if
weighing  <5  kg  (<11  lb)  and  100  mg  if  weighing  ≥5  kg  (≥11  lb)  in  their  first  RSV
season. During the participants’ second RSV season, the incidence of serious adverse
events did not significantly differ between the nirsevimab and palivizumab arms. The
overall  evidence  certainty  using  GRADE  criteria  was  rated  as  very  low.  Because
nirsevimab appears to have efficacy as high as, or higher than, palivizumab (although
no  head-to-head  efficacy  trials  exist)  (20),  and  is  assumed  to  be  less  costly  (21),
replacing  palivizumab  with  nirsevimab  for  the  palivizumab-eligible  children  entering
their  second  season  is  expected  to  be  cost  saving.  The  GRADE  evidence  profile  and
supporting
 evidence
 for
 the
 EtR
 Framework
 are
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/nirsevimab-season2-rsv-infants-children.
html
 and
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/nirsevimab-season2-rsv-infants-children-
etr.html. Top The cost effectiveness for use of nirsevimab for infants aged <8 months
born during or entering their first RSV season (at $445 per dose) was estimated to be
$102,811 per quality adjusted life year (21). Because infants and children entering their
second RSV season are at reduced risk for severe RSV disease compared with infants
during their first RSV season, cost effectiveness for use of nirsevimab for the general
population  of  children  entering  their  second  season  (at  $890  per  dose)****  was
estimated  to  be  $1,557,544  per  quality  adjusted  life  year  (21).  Data  to  assess  the
incidence  of  severe  RSV  disease  and  death  by  type  of  chronic  disease  during  their
second RSV season are limited (21), as are data on efficacy and safety of nirsevimab
among infants and children in their second RSV season. Top ACIP recommends 1 dose
of  nirsevimab  for  all  infants  aged  <8  months  born  during  or  entering  their  first  RSV
season (50 mg for infants weighing <5 kg [<11 lb] and 100 mg for infants weighing ≥5
kg [≥11 lb]). ACIP recommends 1 dose of nirsevimab (200 mg, administered as two 100
mg injections given at the same time at different injection sites) for infants and children
aged 8–19 months who are at increased risk for severe RSV disease and entering their
second  RSV  season††††  (Box).  The  recommendations  for  nirsevimab  apply  to  infants
and children recommended to receive palivizumab by AAP.§§§§ These recommendations
will be updated as new evidence becomes available. Top Providers should administer
nirsevimab to infants aged <8 months and to infants and children aged 8–19 months
who are at increased risk for severe RSV disease beginning shortly before the start of
the RSV season. On the basis of pre–COVID-19 pandemic patterns, nirsevimab could be
administered in most of the continental United States from October through the end of
March. Infants born shortly before or during the RSV season should receive nirsevimab
within  1  week  of  birth.  Nirsevimab  administration  can  occur  during  the  birth
hospitalization or in the outpatient setting. Optimal timing for nirsevimab administration
is shortly before the RSV season begins; however, nirsevimab may be administered to
age-eligible infants and children who have not yet received a dose at any time during
the  season.  Only  a  single  dose  of  nirsevimab  is  recommended  for  an  RSV  season.
Infants  with  prolonged  birth  hospitalizations  related  to  prematurity  or  other  causes
should receive nirsevimab shortly before or promptly after hospital discharge.¶¶¶¶ No
evidence is available to support use of nirsevimab for prevention of hospital-acquired
RSV  infection,  and  nirsevimab  is  not  recommended  for  this  indication.  Because  the
timing  of  the  onset,  peak,  and  decline  of  RSV  activity  might  vary  geographically,
providers  can  adjust  administration  schedules  based  on  local  epidemiology.  RSV
seasonality in tropical climates (including southern Florida, Guam, Hawaii, Puerto Rico,
U.S.-affiliated Pacific Islands, and U.S. Virgin Islands) might differ from that of most of
the continental United States or be unpredictable (21–23). In Alaska, RSV seasonality is
less  predictable,  and  the  duration  of  RSV  activity  is  often  longer  than  the  national
average  duration  (24).  Providers  in  these  jurisdictions  should  consult  state,  local,  or
territorial guidance on timing of nirsevimab administration. On the basis of limited data
from  clinical  trials,  coadministration  of  nirsevimab  with  routine  vaccines  resulted  in  a
similar  rate  of  adverse  events  compared  with  administration  of  vaccines  alone  (25).
Nirsevimab  is  not  expected  to  interfere  with  the  immune  response  to  other  routine
childhood  immunizations  (26).  In  accordance  with  general  best  practices  for
immunization, simultaneous administration of nirsevimab with age-appropriate vaccines
is recommended (27). Infants and children aged 8–19 months who are at increased risk
for severe RSV disease and who are entering their second RSV season (timing of season
as defined above) are recommended to receive nirsevimab. Replacing palivizumab with
nirsevimab is expected to be cost saving, and ACIP recommends nirsevimab for eligible
children entering their second RSV season, similar to groups of children recommended
by AAP for palivizumab during their second RSV season (16) (Box). In addition, research
suggests that some American Indian or Alaska Native (AI/AN) children experience high
rates  of  severe  RSV  disease.  A  recent  study  found  that  incidence  of  RSV-associated
hospitalization  among  some  AI/AN  children  aged  12–23  months  was  four  to  10  times
that of similar-aged children across seven sites in the United States (28). These studies
have been  limited  to  specific  populations  and  might  not  be broadly  representative of
risk  in  all  AI/AN  children.  Some  AI/AN  communities  live  in  remote  regions,  making
transportation of children with severe RSV more challenging (16). Given the available
evidence,  ACIP  also  recommends  nirsevimab  for  AI/AN  children  entering  their  second
RSV  season.  When  administering  nirsevimab  to  children  with  increased  risk  for
bleeding,  providers  should  follow  ACIP’s  general  best  practice  guidelines  for
immunization  (27).  Nirsevimab  is  contraindicated  in  persons  with  a  history  of  severe
allergic reaction (e.g., anaphylaxis) after a previous dose or to a product component.
Adverse reactions might occur after administration of nirsevimab alone; these reactions
may be reported to MedWatch online (https://www.fda.gov/medwatch), by fax, by mail,
or by contacting FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.***** Adverse reactions might occur after the
coadministration  of  nirsevimab  with  a  vaccine;  these  reactions  should  be  reported  to
the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), and reports should specify that
the patient received nirsevimab on the VAERS form.††††† Reports can be submitted to
VAERS  online,  by  fax,  or  by  mail.  Additional  information  about  VAERS  is  available  by
telephone (1-800-822-7967) or online (https://vaers.hhs.gov). When adverse reactions
that  occur  after  the  coadministration  of  nirsevimab  with  a  vaccine  are  reported  to
VAERS,  additional  reporting  of  the  same  adverse  reactions  to  MedWatch  is  not
necessary. Top Voting members of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(in addition to listed authors): Lynn Bahta, Minnesota Department of Health; Wilbur H.
Chen,  University  of  Maryland  School  of  Medicine;  Sybil  Cineas,  Warren  Alpert  Medical
School of Brown University; Matthew F. Daley, Kaiser Permanente Colorado; Grace M.
Lee,  Stanford  University  School  of  Medicine;  Jamie  Loehr,  Cayuga  Family  Medicine;
Veronica  V.  McNally,  Franny  Strong  Foundation;  Katherine  A.  Poehling,  Wake  Forest
School of Medicine; H. Keipp Talbot, Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Chair: Sarah
S.  Long,  Drexel  University  College  of  Medicine;  ACIP  Members:  Oliver  Brooks,  Watts
Healthcare  Corporation;  Camille  N.  Kotton,  Harvard  Medical  School;  Pablo  J.  Sánchez,
The  Research  Institute  at  Nationwide  Children’s  Hospital;  Consultants:  Kevin  Ault,
Western  Michigan  University;  Carol  Baker,  McGovern  Medical  School,  University  of
Texas Health Science Center; Helen Chu, University of Washington; Daniel Feikin, World
Health  Organization;  Natasha  Halasa,  Vanderbilt  University;  Denise  Jamieson,  Emory
University School of Public Health; Cody Meissner, Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine;
Liaison  Representatives:  Nicole  Chaisson,  American  Academy  of  Family  Physicians;
Molly  Howell,  Association  of  Immunization  Managers;  Brenna  L.  Hughes,  American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; James McAuley, Infectious Diseases Society
of  America;  Sean  T.  O’Leary,  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics;  Jennifer  Schuster,
Pediatric  Infectious  Diseases  Society;  Patsy  Stinchfield,  National  Foundation  for
Infectious  Diseases;  Ex-officio  Members:  Judy  Beeler,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;
Yodit  Belew,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  Terry  Dalle-Tezze,  Department  of  Health
and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration; Nicholas Geagan,
Food and Drug Administration; April Killikelly, Public Health Agency of Canada; Sonnie
Kim,  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases;  Jessica  Lee,  Centers  for
Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services;  Lucia  Lee,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  Valerie
Marshall, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health; Winnie Siu, Public Health Agency
of  Canada;  Prabha  Viswanathan,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  Rachel  Zhang,  Food
and  Drug  Administration;  CDC  Leads:  Katherine  Fleming-Dutra,  Jefferson  Jones;  CDC
Contributors: Amadea Britton, Karen R. Broder, Angie Campbell, Doug Campos-Outcalt,
Melissa  Coughlin,  Nicole  Dowling,  Sally  Ezra,  Monica  Godfrey,  Aron  Hall,  Anne  Hause,
Fiona  Havers,  Andrew  Leidner,  Ruth  Link-Gelles,  Elizabeth  Greene,  Jessica  MacNeil,
Meredith  McMorrow,  Michael  Melgar,  Claire  Midgley,  Noelle-Angelique  Molinari,  Heidi
Moline,  Rebecca  Morgan,  Danielle  Moulia,  Neil  Murthy,  Christine  Olson,  Ismael
Ortega-Sanchez,  Manisha  Patel,  Pragna  Patel,  Amanda  Payne,  Jamison  (Jamie)  Pike,
Derrell  Powers,  Mila  Prill,  Lauren  Roper,  Hannah  Rosenblum,  Heather  Scobie,  Andrea
Sharma,  David  Shay,  Tom  Shimabukuro,  Tami  Skoff,  Chris  Taylor,  Naomi  Tepper,
Stephanie  Thomas,  Natalie  Thornburg,  Megan  Wallace,  Melinda  Wharton,  Raigan
Wheeler, Amber Winn, Patricia (Akpobome) Wodi. Top Corresponding author: Jefferson
M.  Jones,  media@cdc.gov.  Top  1Coronavirus  and  Other  Respiratory  Viruses  Division,
National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;  2Watts  Healthcare
Corporation,  Los  Angeles  California;  3Nationwide  Children’s  Hospital,  The  Ohio  State
University  College  of  Medicine,  Columbus,  Ohio;  4Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,
Massachusetts; 5Immunization Services Division, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;  6Drexel  University  College  of  Medicine,  Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International
Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of
interest. Oliver Brooks reports advocacy work with the Immunize LA Families Coalition;
no payments were received as part of this work. No other potential conflicts of interest
were
 disclosed.
 Top
 *
https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-new-drug-preven
t-rsv-babies-and-toddlers  †  The  recommended  dosage  for  infants  born  during  or
entering  their  first  RSV  season  and  weighing  <5  kg  (<11  lb)  is  50  mg;  for  those
weighing  ≥5  kg  (≥11  lb),  the  recommended  dosage  is  100  mg.  The  recommended
dosage for infants and children aged 8–19 months at increased risk for severe disease
entering their second RSV season is 200 mg (2 x 100 mg injections). § Critical outcomes
include
 medically
 attended
 RSV-associated
 LRTI,
 RSV-associated
 LRTI
 with
hospitalization,  RSV-associated  LRTI  with  ICU  admission,  and  RSV-associated  death.
Important
 outcomes
 include
 all-cause
 medically
 attended
 LRTI,
 all-cause
LRTI-associated hospitalization, and serious adverse events. ¶ Phase 2b trial locations:
Argentina,  Australia,  Brazil,  Bulgaria,  Canada,  Chile,  Czechia,  France,  Hungary,  Italy,
New Zealand, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom, and United States;
phase  3:  Austria,  Belgium,  Bulgaria,  Canada,  Czechia,  Estonia,  Finland,  France,
Germany,  Israel,  Japan,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Poland,  Russia,  South  Africa,  South  Korea,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States. ** An additional trial was conducted
that enrolled 615 preterm infants born at <35 weeks’ gestation and who were eligible
to receive palivizumab and 310 infants with either chronic lung disease and requiring
medical intervention within 6 months of randomization or hemodynamically significant
CHD.  Participants  were  randomized  (2:1)  to  either  receive  1  dose  of  nirsevimab  or
monthly injections of palivizumab. The trial was designed as a pharmacokinetic study
and  was  not  designed  to  measure  efficacy.  A  nirsevimab  concentration  target  was
established based on the phase 2b and phase 3 trials. The preterm, CHD, and chronic
lung  disease  cohorts  all  met  the  threshold.  In  addition,  day  150  postinjection
concentrations in the increased risk trial were comparable or higher than in the phase 3
trial.  This  study  did  not  meet  criteria  for  inclusion  in  GRADE  for  efficacy  of  infants  in
their first RSV season because there was no placebo control group. †† In the phase 2b
trial, all infants in the treatment arm received 50 mg nirsevimab. Among infants who
weighed  ≥5  kg  (≥11  lb),  nirsevimab  concentrations  and  efficacy  were  found  to  be
lower. In the phase 3 trial, the dose remained 50 mg for those who weighed <5 kg (<11
lb) and increased to 100 mg for those who weighed ≥5 kg (≥11 lb). Among 969 infants
in the phase 2b trial treatment arm, 399 (41%) were excluded from pooled analyses. §§
Medically attended LRTI was defined as at least one documented physical examination
finding localized to the lower respiratory tract, clinical signs and symptoms of severe
respiratory  disease,  an  inpatient  or  outpatient  encounter,  and  a  positive  RSV
polymerase chain reaction test result. ¶¶ For benefit outcomes rated as important for
policy decisions by the Work Group, nirsevimab lowered the risk for all-cause medically
attended  LRTI  (efficacy  =  34.8%  [95%  CI  =  23.0%–44.7%])  and  all-cause
LRTI-associated hospitalization (efficacy = 44.9% [95% CI = 24.9%–59.6%]). *** Serious
adverse events were defined in the protocol as any adverse event that results in death,
is immediately life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongs an existing
hospitalization,  results  in  persistent  or  significant  disability/incapacity,  or  is  an
important  medical  event  that  might  jeopardize  the  subject  or  might  require  medical
intervention  to  prevent  one  of  the  outcomes  listed.  †††  No  adverse  events  of
anaphylaxis or immune complex disease were reported. Two adverse events of special
interest,  both  thrombocytopenia,  were  reported.  One  event  was  diagnosed  as
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, and one occurred in a patient with a diagnosis of
sepsis; neither was assessed as being attributable to or related to nirsevimab. Among
the  initially  enrolled  1,490  infants  in  the  phase  3  trial,  the  incidence  of  medically
attended  RSV-associated  LRTI  351–510  days  after  injection  was  not  significantly
different in the nirsevimab (0.7%) and control (0.2%) arms, suggesting that protection
provided  from  nirsevimab  does  not  result  in  a  shift  in  the  RSV  burden  to  the  second
year of life. The incidence of new onset chronic disease was similar in the nirsevimab
(0.3%) and placebo (0.4%) arms. Among all participants in the phase 2b and phase 3
trials,  adverse events  were reported  in  1.2% of  participants  who  received  nirsevimab
within  360  days  of  the  injection.  Most  (97%)  of  these  were  mild  to  moderate  in
intensity.  Adverse  reactions  that  were  more  common  among  infants  who  received
nirsevimab  than  placebo  were  rash  occurring  within  14  days  of  injection  (0.9%  of
nirsevimab  recipients  versus  0.6%  of  placebo  recipients)  and  injection  site  reactions
occurring within 7 days of injection (0.3% of nirsevimab recipients versus 0% of placebo
recipients).  §§§  Among  infants  in  their  first  RSV  season,  those  in  the  nirsevimab  arm
received 50 mg if they weighed <5 kg (<11 lb) and 100 mg if they weighed ≥5 kg (≥11
lb). Participants with chronic lung disease or CHD who received nirsevimab in season 1
also received nirsevimab in season 2, and those who received palivizumab in season 1
were rerandomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive nirsevimab or palivizumab in season 2. In
season  2,  nirsevimab  was  administered  as  a  200  mg  dose  followed  by  four  monthly
injections of placebo. Palivizumab was administered as 5 monthly 15 mg/kg doses. ¶¶¶
Pharmacokinetic  extrapolation  was  used  and  based  on  comparable  pharmacokinetic
levels  from  efficacy  data  among  infants  aged  <12  months  for  prevention  of  the  first
medically attended RSV-associated LRTI to pharmacokinetic levels among infants and
children aged ≤24 months with chronic lung disease or CHD entering their second RSV
season.  On  the  basis  of  pharmacokinetic  and  efficacy  data  from  the  phase  2b  and
phase  3  (MELODY)  trials,  a  target  area  under  the  curve  nirsevimab  concentration  of
>12.8  mg*day/mL  was  established.  For  the  chronic  lung  disease  cohort,  129  of  132
(98%) participants met the target nirsevimab concentration, and for the CHD cohort, all
participants met the target. In addition, the concentration of nirsevimab 150 days after
injection  was  higher  compared  with  the  150-day  concentration  in  the  phase  3  trial
nirsevimab arm population. **** Assumes that the cost of 200 mg of nirsevimab will be
twice that of 100 mg. The cost of 50 mg and 100 mg of nirsevimab was assumed to be
the
 same.
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2023-08-3/02-RSV-jones-
508.pdf  ††††  Infants  and  children  aged  ≥8  months  have  likely  experienced  an  RSV
season  and  are  at  decreased  risk  for  severe  RSV-associated  disease  compared  with
younger infants without previous RSV exposure. Children aged ≥20 months have likely
experienced two RSV seasons and are at decreased risk for severe disease compared
with  younger  children  who  have  experienced  only  one  RSV  season.  §§§§  AAP  has
released
 guidance
 on
 the
 use
 of
 palivizumab
 and
 nirsevimab.
https://publications.aap.org/redbook/resources/25379  ¶¶¶¶  Consistent  with  general
best practices for immunization, the chronologic (not corrected) age of preterm infants
should be used to determine timing and eligibility for nirsevimab administration. *****
Adverse events can be reported to MedWatch because FDA has classified nirsevimab as
a  drug.  †††††  Specifically,  in  Section  9:  “Prescriptions,  over-the-counter  medications,
dietary supplements, or herbal remedies being taken at the time of vaccination.” Top
Top  Abbreviation:  RSV  =  respiratory  syncytial  virus.  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this
article: Jones JM, Fleming-Dutra KE, Prill MM, et al. Use of Nirsevimab for the Prevention
of
 Respiratory
 Syncytial
 Virus
 Disease
 Among
 Infants
 and
 Young
 Children:
Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  —  United
States,
 2023.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2023;72:920–925.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7234a4. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7234a4.htm
