Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  July  21,  2023  /  72(29);793–801  Michael  Melgar,
MD1;  Amadea  Britton,  MD1;  Lauren  E.  Roper,  MPH1;  H.  Keipp  Talbot,  MD2;  Sarah  S.
Long,  MD3;  Camille  N.  Kotton,  MD4;  Fiona  P.  Havers,  MD1  (View  author  affiliations)
What  is  already  known  about  this  topic?  Respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV)  causes
substantial  morbidity  and  mortality  in  older  adults.  In  May  2023,  the  Food  and  Drug
Administration approved the first two vaccines for prevention of RSV lower respiratory
tract disease (LRTD) for use in adults aged ≥60 years. What is added by this report? For
both  vaccine  products,  vaccination  with  a  single  RSV  vaccine  dose  demonstrated
moderate  to  high  efficacy  in  preventing  symptomatic  RSV-associated  LRTD  among
adults  aged  ≥60  years.  On  June  21,  2023,  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices recommended that persons aged ≥60 years may receive a single dose of RSV
vaccine,  using  shared  clinical  decision-making.  What  are  the  implications  for  public
health practice? RSV vaccination might prevent substantial morbidity in older adults at
risk for severe RSV disease; postmarketing surveillance for safety and effectiveness will
direct future guidance. Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Table 1 Table 2
Table 3 Table 4 Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a cause of severe respiratory illness
in  older  adults.  In  May  2023,  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  approved  the  first
vaccines for prevention of RSV-associated lower respiratory tract disease in adults aged
≥60 years. Since May 2022, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
Respiratory Syncytial Virus Vaccines Adult Work Group met at least monthly to review
available  evidence  regarding  the  safety,  immunogenicity,  and  efficacy  of  these
vaccines among adults aged ≥60 years. On June 21, 2023, ACIP voted to recommend
that adults aged ≥60 years may receive a single dose of an RSV vaccine, using shared
clinical  decision-making.  This  report  summarizes  the  body  of  evidence  considered  for
this  recommendation  and  provides  clinical  guidance  for  the  use  of  RSV  vaccines  in
adults aged ≥60 years. RSV vaccines have demonstrated moderate to high efficacy in
preventing  RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  disease  and  have  the  potential  to
prevent  substantial  morbidity  and  mortality  among  older  adults;  postmarketing
surveillance will direct future guidance. Top In the United States, respiratory syncytial
virus  (RSV)  causes  seasonal  epidemics  of  respiratory  illness.  Although  the  COVID-19
pandemic  interrupted  seasonal  RSV  circulation,  the  timing  and  number  of  incident
cases  of  the  2022–23  fall  and  winter  epidemic  suggested  a  likely  gradual  return  to
prepandemic  seasonality  (1).  Each  season,  RSV  causes  substantial  morbidity  and
mortality
 in
 older
 adults,
 including
 lower
 respiratory
 tract
 disease
 (LRTD),
hospitalization,  and  death.  Incidence  estimates  vary  widely  and  are  affected  by
undertesting and potentially low sensitivity of standard diagnostic testing among adults
(2–5).  Most  adult  RSV  disease  cases  occur  among  older  adults  with  an  estimated
60,000–160,000 hospitalizations and 6,000–10,000 deaths annually among adults aged
≥65 years (5–10). Adults with certain medical conditions, including chronic obstructive
pulmonary  disease,  asthma,  congestive  heart  failure,  coronary  artery  disease,
cerebrovascular  disease,  diabetes  mellitus,  and  chronic  kidney  disease,  are  at
increased risk for RSV-associated hospitalization (11–13), as are residents of long-term
care  facilities  (14),  and  persons  who  are  frail*  or  of  advanced  age  (incidence  of
RSV-associated hospitalization among adults increases with age, with the highest rates
among  those  aged  ≥75  years)  (6,15).  RSV  can  also  cause  severe  disease  in  persons
with  compromised  immunity,  including  recipients  of  hematopoietic  stem  cell
transplantation  and  patients  taking  immunosuppressive  medications  (e.g.,  for  solid
organ transplantation, cancer treatment, or other conditions) (16,17). In May 2023, the
Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  approved  the  first  vaccines  for  prevention  of
RSV-associated  LRTD  in  adults  aged  ≥60  years.  RSVPreF3  (Arexvy,  GSK)  is  a  1-dose
(0.5 mL) adjuvanted (AS01E) recombinant stabilized prefusion F protein (preF) vaccine
(18). RSVpreF (Abrysvo, Pfizer) is a 1-dose (0.5 mL) recombinant stabilized preF vaccine
(19). Top Since May 2022, CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
RSV Vaccines Adult Work Group (Work Group) met at least monthly to review available
evidence regarding the safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy of the GSK and Pfizer RSV
vaccines  among  adults  aged  ≥60  years.  A  systematic  review  of  published  and
unpublished evidence of the efficacy and safety of these vaccines among persons aged
≥60 years was conducted. The body of evidence consisted of one phase 3 randomized
controlled trial and one combined phase 1 and 2 (phase 1/2) randomized controlled trial
for each vaccine. The Work Group used the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
Development  and  Evaluation  (GRADE)  approach  to  independently  determine  the
certainty of evidence for outcomes related to each vaccine, rated on a scale of high to
very  low  certainty.†  In  evaluating  safety,  the  Work  Group  defined  inflammatory
neurologic  events  as  cases  of  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  (GBS),  chronic  inflammatory
demyelinating  polyneuropathy,  and  acute  central  nervous  system  inflammation  (e.g.,
transverse myelitis or acute disseminated encephalomyelitis [ADEM]) occurring within
42  days  after  vaccination.  The  Work  Group  then  employed  the  Evidence  to
Recommendation  Framework  to  guide  its  deliberations  on  recommendation  for  RSV
vaccination, reviewing data on the public health problem, benefits and harms, value to
the target population, acceptability to key stakeholders, feasibility, resource use, and
equity.§ Work Group conclusions regarding evidence for the use of RSV vaccines among
adults aged ≥60 years were presented to ACIP at public meetings on February 23 and
June  21,  2023  (10,15).  Top  Evaluated  efficacy  evidence  for  the  GSK  RSV  vaccine
consisted of data from one ongoing randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase
3  clinical  trial  conducted  in  17  countries  and  including  24,973  immunocompetent
participants aged ≥60 years randomized 1:1 to receive 1 dose of vaccine (intervention
group, 120 μg preF protein with AS01E adjuvant) or saline placebo (control group) (20).
Efficacy  findings  were  based  on  analyses  of  data  collected  during  May  2021–March
2023, which included two complete RSV seasons for Northern Hemisphere participants
and one complete RSV season for Southern Hemisphere participants. Efficacy analyses
for season one spanned May 2021–April 2022, while efficacy analyses for season two
spanned
 August
 2022–March
 2023;
 exact
 study-defined
 season
 dates
 were
site-dependent.  Mean  time  from  vaccination  to  end  of  efficacy  follow-up  across  both
seasons  was  approximately  15  months  per  participant.  The  efficacy  of  1  dose  of  the
GSK  vaccine  in  preventing  symptomatic,  laboratory-confirmed  RSV-associated  LRTD¶
was 82.6% (96.95% CI = 57.9%–94.1%) during the first RSV season and 56.1% (95%
CI = 28.2%–74.4%) during the second season (Table 1).** Efficacy of 1 dose over two
seasons was 74.5% (97.5% CI = 60.0%–84.5%) in preventing RSV-associated LRTD and
77.5%  (95%  CI  =  57.9%–89.0%)  in  preventing  medically  attended  RSV-associated
LRTD.††  The  study  was  not  powered  to  estimate  efficacy  against  hospitalization
(intervention  group  =  one  event;  control  group  =  five  events),  severe  RSV  illness
requiring  respiratory  support  (intervention  group  =  one  event;  control  group  =  five
events),§§  or  death  (no  events).¶¶  Evidence  regarding  safety  of  the  GSK  vaccine
consisted of data from two randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials,
including  the  same  ongoing  phase  3  trial  (20)  and  a  phase  1/2  trial  with  201
participants aged ≥60 years who received either the vaccine formulation used in phase
3  or  placebo  (21).  Across  both  clinical  trials,  severe  reactogenicity  events  (grade  3
solicited local or systemic reactions recorded during days 0–4 [phase 3 trial] and days
0–7  [phase  1/2  trial]  after  vaccination)  occurred  in  3.8%  of  the  intervention  group
participants, compared with 0.9% of the control group participants (pooled relative risk
[RR] = 4.10; 95% CI = 1.99–8.45) (Table 2). The frequency of serious adverse events
(SAEs)***  across  both  trials  was  similar  in  the  intervention  (4.4%)  and  control  (4.3%)
groups (pooled RR = 1.02; 95% CI = 0.91–1.15). A higher number of participants in the
intervention group than in the control group reported atrial fibrillation as an unsolicited
event within the 30 days after injection (intervention = 10 events [0.1%]; control = four
events [<0.1%]), eight of which were SAEs [intervention = seven; control = one]; three
of the SAEs corresponded to new onset atrial fibrillation (intervention = two; control =
one) (22). Across all GSK vaccine clinical trials in older adults, inflammatory neurologic
events were reported in three of 17,922 participants within 42 days after receipt of the
GSK vaccine (23). All three events occurred in trials excluded from GRADE because of
lack of an unvaccinated comparator arm. The reported cases included one case of GBS
in a participant aged 78 years from Japan with symptom onset 9 days postvaccination
in an open-label phase 3 clinical trial and two cases of ADEM among participants in a
randomized  phase  3  coadministration  study  (15,22).  The  two  ADEM  cases  were
reported  in  participants  aged  71  years  from  the  same  site  in  South  Africa  after
concomitant receipt of the GSK vaccine and standard dose seasonal influenza vaccine;
symptom  onset  occurred  7  and  22  days  postvaccination,  and  one  case  was  fatal.  In
both  ADEM  cases,  the  diagnosis  was  based  on  symptoms  and  clinical  findings  only;
diagnostic  testing  (including  brain  imaging,  cerebrospinal  fluid  testing,  and  nerve
conduction  studies)  was  not  performed,  leading  to  uncertainty  in  the  diagnoses.  The
investigator  in  the  fatal  case  later  revised  the  diagnosis  from  ADEM  to  hypoglycemia
and dementia (15,22). Evaluated efficacy evidence for the Pfizer vaccine consisted of
data  from  one  ongoing,  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  phase  3  clinical
trial conducted in seven countries and including 36,862 immunocompetent participants
aged ≥60 years randomized 1:1 to receive 1 dose of vaccine (intervention group, 120
μg preF protein) or placebo containing the same buffer ingredients as the vaccine but
without  active  components  (control  group)  (24).  Efficacy  findings  were  based  on
analyses  of  data  collected  during  August  2021–January  2023,  which  included  one
complete RSV season for Northern and Southern Hemisphere participants and a partial
second season for Northern Hemisphere participants only. Efficacy analyses for season
one  spanned  August  2021–October  2022,  while  efficacy  analyses  for  season  two
spanned
 July
 2022–January
 2023;
 exact
 study-defined
 season
 dates
 were
site-dependent.  Mean  follow-up  time  from  vaccination  to  end  of  efficacy  follow-up
across both seasons, including a gap in RSV surveillance between the first and second
RSV seasons, was approximately 12 months per participant. Efficacy of 1 dose of the
Pfizer  vaccine  in  preventing  symptomatic,  laboratory-confirmed  RSV-associated
LRTD††† was 88.9% (95% CI = 53.6%–98.7%) during the first RSV season and 78.6%
(95% CI = 23.2%–96.1%) during the partial second season (Table 3).§§§ Efficacy of a
single  dose  over  two  seasons  was  84.4%  (95%  CI  =  59.6%–95.2%)  in  preventing
RSV-associated  LRTD  and  81.0%  (95%  CI  =  43.5%–95.2%)  in  preventing  medically
attended  RSV-associated  LRTD.¶¶¶  The  study  was  not  powered  to  estimate  efficacy
against hospitalization (intervention group = one event; control group = three events),
severe  RSV  illness  requiring  respiratory  support  (intervention  group  =  one  event;
control group = one event),**** or death (no events).†††† Evidence regarding safety of
the
 Pfizer
 vaccine
 consisted
 of
 data
 from
 two
 randomized,
 double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trials, including the same ongoing phase 3 trial (24), and a
phase  1/2  trial  with  91  participants  aged  ≥65  years  who  received  either  the  vaccine
formulation  used  in  phase  3  or  placebo  (25).  Across  both  clinical  trials,  severe
reactogenicity  events  (grade  3  or  higher  local  or  systemic  reactions  recorded  during
days  0–7  after  vaccination)  occurred  in  1.0%  of  the  intervention  group  participants,
compared  with  0.7%  of  the  control  group  participants  (pooled  RR  =  1.43;  95%
CI = 0.85–2.39) (Table 4). The frequency of SAEs across both trials was similar in the
intervention (4.3%) and control (4.1%) groups (pooled RR = 1.04; 95% CI = 0.94–1.15).
A  higher  number  of  participants  in  the  intervention  group  than  in  the  control  group
reported  atrial  fibrillation  as  an  unsolicited  event  within  the  30  days  after  injection
(intervention = 10 events [<0.1%]; control = four events [<0.1%], of which seven were
SAEs  [intervention  =  four;  control  =  three]).  Among  participants  who  reported  atrial
fibrillation, a medical history of atrial fibrillation was reported by six of 10 Pfizer vaccine
recipients and two of four placebo recipients (26). Across all Pfizer vaccine clinical trials
among older adults, inflammatory neurologic events were reported in three of 20,255
participants within 42 days after receipt of the vaccine (15,26,27). The events included
GBS in a participant aged 66 years from the United States with symptom onset 14 days
postvaccination; Miller Fisher syndrome (a GBS variant) in a participant aged 66 years
from  Japan  with  symptom  onset  10  days  postvaccination;  and  undifferentiated
motor-sensory axonal polyneuropathy with worsening of preexisting symptoms 21 days
postvaccination  in  a  participant  aged  68  years  from  Argentina  (15,26,27).  Top
Vaccination  with  a  single  dose  of  the  GSK  or  Pfizer  RSV  vaccines  demonstrated
moderate  to  high  efficacy  in  preventing  symptomatic  RSV-associated  LRTD  over  two
consecutive  RSV  seasons  among  adults  aged  ≥60  years.  Although  trials  were
underpowered  to  estimate  efficacy  against  RSV-associated  hospitalization  and  death,
prevention  of  LRTD,  including  medically  attended  LRTD,  suggests  that  vaccination
might prevent considerable morbidity from RSV disease among adults aged ≥60 years.
Although both vaccines were generally well-tolerated with an acceptable safety profile,
six  cases  of  inflammatory  neurologic  events  (including  GBS,  ADEM,  and  others)  were
reported after RSV vaccination in clinical trials. Whether these events occurred due to
chance,  or  whether  RSV  vaccination  increases  the  risk  for  inflammatory  neurologic
events  is  currently  unknown.  Until  additional  evidence  becomes  available  from
postmarketing  surveillance  clarifying  the  existence  of  any  potential  risk,  RSV
vaccination  in  older  adults  should  be  targeted  to  those  who  are  at  highest  risk  for
severe  RSV  disease  and  therefore  most  likely  to  benefit  from  vaccination.  The
recommendation for shared clinical decision-making is intended to allow flexibility for
providers  and  patients  to  consider  individual  risk  for  RSV  disease,  while  taking  into
account  patient  preferences.  Top  On  June  21,  2023,  ACIP  recommended  that  adults
aged  ≥60  years  may  receive  a  single  dose  of  RSV  vaccine,  using  shared  clinical
decision-making.§§§§ Shared Clinical Decision-Making for Adults Aged ≥60 years. Unlike
routine  and  risk-based  vaccine  recommendations,  recommendations  based  on  shared
clinical  decision-making  do  not  target  all  persons  in  a  particular  age  group  or  an
identifiable risk group. For RSV vaccination, the decision to vaccinate a patient should
be  based  on  a  discussion  between  the  health  care  provider  and  the  patient,  which
might be guided by the patient’s risk for disease and their characteristics, values, and
preferences; the provider’s clinical discretion; and the characteristics of the vaccine. As
part  of  this  discussion,  providers  and  patients  should  consider  the  patient’s  risk  for
severe  RSV-associated  disease.  Epidemiologic  evidence  indicates  that  persons  aged
≥60 years who are at highest risk for severe RSV disease and who might be most likely
to benefit from vaccination include those with chronic medical conditions such as lung
diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma; cardiovascular
diseases  such  as  congestive  heart  failure  and  coronary  artery  disease;  moderate  or
severe  immune  compromise  (either  attributable  to  a  medical  condition  or  receipt  of
immunosuppressive  medications  or  treatment)¶¶¶¶;  diabetes  mellitus;  neurologic  or
neuromuscular conditions; kidney disorders, liver disorders, and hematologic disorders;
persons  who  are  frail;  persons  of  advanced  age;  and  persons  with  other  underlying
conditions  or  factors  that  the  provider  determines  might  increase  the  risk  for  severe
RSV-associated respiratory disease (Box). Adults aged ≥60 years who are residents of
nursing  homes  and  other  long-term  care  facilities  are  also  at  risk  for  severe  RSV
disease. It should be noted that the numbers of persons enrolled in the trials who were
frail,  were  of  advanced  age,  and  lived  in  long-term  care  facilities  were  limited,  and
persons  with  compromised  immunity  were  excluded  (some  of  whom  might  have  an
attenuated immune response to RSV vaccination). However, adults aged ≥60 years in
these populations may receive vaccination using shared clinical decision-making given
the potential for benefit. RSV vaccination is currently approved and recommended for
administration  as  a  single  dose;  sufficient  evidence  does  not  exist  at  this  time  to
determine  the  need  for  revaccination.  Optimally,  vaccination  should  occur  before  the
onset  of  the  RSV  season;  however,  typical  RSV  seasonality  was  disrupted  by  the
COVID-19  pandemic  and  has  not  returned  to  prepandemic  patterns.  For  the  2023–24
season, clinicians should offer RSV vaccination to adults aged ≥60 years using shared
clinical  decision-making  as  early  as  vaccine  supply  becomes  available  and  should
continue
 to
 offer
 vaccination
 to
 eligible
 adults
 who
 remain
 unvaccinated.
Coadministration  of  RSV  vaccines  with  other  adult  vaccines  during  the  same  visit  is
acceptable.***** Available data on immunogenicity of coadministration of RSV vaccines
and  other  vaccines  are  currently  limited.  Coadministration  of  RSV  and  seasonal
influenza vaccines met noninferiority criteria for immunogenicity with the exception of
the  FluA/Darwin  H3N2  strain  when  the  GSK  RSV  vaccine  was  coadministered  with
adjuvanted  quadrivalent  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  (28,29).  RSV  and  influenza
antibody  titers  were  somewhat  lower  with  coadministration;  however,  the  clinical
significance  of  this  is  unknown.  Administering  RSV  vaccine  with  one  or  more  other
vaccines  at  the  same  visit  might  increase  local  or  systemic  reactogenicity.  Data  are
only  available  for  coadministration  of  RSV  and  influenza  vaccines,  and  evidence  is
mixed  regarding  increased  reactogenicity.  Data  are  lacking  on  the  safety  of
coadministration  with  other  vaccines  that  might  be  recommended  for  persons  in  this
age  group,  such  as  COVID-19  vaccines;  pneumococcal  vaccines;  adult  tetanus,
diphtheria,  and  pertussis  vaccines;  and  the  recombinant  zoster  vaccine  (the
recombinant zoster vaccine and GSK’s RSV vaccine contains the same adjuvant). When
deciding whether to coadminister other vaccines with an RSV vaccine, providers should
consider whether the patient is up to date with currently recommended vaccines, the
feasibility  of  the  patient  returning  for  additional  vaccine  doses,  risk  for  acquiring
vaccine-preventable  disease,  vaccine  reactogenicity  profiles,  and  patient  preferences.
Postlicensure efficacy and safety monitoring of coadministered RSV vaccines with other
vaccines  will  further  direct  guidance.  As  with  all  vaccines,  RSV  vaccination  should  be
delayed for persons experiencing moderate or severe acute illness with or without fever
(precaution). RSV vaccines are contraindicated for and should not be administered to
persons  with  a  history  of  severe  allergic  reaction,  such  as  anaphylaxis,  to  any
component  of  the  vaccine  (30,31).  Top  Adverse  events  after  vaccination  should  be
reported  to  the  Vaccine  Adverse  Event  Reporting  System  (VAERS).  Reporting  is
encouraged for any clinically significant adverse event even if it is uncertain whether
the  vaccine  caused  the  event.  Information  on  how  to  submit  a  report  to  VAERS  is
available  at  https://vaers.hhs.gov/index.html  or  by  telephone  at  1-800-822-7967.  Top
CDC  will  monitor  adverse  events,  including  cases  of  GBS,  ADEM,  and  other
inflammatory neurologic events after RSV vaccination through VAERS and the Vaccine
Safety
 Datalink
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/ensuringsafety/monitoring/vsd/index.html).  CDC  will
also prioritize estimating vaccine effectiveness against RSV-associated hospitalization.
These data will be evaluated by CDC and ACIP as soon as they are available. According
to  FDA  postmarketing  requirements  and  commitments,  GSK  will  conduct  a  study
evaluating  risk  for  GBS,  ADEM,  and  atrial  fibrillation  after  vaccination  with  RSVPreF3
(18).  Pfizer  will  conduct  two  studies,  one  evaluating  risk  for  GBS  and  a  second
evaluating risk for atrial fibrillation after vaccination with RSVpreF (19). Pfizer will also
evaluate  the  safety  and  immunogenicity  of  a  second  RSVpreF  dose  in  a  subset  of
participants  in  the  main  phase  3  trial;  GSK  will  evaluate  safety,  immunogenicity,  and
efficacy  of  RSVPreF3  revaccination  as  part  of  its  main  phase  3  trial.  Top  Voting
members  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (in  addition  to  listed
authors):  Lynn  Bahta,  Minnesota  Department  of  Health;  Beth  P.  Bell,  University  of
Washington; Oliver Brooks, Watts HealthCare Corporation; Wilbur H. Chen, University of
Maryland  School  of  Medicine;  Sybil  Cineas,  Warren  Alpert  Medical  School  of  Brown
University;  Matthew  F.  Daley,  Kaiser  Permanente  Colorado;  Grace  M.  Lee,  Stanford
University  School  of  Medicine;  Jamie  Loehr,  Cayuga  Family  Medicine;  Veronica  V.
McNally,  Franny  Strong  Foundation;  Katherine  A.  Poehling,  Wake  Forest  School  of
Medicine;  Pablo  J.  Sánchez,  The  Research  Institute  at  Nationwide  Children’s  Hospital.
Chair:  Camille  N.  Kotton,  Harvard  Medical  School;  ACIP  Members:  H.  Keipp  Talbot,
Vanderbilt  University  School  of  Medicine;  Sarah  S.  Long,  Drexel  University  College  of
Medicine;
 Consultants:
 Robert
 L.
 Atmar,
 Baylor
 College
 of
 Medicine;
 Doug
Campos-Outcalt, University of Arizona; Helen Y. Chu, University of Washington; Peter D.
Donofrio,  Vanderbilt  University  Medical  Center;  Marie  R.  Griffin,  Vanderbilt  University
Medical Center; Cynthia Lucero-Obusan, Veterans Health Administration, Public Health
National Program Office; Rebecca L. Morgan, McMaster University; Tracy J. Ruckwardt,
National  Institute  of  Allergy  and  Infectious  Diseases;  Jonathan  Temte,  University  of
Wisconsin  School  of  Medicine  and  Public  Health;  Liaison  Representatives:  Jennifer
Heath,  Association  of  Immunization  Managers;  April  Killikelly,  Canadian  National
Advisory Committee on Immunization; Gretchen LaSalle, American Academy of Family
Physicians;  Ruth  Lynfield,  National  Foundation  for  Infectious  Diseases;  Steven  A.
Pergam,  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America;  Kenneth  E.  Schmader,  American
Geriatrics Society; Winnie Siu, Canadian National Advisory Committee on Immunization;
Vidya Sundareshan, American College of Physicians; Katherine Williams, Association for
Prevention Teaching and Research; Ex-officio Members: Judy A. Beeler, Food and Drug
Administration; Nicholas Geagan, Food and Drug Administration; Jeffrey Kelman, Center
for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services;  Sonnie  Kim,  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and
Infectious  Diseases;  Valerie  Marshall,  Office  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  for  Health;
Nadine  Peart  Akindele,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  Rachel  Zhang,  Food  and  Drug
Administration; CDC Leads: Michael Melgar, Amadea Britton; CDC Contributors: Melissa
Coughlin, Jennifer DeCuir, Katherine Fleming-Dutra, Monica Godfrey, Anne Hause, Fiona
Havers, Jefferson Jones, Andrew Leidner, Ruth Link-Gelles, Meredith McMorrow, Danielle
Moulia,  Neil  Murthy,  Ismael  Ortega  Sánchez,  Amanda  Payne,  Jamison  Pike,  Mila  Prill,
Lauren Roper, Hannah Rosenblum, David Shay, Diya Surie, Christopher Taylor, Natalie
Thornburg,  Megan  Wallace,  Akpobome  (Patricia)  Wodi.  Top  Corresponding  author:
Michael  Melgar,  media@cdc.gov.  Top  1Coronavirus  and  Other  Respiratory  Viruses
Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 2Vanderbilt
University  School  of  Medicine,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  3Drexel  University  College  of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 4Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
Top All authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts
of interest were disclosed. Top * Frailty is a multidimensional geriatric syndrome and
reflects a state of increased vulnerability to adverse health outcomes. Although there is
no consensus definition, one frequently used tool is the Fried frailty phenotype in which
frailty  is  defined  as  a  clinical  syndrome  with  three  or  more  of  the  following  signs  or
symptoms:  unintentional  weight  loss  (10  lbs  [4.5  kg]  in  the  past  year),  self-reported
exhaustion, weakness (grip strength), slow walking speed, and low physical activity. †
GRADE
 tables
 are
 available
 online
 for
 both
 the
 GSK
 RSV
 vaccine
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/GSK-Adjuvanted-RSVPreF3-adults.html)
and
 the
 Pfizer
 RSV
 vaccine
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/Pfizer-Bivalent-RSVpreF-adults.html).  For
the  GSK  RSV  vaccine,  the  efficacy  estimates  presented  differ  slightly  from  efficacy
estimates  included  in  the  GRADE  tables  because  the  manufacturer  used  a  different
method from CDC to calculate vaccine efficacy. Estimates in this report are those of the
manufacturer,  and  estimates  in  the  GRADE  tables  are  those  calculated  by  CDC.  §
Evidence  to  Recommendation  documents  are  available  for  the  GSK  vaccine
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/GSK-Adjuvanted-RSVPreF3-adults-etr.ht
ml)
 and
 Pfizer
 RSV
 vaccines
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/Pfizer-Bivalent-RSVpreF-adults-etr.html).
¶ RSV-associated LRTD (RSVPreF3 trial): two or more lower respiratory symptoms (new
or  increased  sputum,  cough,  and  dyspnea)  or  signs  (new  or  increased  wheezing,
crackles  or  rhonchi  detected  during  chest  auscultation,  respiratory  rate  ≥20
respirations  per  minute,  low  or  decreased  oxygen  saturation,  and  need  for  oxygen
supplementation) for ≥24 hours (including one or more lower respiratory signs) or three
or more lower respiratory symptoms for ≥24 hours. ** Manufacturer-calculated efficacy.
Includes  events  >14  days  after  injection  and  person-time  available  from  the
manufacturer’s  pivotal  phase  3  trial.  Estimates  are  adjusted  for  participant  age  and
region.  ††  Medically  attended  RSV-associated  LRTD  (RSVPreF3  trial):  LRTD  plus
attendance  at  one  or  more  inpatient  or  outpatient  health  care  service.  Estimates  not
included  in  per-protocol  assessments.  §§  Persons  with  severe  RSV  illness  requiring
respiratory
 support
 (RSVPreF3
 trial):
 RSV-associated
 illness
 requiring
 oxygen
supplementation, positive airway pressure, or other types of mechanical ventilation. If
participant  was  already  receiving  any  of  these,  significant  change  or  adaptation  was
considered. ¶¶ The limited number of hospitalizations, severe RSV illnesses, and deaths
observed in the trial might have been partially due to limited enrollment of persons at
highest risk for RSV disease including those who were frail, of advanced age, and those
living  in  long-term  care  facilities  and  the  exclusion  of  persons  with  immune
compromise. The 2021–22 RSV season was also disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic,
and  RSV  incidence  was  lower  than  expected  based  on  prepandemic  surveillance
studies. *** Serious adverse events were defined as any untoward medical occurrence
that  resulted  in  death,  was  life  threatening,  required  inpatient  hospitalization  or
prolongation of existing hospitalization, resulted in persistent disability or incapacity, or
was a congenital anomaly or birth defect. ††† RSV-associated LRTD (RSVpreF trial): the
trial had two co-primary endpoints, defined as RSV lower respiratory tract illness (LRTI)
with two or more lower respiratory signs or three or more lower respiratory symptoms
(including new or worsened cough, sputum production, wheezing, shortness of breath,
and tachypnea) lasting >1 day. For RSVpreF estimates in this report, LRTD refers to the
RSVpreF  trial  endpoint  of  LRTI  with  three  or  more  signs  or  symptoms.  §§§
Manufacturer-calculated  efficacy.  Includes  events  occurring  >14  days  after  injection
and person-time available from the manufacturer’s pivotal phase 3 trial. Estimates are
not  adjusted.  ¶¶¶  Medically  attended  RSV-associated  LRTD  (RSVpreF  trial):  LRTD
prompting  any  health  care  visit.  Estimates  not  included  in  per-protocol  assessments.
****  Severe  RSV  illness  requiring  respiratory  support  (RSVpreF  trial):  RSV-associated
acute respiratory illness with new or increased oxygen supplementation or mechanical
ventilation.  ††††  The  limited  number  of  hospitalizations,  severe  RSV  illnesses,  and
deaths  observed  in  the  trial  might  have  been  partially  due  to  limited  enrollment  of
persons at highest risk for RSV disease including those who were frail, of advanced age,
and those living in long-term care facilities and the exclusion of persons with immune
compromise. The 2021–22 RSV season was also disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic,
and  RSV  incidence  was  lower  than  expected  based  on  prepandemic  surveillance
studies.  §§§§  Votes:  1)  Adults  aged  60–64  years  may  receive  a  single  dose  of  RSV
vaccine, using shared clinical decision-making (13–0 vote in favor, one abstention), and
2)  Adults  aged  ≥65  years  may  receive  a  single  dose  of  RSV  vaccine,  using  shared
clinical decision-making (nine to five in favor). Several ACIP members who voted no for
shared  clinical  decision-making  in  adults  aged  ≥65  years  were  in  favor  of  a  routine
recommendation
 for
 all
 persons
 in
 this
 age
 group.
https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2023/s0629-rsv.html
 ¶¶¶¶
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/people-who-are-im
munocompromised.html ***** When administering more than one vaccine at the same
clinical visit, providers should separate injection sites by at least 1 inch if possible and
consider administering vaccines that are associated with an enhanced local reaction in
separate  limbs.  Top  Top  Abbreviations:  LRTD  =  lower  respiratory  tract  disease;
RSV = respiratory syncytial virus.
*  Manufacturer-calculated  efficacy.  Includes  events  >14  days  after  injection  and
person-time available from the manufacturer’s pivotal phase 3 trial. Estimates adjusted
for participant age and region.
† LRTD defined as two or more lower respiratory symptoms (new or increased sputum,
cough, and dyspnea) or signs (new or increased wheezing, crackles or rhonchi detected
during  chest  auscultation,  respiratory  rate  ≥20  respirations  per  minute,  low  or
decreased  oxygen  saturation  [<95%  or  ≤90%  if  baseline  was  <95%],  and  need  for
oxygen supplementation) for ≥24 hours, including one or more lower respiratory signs,
or three or more lower respiratory symptoms for ≥24 hours.
§  Medically  attended  RSV-associated  LRTD  defined  as  LRTD  plus  attention  at  one  or
more  inpatient  or  outpatient  health  care  services.  Estimates  were  not  included  in
per-protocol assessments.
¶  Season  1  vaccine  efficacy  estimates  reflect  efficacy  against  first  events  occurring
during the first complete RSV season for Northern Hemisphere participants and a partial
first  RSV  season  for  Southern  Hemisphere  participants  (May  2021–April  2022;  exact
study-defined season dates were site-dependent).
** 96.95% CI; the CI for primary trial endpoint was adjusted for multiplicity.
†† 95% CI.
§§  Season  2  vaccine  efficacy  estimates  reflect  efficacy  against  first  events  occurring
during the second complete Northern Hemisphere RSV season for Northern Hemisphere
participants  (August  2022–March  2023;  exact  study-defined  season  dates  were
site-dependent). In addition to Northern Hemisphere participants, Southern Hemisphere
participants  were  also  included  in  these  analyses,  but  this  time  span  reflects  an
interseason period with low RSV incidence in the Southern Hemisphere.
¶¶ Interim analysis underpowered to estimate efficacy.
***  Combined  season  1  and  2  (interim)  vaccine  efficacy  estimates  reflect  efficacy
against first events occurring any time during Season 1 or Season 2. The mean time
from start to end of efficacy surveillance was approximately 15 months per participant.
†††  97.5%  CI;  the  CI  for  primary  trial  endpoint  was  adjusted  for  multiplicity.  Top
Abbreviations: AE = adverse event; GBS = Guillain-Barré syndrome.
* Includes serious adverse events and severe reactogenicity events observed in GSK’s
pivotal  phase  3  trial  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36791160/)  and  phase  1/2  trial
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35904987/).  Inflammatory  neurologic  events  include
those  observed  across  all  GSK  clinical  trials,  including  an  open-label  study
(https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04732871)
 and
 a
 coadministration
 study
(https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04841577). Additional data provided by GSK.
† Represents number of events and percentage of all participants experiencing events
observed  among  RSVPreF3  vaccine  recipients  across  all  included  trials  for  each
outcome.
§ Represents number of events and percentage of all participants experiencing events
observed among placebo recipients across all included trials for each outcome.
¶ Pooled relative risk for events in all included trials for each outcome.
**  Serious  AEs  were  defined  as  any  untoward  medical  occurrence  (during  6  months
after injection in the phase 3 trial and 60 days after injection in the phase 1/2 trial) that
resulted  in  death,  was  life  threatening,  required  inpatient  hospitalization  or
prolongation of existing hospitalization, resulted in persistent disability or incapacity, or
was a congenital anomaly or birth defect.
††  Severe  reactogenicity  events  were  defined  as  grade  3–solicited  local  reaction
(injection  site  pain,  redness  and  swelling)  or  systemic  reactions  (fatigue,  fever,
headache, gastrointestinal symptoms [nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal pain],
arthralgia,  myalgia,  and  shivering)  recorded  during  days  0–4  after  vaccination  in  the
phase  3  trial  and  days  0–7  after  vaccination  in  the  phase  1/2  trial.  For  injection  site
redness and swelling, grade 3 corresponded to a diameter >3.9” (>100 mm). For fever,
grade  3  corresponded  to  a  temperature  >102.2°F  (>39°C).  For  all  other  reactions,
grade 3 corresponded to reactions that prevented normal, everyday activities. Grade 4
events were not defined in these trials.
§§ Defined by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Respiratory Syncytial
Virus Vaccines Adult Work Group as GBS (including GBS variants), chronic inflammatory
demyelinating  polyneuropathy,  or  acute  central  nervous  system  inflammation  (e.g.,
transverse myelitis or acute disseminated encephalomyelitis) occurring ≤42 days after
vaccination.
¶¶ No inflammatory neurologic events were reported in either the phase 3 or phase 1/2
trials.  However,  across  all  RSVPreF3  trials  inflammatory  neurologic  events  were
reported in three of 17,922 adults vaccinated with RSVPreF3. Events included one case
of  GBS  in  an  open-label  phase  3  clinical  trial,  and  two  cases  of  acute  disseminated
encephalomyelitis
 among
 participants
 in
 a
 randomized
 phase
 3
 study
 of
coadministration  of  RSVPreF3  and  standard  dose  seasonal  influenza  vaccine.  Relative
risk could not be calculated because neither trial had a placebo-controlled comparator
group.  Top  Abbreviations:  LRTD  =  lower  respiratory  tract  disease;  LRTI  =  lower
respiratory tract illness; RSV = respiratory syncytial virus.
*  Manufacturer-calculated  efficacy.  Includes  events  >14  days  after  injection  and
person-time  available  from  the  manufacturer’s  pivotal  phase  3  trial.  Estimates  are
unadjusted.
†  The  RSVpreF  trial  had  two  co-primary  endpoints,  defined  as  RSV  LRTI  with  two  or
more lower respiratory signs or symptoms lasting >1 day, and RSV LRTI with three or
more lower respiratory signs or symptoms lasting >1 day. Lower respiratory signs and
symptoms included new or worsened cough, sputum production, wheezing, shortness of
breath,  and  tachypnea.  For  RSVpreF  estimates  in  this  report,  LRTD  refers  to  the
RSVpreF  trial  endpoint  of  RSV  LRTI  with  three  or  more  lower  respiratory  signs  or
symptoms.
§ Medically attended RSV-associated LRTD was defined as LRTD prompting any health
care  visit  (any  outpatient  or  inpatient  visit  such  as  hospitalization,  emergency
department visit, urgent care visit, home health care services, primary care physician
office  visit,  pulmonologist  office  visit,  specialist  office  visit,  other  visit,  or  telehealth
contact). Estimates were not included in per-protocol assessments.
¶  Season  1  vaccine  efficacy  estimates  reflect  efficacy  against  first  events  occurring
during  the  first  complete  RSV  season  for  Northern  and  Southern  Hemisphere
participants  (August  2021–October  2022;  exact  study-defined  season  dates  were
site-dependent).
**  Season  2  (interim)  vaccine  efficacy  estimates  reflect  efficacy  against  first  events
occurring during the second complete RSV season for Northern Hemisphere participants
only (July 2022–January 2023; Southern Hemisphere data not yet available).
†† Interim analysis underpowered to estimate efficacy.
§§ Combined season 1 and 2 (interim) vaccine efficacy estimates reflect efficacy against
first events occurring any time during season 1 or season 2. The mean time from start
to  end  of  efficacy  surveillance  was  approximately  12  months  per  participant.  Top
Abbreviations: AE = adverse events; GBS = Guillain-Barré syndrome.
*
 Safety
 events
 observed
 in
 Pfizer’s
 pivotal
 phase
 3
 trial
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37018468/)
 and
 phase
 1/2
 trial
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34932102/).  There  were  no  additional  inflammatory
neurologic events observed in any Pfizer clinical trials other than the two trials included.
Additional data provided by Pfizer.
†  Represents  number  of  events  and  percent  of  all  participants  experiencing  events
observed among RSVpreF vaccine recipients across phase 3 and phase 1/2 trials.
§  Represents  number  of  events  and  percent  of  all  participants  experiencing  events
observed among placebo recipients across phase 3 and phase 1/2 trials.
¶ Pooled relative risk for events in phase 3 and phase 1/2 trials.
** Serious AEs were defined as any untoward medical occurrence (during all available
follow-up time [safety follow-up through February 2023] after injection in the phase 3
trial  and  60 days  for the phase 1/2 trial) that resulted  in  death,  was  life threatening,
required inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, resulted in
persistent disability or incapacity, or was a congenital anomaly or birth defect.
††  Severe  reactogenicity  events  were  defined  as  grade  3  or  higher  local  reaction
(injection  site  pain,  redness  and  swelling)  or  systemic  reaction  (fever,  fatigue  or
tiredness,  headache,  nausea,  muscle  pain,  joint  pain,  vomiting,  diarrhea,  and  other
systemic event) recorded during days 0–7 after vaccination. For injection site redness
and  swelling,  grade  3  corresponded  to  a  diameter  >3.9”  (>100  mm)  from  e-diary  or
severe grade from adverse event case report form. For fever, grade 3 corresponded to
a temperature >102°F (>38.9°C) from e-diary or severe grade from adverse event case
report form. For all other reactions, grade 3 corresponded to reactions that prevented
normal,  everyday  activities.  Grade  4  event  corresponded  only  to  a  fever  >104°F
(>40°C).
§§ Defined by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Work Group as GBS
(including GBS variants), chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, or acute
central  nervous  system  inflammation  (e.g.,  transverse  myelitis  or  acute  disseminated
encephalomyelitis) occurring ≤42 days after vaccination.
¶¶ Across all RSVpreF clinical trials, including trials other than the phase 3 and phase
1/2  trials  summarized  in  this  table,  inflammatory  neurologic  events  were  reported  in
three of 20,255 adults ≤42 days after vaccination with RSVpreF (all in the phase 3 trial).
The events included GBS, Miller Fisher syndrome (a GBS variant), and undifferentiated
motor-sensory axonal polyneuropathy. Relative risk could not be calculated because no
events were observed in the placebo-controlled comparator group. Top • Lung disease
(such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma) • Cardiovascular diseases
(such  as  congestive  heart  failure  and  coronary  artery  disease)  •  Moderate  or  severe
immune compromise* • Diabetes mellitus • Neurologic or neuromuscular conditions •
Kidney  disorders  •  Liver  disorders  •  Hematologic  disorders  •  Other  underlying
conditions  that  a  health  care  provider  determines  might  increase  the  risk  for  severe
respiratory disease • Frailty† • Advanced age§ • Residence in a nursing home or other
long-term care facility • Other underlying factors that a health care provider determines
might increase the risk for severe respiratory disease Abbreviation: RSV = respiratory
syncytial virus. * A list of potentially immune compromising conditions is available at
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/people-who-are-im
munocompromised.html. † Frailty is a multidimensional geriatric syndrome and reflects
a  state  of  increased  vulnerability  to  adverse  health  outcomes.  Although  there  is  no
consensus  definition,  one  frequently  used  tool  is  the  Fried  frailty  phenotype  in  which
frailty is defined as a clinical syndrome with three or more of the following symptoms
present:  unintentional  weight  loss  (10  lbs  [4.5  kg]  in  the  past  year),  self-reported
exhaustion, weakness (grip strength), slow walking speed, and low physical activity. §
Among adults aged ≥60 years, RSV incidence increases with advancing age. Although
age  may  be  considered  in  determining  an  older  adult  patient’s  risk  for  severe
RSV-associated disease, there is no specific age threshold at which RSV vaccination is
more  strongly  recommended  within  the  age  group  of  adults  aged  ≥60  years.  Top
Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Melgar  M,  Britton  A,  Roper  LE,  et  al.  Use  of
Respiratory Syncytial Virus Vaccines in Older Adults: Recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices — United States, 2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 2023;72:793–801. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7229a4. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7229a4.htm
