Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / October 13, 2023 / 72(41);1115–1122 On October 6,
2023,  this  report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Katherine  E.
Fleming-Dutra, MD1,*; Jefferson M. Jones, MD1,*; Lauren E. Roper, MPH1; Mila M. Prill,
MSPH1;  Ismael  R.  Ortega-Sanchez,  PhD1;  Danielle  L.  Moulia,  MPH1;  Megan  Wallace,
DRPH1;  Monica  Godfrey,  MPH1;  Karen  R.  Broder,  MD2;  Naomi  K.  Tepper,  MD3;  Oliver
Brooks, MD4; Pablo J. Sánchez, MD5; Camille N. Kotton, MD6; Barbara E. Mahon, MD1;
Sarah  S.  Long,  MD7;  Meredith  L.  McMorrow,  MD1  (View  author  affiliations)  What  is
already  known  about  this  topic?  Nirsevimab  is  recommended  in  infants  to  prevent
respiratory  syncytial  virus  (RSV)-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  (LRTI).  In
August  2023,  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  approved  Pfizer  RSV  vaccine  for
pregnant persons at 32–36 weeks’ gestation to prevent RSV-associated LRTI in infants
aged  <6  months.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  On  September  22,  2023,  CDC’s
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  recommended  RSV  vaccine  for
pregnant  persons  at  32–36  weeks’  gestation  using  seasonal  administration  (meaning
September–January  in  most  of  the  United  States)  to  prevent  RSV-associated  LRTI  in
infants  aged  <6  months.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?  CDC
recommends  protecting  all  infants  against  RSV-associated  LRTI  through  use  of  either
the maternal RSV vaccine or infant receipt of nirsevimab. Views equals page views plus
PDF downloads Table 1 Table 2 Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the leading cause of
hospitalization among U.S. infants. Nirsevimab (Bevfortus, Sanofi and AstraZeneca) is
recommended  to  prevent  RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  (LRTI)  in
infants.  In  August  2023,  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  approved  RSVpreF
vaccine  (Abrysvo,  Pfizer  Inc.)  for  pregnant  persons  as  a  single  dose  during  32–36
completed  gestational  weeks  (i.e.,  32  weeks  and  zero  days’  through  36  weeks  and  6
days’  gestation)  to  prevent  RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  disease  in  infants
aged  <6  months.  Since  October  2021,  CDC’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices  (ACIP)  RSV  Vaccines  Pediatric/Maternal  Work  Group  has  reviewed  RSV
epidemiology and evidence regarding safety, efficacy, and potential economic impact of
pediatric  and  maternal  RSV  prevention  products,  including  RSVpreF  vaccine.  On
September  22,  2023,  ACIP  and  CDC  recommended  RSVpreF  vaccine  using  seasonal
administration (i.e., during September through end of January in most of the continental
United States) for pregnant persons as a one-time dose at 32–36 weeks’ gestation for
prevention of RSV-associated LRTI in infants aged <6 months. Either maternal RSVpreF
vaccination  during  pregnancy  or  nirsevimab  administration  to  the  infant  is
recommended to prevent RSV-associated LRTI among infants, but both are not needed
for  most  infants.  All  infants  should  be  protected  against  RSV-associated  LRTI  through
use of one of these products. Top In August 2023, the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved RSVpreF vaccine (Abrysvo, Pfizer Inc.) for pregnant persons to prevent
RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  disease  and  severe  lower  respiratory  tract
disease in infants aged <6 months (1,2). The Pfizer bivalent RSVpreF vaccine, which is
the  same  formulation  and  dose  approved  for  use  in  adults  aged  ≥60  years,  contains
stabilized prefusion F glycoproteins from RSV A and RSV B and is approved as a single
0.5  mL  intramuscular  dose  administered  during  32  through  36  weeks’  gestation.  In
clinical trials among pregnant persons at 24–36 weeks’ gestation, more preterm births
(<37 weeks’ gestation) were observed among RSVpreF vaccine recipients than placebo
recipients,  although  the  differences  were  not  statistically  significant  (1,2).  Available
data  were  insufficient  to  establish  or  exclude  a  causal  relationship  between  preterm
birth and RSVpreF vaccine. FDA labeled the potential risk for preterm birth as a warning
and approved RSVpreF vaccine for use in pregnant persons at 32–36 weeks’ gestation
to  avoid  the  potential  risk  for  preterm  birth  at  <32  weeks’  gestation,  which  is
associated  with  increased  risk  for  morbidity  and  mortality  (2).  More  hypertensive
disorders  of  pregnancy  were  observed  among  RSVpreF  vaccine  recipients  compared
with placebo recipients, although the differences were not statistically significant. FDA
determined  that,  when  RSVpreF  is  administered  during  32–36  weeks’  gestation,  the
benefit  of  vaccination  in  preventing  RSV-associated  LRTI  in  infants  outweighed  risks,
including the potential risk for preterm birth and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy
(1,2). On August 3, 2023, CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
and CDC recommended nirsevimab (Beyfortus, Sanofi and AstraZeneca), a long-acting
monoclonal antibody for prevention of severe RSV disease, for infants aged <8 months
who  are  born  during  or  entering  their  first  RSV  season  and  for  children  aged  8–19
months at increased risk for severe RSV disease entering their second RSV season (3).
On  September  22,  2023,  ACIP  and  CDC  recommended  RSVpreF  vaccine  for  pregnant
persons as a one-time dose during 32–36 completed weeks’ gestation using seasonal
administration (September–January in most of the continental United States) to prevent
RSV-associated  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  (LRTI)  in  infants.  Either  maternal
RSVpreF  vaccination  during  pregnancy  or  nirsevimab  administration  to  the  infant  is
recommended to prevent RSV-associated LRTI in infants, but both are not needed for
most  infants.  This  report  describes  new  recommendations  for  the  use  of  maternal
RSVpreF  during  pregnancy  and  updated  clinical  guidance  regarding  the  use  of
nirsevimab and maternal RSVpreF vaccine. These recommendations will be updated as
new evidence becomes available. RSV is a common cause of LRTI in U.S. infants, most
of whom are infected with RSV during the first year of life (4,5). All infants are at risk for
experiencing  severe  RSV  disease.  RSV  is  the  leading  cause  of  hospitalization  among
U.S. infants (6); 2% to 3% of young infants will be hospitalized for RSV disease (7–9).
Approximately
 58,000–80,000
 RSV-associated
 hospitalizations
 and
 100–300
RSV-associated deaths occur annually among U.S. children aged <5 years (10–13). An
estimated  79%  of  children  aged  <2  years  hospitalized  with  RSV  had  no  underlying
medical conditions (7). RSV-associated hospitalization rates are highest in infants aged
<6  months,  with  hospitalization  peaking  at  age  1  month,  and  then  decreasing  with
increasing age (7). Before the COVID-19 pandemic, RSV circulation consistently peaked
during  winter  months  in  the  continental  United  States,  although  the  timing  varied  by
geographic  region  (14);  however,  the  COVID-19  pandemic  disrupted  RSV  seasonality,
with historically low RSV circulation during 2020–21 and early and prolonged circulation
during 2021–22 (14). RSV circulation in 2022–23 began later than during the 2021–22
season  but  earlier  than  prepandemic  seasons  (14).  RSV  activity  in  August  and
September  2023  suggests  that  transmission  patterns  are  returning  to  prepandemic
seasonal
 RSV
 trends.†
 Top
 Since
 October
 2021,
 the
 ACIP
 RSV
 Vaccines
Pediatric/Maternal  Work  Group  (the  Work  Group)  has  met  at  least  monthly  to  review
evidence  regarding  RSV  epidemiology  and  safety,  efficacy,  and  potential  economic
impact of pediatric and maternal RSV prevention products, including RSVpreF vaccine.
A systematic literature search was completed to review evidence regarding the efficacy
and  safety  of  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccination  during  pregnancy.  The  Work  Group
determined  a  priori  outcomes  that  were  critical  or  important  to  vaccine  policy
decisions.§ Evidence of efficacy and safety were derived from multicountry trials that
randomized  pregnant  persons  to  receive  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccination  or  placebo
during  24–36  weeks’  gestation:  a  phase  2b  trial¶  with  581  pregnant  persons  (115  of
whom received the phase 3 vaccine dose and formulation and 117 of whom received
placebo)  and  a  phase  3  trial**  including  7,392  pregnant  persons,  randomized  1:1  to
vaccine  and  placebo  arms  (15,16).  The  Work  Group  used  the  Grading  of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach†† to
assess the certainty of evidence for outcomes related to maternal RSVpreF vaccination
during  pregnancy,  rated  on  a  scale  of  very  low  to  high  certainty.  The  Work  Group
employed  the  Evidence  to  Recommendation  (EtR)  Framework§§  to  guide  its
deliberations on recommendations for maternal RSVpreF vaccination during pregnancy
and  review  of  data  on  the  public  health  problem,  benefits  and  harms,  value  to  the
target  population,  acceptability  to  key  stakeholders,  feasibility,  direct  and  indirect
resource  utilization,  and  equity.  Top  In  the  Pfizer  phase  2b  and  3  trials,  maternal
RSVpreF vaccination was administered during 24–36 weeks’ gestation (15,16). For the
GRADE  assessment,  data  were  included  from  phase  2b  and  3  trials  using  the  trial
dosing interval of 24–36 weeks’ gestation. Using all available data from the trial dosing
interval  provided  increased  power  to  detect  potential  benefits  and  harms.  Additional
analyses  of  efficacy  and  safety  outcomes  from  participants  who  received  vaccine  or
placebo during the approved dosing interval of 32–36 weeks’ gestation were reviewed
and are included as a supplement to the evidence included in GRADE (2,9). The details
of  the  GRADE  evidence  profile  and  supporting  evidence  for  the  EtR  Framework  are
available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/pfizer-RSVpreF-pregnant-people.html and
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/pfizer-RSVpreF-pregnant-people-etr.html.
For  the  GRADE  assessment  of  benefits,  data  on  vaccine  efficacy  among  infants  from
birth  through  180  days  of  life  were  evaluated  (9,16).  Efficacy  against  medically
attended  RSV-associated  LRTI  was  51.3%  among  the  full  trial  population  (trial  dosing
interval of 24–36 weeks’ gestation) and 57.3% when maternal RSVpreF vaccination was
given  during  the  approved  dosing  interval  (32–36  weeks’  gestation).  Efficacy  against
hospitalization  for  RSV-associated  LRTI  was  56.8%  during  the  full  trial  dosing  interval
and 48.2% during the approved dosing interval (Table 1). For the GRADE assessment of
harms, results from the phase 2b and phase 3 trials were pooled¶¶ (9,16). The overall
evidence  certainty  using  GRADE  criteria  was  rated  as  very  low,  driven  by  the
uncertainty  in  the  critical  harm  outcome  of  preterm  birth  (<37  weeks’  gestation).***
ACIP judged the benefits of maternal RSVpreF vaccination at 32–36 weeks’ gestation to
outweigh the potential risks for preterm birth and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
The most common local and systemic adverse reactions were pain at the injection site,
headache, muscle pain, and nausea.††† Although not statistically significant, in the full
trial population more preterm births and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (including
preeclampsia)  were  observed  in  persons  administered  the  vaccine  rather  than  the
placebo,  and  more  infants  whose  mothers  received  the  vaccine  had  low  birthweight
≤5.5  lbs  (≤2,500  g)  and  neonatal  jaundice  compared  with  infants  whose  mothers
received the placebo.§§§ Pregnant persons at increased risk for preterm delivery were
excluded from the phase 2b and phase 3 trials. In the full trial population, preeclampsia
occurred among 1.8% (95% CI = 1.4%–2.3%) of vaccine recipients and in 1.4% (95% CI
=  1.1%–1.9%)  of  placebo  recipients  (2).  Pregnancy-related  serious  adverse  events
overall  (which  include  preeclampsia)  occurred  in  16.2%  (95%  CI  =  15.1%–17.5%)  of
participants in the vaccine group and 15.2% (95% CI = 14.0%–16.4%) in the placebo
group¶¶¶ (2). The data reviewed by ACIP support that limiting vaccine administration to
the  approved  dosing  interval  (32–36  weeks’  gestation)  reduces  the  potential  risk  for
preterm  birth  and  thereby,  the  potential  for  related  complications  compared  with  the
trial dosing interval of 24–36 weeks’ gestation. In the Pfizer phase 3 trial, using the full
trial dosing interval, 5.7% of infants born to RSVpreF vaccine recipients were preterm
compared  with  4.7%  of  those  born  to  placebo  recipients  (Table  2).  In  the  full  trial
population, more than one half of preterm births occurred >30 days after vaccination
(121 [60%] of 201 preterm births in the vaccine group and 98 [58%] of 169 preterm
births in the placebo group), and most preterm births occurred at or after 33 weeks’
gestation (194 [97%] of 201 preterm births in the vaccine group versus 161 [95%] of
169 preterm births in the placebo group). When the prevalence of preterm birth was
assessed among phase 3 trial participants who received vaccine during the approved
dosing  interval  (32–36  weeks’  gestation),  4.2%  of  infants  were  born  preterm  in  the
vaccine group versus 3.7% in the placebo group. The majority of preterm births among
participants who received vaccination during the approved dosing interval occurred at
36 weeks’ gestation (49 [72%] of 68 preterm births in the vaccine group and 35 [59%]
of 59 preterm births in the placebo group). The Pfizer maternal RSVpreF vaccine is the
same formulation and dose approved for use in adults aged ≥60 years. In clinical trials
in  adults  aged  ≥60  years  for  RSVpreF  vaccine,  three  inflammatory  neurologic  events
(two cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome, including one case of the Miller-Fisher variant,
and one case of undifferentiated motor-sensory polyneuropathy) were reported within
42  days  after  vaccination  among  20,255  investigational  vaccine  recipients  aged  ≥60
years,  whereas  no  cases  were  observed  among  placebo  recipients  (17).  No  cases  of
Guillain-Barré syndrome or other inflammatory neurologic events were reported in the
phase 2b or phase 3 trials among pregnant persons (15). Top ACIP considered whether
use of RSVpreF vaccine in pregnant persons is a reasonable and efficient allocation of
resources.  The  societal  incremental  cost  effectiveness  ratio  for  RSVpreF  vaccine,
assuming  year-round  dosing  and  cost  of  $295  per  dose,  was  $400,304  per
quality-adjusted  life  year  (QALY)  saved.  Assuming  a  pre–COVID-19  typical  RSV
seasonality  in  most  of  the  continental  United  States,  the  societal  incremental  cost
effectiveness
 ratio
 for
 administering
 RSVpreF
 to
 pregnant
 persons
 during
September–January would be $167,280/QALY saved (9). Top On September 22, 2023,
ACIP and CDC recommended maternal Pfizer RSVpreF vaccination in pregnant persons
as a one-time dose at 32 weeks and zero days’–36 weeks and 6 days’ gestation using
seasonal administration (meaning September–January in most of the continental United
States)  for  prevention  of  RSV-associated  LRTI  in  infants  aged  <6  months.****  These
recommendations  will  be  updated  as  new  evidence  becomes  available.  Seasonal
Administration of RSVpreF Vaccine. Maternal RSVpreF vaccine should be administered
to pregnant persons during September–January in most of the continental United States
to target vaccine to pregnant persons whose infants will be in their first months of life,
when  protection  from  maternal  vaccination  would  be  at  its  highest,  during  the  RSV
season.  Administering  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccine  starting  in  September  (1–2  months
before  the  anticipated  start  of  the  RSV  season)  and  continuing  through  January  (2–3
months before the anticipated end of the RSV season) will maximize cost-effectiveness
and  benefits.  In  jurisdictions  with  RSV  seasonality  that  differs  from  most  of  the
continental  United  States,  including  Alaska,  southern  Florida,  Guam,  Hawaii,  Puerto
Rico, U.S.-affiliated Pacific Islands, and U.S. Virgin Islands, providers should follow state,
local,  or  territorial  guidance  on  timing  of  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccination.††††
Simultaneous  Administration  with  Other  Vaccines.  In  accordance  with  CDC’s  General
Best  Practices  Guidelines  for  Immunization,  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccine  can  be
administered to pregnant persons with other recommended vaccines, such as tetanus,
diphtheria, and pertussis (Tdap), influenza, and COVID-19 vaccines, without regard to
timing, including simultaneous vaccination at different anatomic sites on the same day
(18).  Additional  Vaccine  Doses  in  Subsequent  Pregnancies.  Currently,  no  data  are
available  on  either  the  efficacy  of  the  first  lifetime  dose  to  protect  infants  born  after
subsequent  pregnancies  or  the  safety  of  additional  doses  given  during  subsequent
pregnancies.  Additional  data  are  needed  to  determine  whether  additional  seasonal
doses  during  subsequent  pregnancies  are  indicated,  and  ACIP  might  update
recommendations  in  the  future,  as  data  become  available.  Recommendations  for
nirsevimab, a long-acting monoclonal antibody product, have been previously published
(3). Either maternal RSVpreF vaccination during pregnancy at 32–36 weeks’ gestation
or  nirsevimab  immunization  for  infants  aged  <8  months  who  are  born  during  or  are
entering  their  first  RSV  season  is  recommended  to  prevent  RSV-associated  LRTI  in
infants,  but  administration  of  both  products  is  not  needed  for  most  infants.  Providers
who  care  for  pregnant  persons  should  discuss  the  relative  advantages  and
disadvantages  of  both  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccination  and  nirsevimab  and  consider
patient preferences when determining whether to vaccinate the pregnant person or to
rely  on  administration  of  nirsevimab  to  the  infant  (Box)  (19).  No  data  are  available
directly  comparing  the  efficacy  of  nirsevimab  and  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccine  in
preventing  RSV-associated  LRTI  in  infants.  Protection  conferred  through  maternal
vaccination  will  likely  wane  after  3  months,  as  has  been  observed  in  infants  born  to
pregnant  persons  who  have  received  influenza  and  COVID-19  vaccines  (16,20,21).
However,
 because
 maternal
 RSV
 vaccination
 at
 32–36
 weeks’
 gestation
 is
recommended during only September–January in most of the continental United States,
most infants of vaccinated mothers will be born during an RSV season. Mothers of most
infants  born  outside  of  RSV  season  (i.e.,  during  April–September)  will  not  have  been
vaccinated; therefore, nirsevimab is recommended for these infants at the onset of the
RSV  season  if  they  are  aged  <8  months.  At  least  14  days  are  likely  needed  after
maternal  vaccination  for  development  and  transplacental  transfer  of  maternal
antibodies  to  protect  the  infant  (16,22);  therefore,  nirsevimab  is  recommended  for
infants born <14 days after maternal RSVpreF vaccination. The earliest an infant could
be  born  and  be  considered  protected  by  maternal  receipt  of  RSVpreF  vaccine  at  32
weeks’  gestation  (the  earliest  recommended  time  for  vaccination)  would  be  at  34
gestational  weeks.  Therefore,  nirsevimab  is  recommended  for  all  infants  born  at  <34
weeks’ gestation. Nirsevimab is recommended for infants aged <8 months born during
or  entering  their  first  RSV  season  whose  mother  did  not  receive  RSVpreF  vaccine,
whose  mother’s  receipt  of  RSVpreF  vaccine  is  unknown,  or  who  were  born  <14  days
after maternal vaccination. Nirsevimab is not needed for most infants aged <8 months
whose  mother  received  RSVpreF  vaccine  ≥14  days  before  birth.  Nirsevimab  may  be
considered for infants born to vaccinated mothers in rare circumstances when, based
on the clinical judgment of the health care provider, the potential incremental benefit of
administration  is  warranted.  These  situations  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  infants
born  to  mothers  who  might  not  have  mounted  an  adequate  immune  response  to
vaccination  (e.g.,  persons  with  immunocompromising  conditions)  or  who  have
conditions associated with reduced transplacental antibody transfer (e.g., persons living
with  HIV  infection)  (23);  infants  who  might  have  experienced  loss  of  maternal
antibodies,  such  as  those  who  have  undergone  cardiopulmonary  bypass  (24)  or
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; and infants with substantially increased risk for
severe  RSV  disease  (e.g.,  hemodynamically  significant  congenital  heart  disease,  or
intensive care admission requiring oxygen at hospital discharge). Infants and children
aged 8–19 months who are at increased risk for severe RSV disease and are entering
their  second  RSV  season  are  recommended  to  receive  nirsevimab  regardless  of
maternal  RSVpreF  vaccination  (3).  Recommendations  for  timing  of  nirsevimab
administration,  coadministration  of  nirsevimab  with  routine  childhood  vaccines,
reporting of adverse events, and recommendations for use for infants and children aged
8–19 months who are at increased risk for severe RSV disease and who are entering
their second RSV season have been previously published and remain unchanged (3). As
with  all  vaccines,  RSV  vaccination  should  be  delayed  for  persons  experiencing
moderate or severe acute illness with or without fever (precaution). RSV vaccines are
contraindicated for and should not be administered to persons with a history of severe
allergic reaction, such as anaphylaxis, to any component of the vaccine. Adverse events
after  vaccination  should  be  reported  to  the  Vaccine  Adverse  Event  Reporting  System
(VAERS). Reporting is encouraged for any clinically significant adverse event even if it is
uncertain whether the vaccine caused the event. Information on how to submit a report
to  VAERS  is  available  at  https://vaers.hhs.gov/index.html  or  by  telephone  at
1-800-822-7967.
 CDC
 will
 monitor
 adverse
 events,
 including
 preterm
 birth,
hypertensive  disorders  of  pregnancy,  and  inflammatory  neurologic  events  after
RSVpreF  vaccination  in  pregnant  persons  through  VAERS  and  the  Vaccine  Safety
Datalink
(https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/ensuringsafety/monitoring/vsd/index.html).
Reactions and health impacts after RSVpreF vaccination will also be monitored through
v-safe. According to FDA post-marketing requirements, the manufacturer will conduct
post-marketing  studies  to  assess  preterm  birth  and  hypertensive  disorders  of
pregnancy,  including  preeclampsia  (25).  Top  Voting  members  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (in  addition  to  listed  authors):  Lynn  Bahta,
Minnesota  Department  of  Health;  Beth  P.  Bell,  University  of  Washington;  Wilbur  H.
Chen,  University  of  Maryland  School  of  Medicine;  Sybil  Cineas,  Warren  Alpert  Medical
School of Brown University; Matthew F. Daley, Kaiser Permanente Colorado; Grace M.
Lee,  Stanford  University  School  of  Medicine;  Jamie  Loehr,  Cayuga  Family  Medicine;
Veronica  V.  McNally,  Franny  Strong  Foundation;  Katherine  A.  Poehling,  Wake  Forest
School  of  Medicine.  Chair:  Sarah  S.  Long,  Drexel  University  College  of  Medicine;  ACIP
Members:  Oliver  Brooks,  Watts  Healthcare  Corporation;  Camille  N.  Kotton,  Harvard
Medical  School;  Pablo  J.  Sánchez,  The  Research  Institute  at  Nationwide  Children’s
Hospital; Consultants: Kevin Ault, Western Michigan University; Carol Baker, McGovern
Medical  School,  University  of  Texas  Health  Science  Center;  Helen  Chu,  University  of
Washington;  Daniel  Feikin,  World  Health  Organization;  Natasha  Halasa,  Vanderbilt
University; Denise Jamieson, Emory University School of Public Health; Cody Meissner,
Dartmouth  Geisel  School  of  Medicine;  Liaison  Representatives:  Nicole  Chaisson,
American  Academy  of  Family  Physicians;  Molly  Howell,  Association  of  Immunization
Managers;  Brenna  L.  Hughes,  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists;
James  McAuley,  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America;  Sean  T.  O’Leary,  American
Academy  of  Pediatrics;  Jennifer  Schuster,  Pediatric  Infectious  Diseases  Society;  Patsy
Stinchfield,  National  Foundation  for  Infectious  Diseases;  Ex-officio  Members:  Judy
Beeler,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  Yodit  Belew,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;
Matthew  Clark,  Indian  Health  Service;  Terry  Dalle-Tezze,  Department  of  Health  and
Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration; Nicholas Geagan, Food
and Drug Administration; April Killikelly, Public Health Agency of Canada; Sonnie Kim,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases; Jessica Lee, Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services; Lucia Lee, Food and Drug Administration; Valerie Marshall, Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Health; Winnie Siu, Public Health Agency of Canada; Prabha
Viswanathan,
 Food
 and
 Drug
 Administration;
 Robin
 Wisch,
 Food
 and
 Drug
Administration;  Rachel  Zhang,  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  CDC  Leads:  Katherine
Fleming-Dutra, Jefferson Jones; CDC Contributors: Amadea Britton, Latifah Boyce, Karen
R. Broder, Angela P. Campbell, Doug Campos-Outcalt, Melissa Coughlin, Nicole Dowling,
Jarrett  Gartin,  Monica  Godfrey,  Kate  Grusich,  Aron  Hall,  Anne  Hause,  Fiona  Havers,
Demorah Hayes, Andrew Leidner, Ruth Link-Gelles, Elizabeth Greene, Jessica MacNeil,
Meredith  McMorrow,  Michael  Melgar,  Sarah  Meyer;  Claire  Midgley,  Heidi  Moline,
Rebecca Morgan, Danielle Moulia, Neil Murthy, Christine Olson, Ismael Ortega-Sanchez,
Manisha Patel, Pragna Patel, Monica Patton, Amanda Payne, Georgina Peacock, Jamison
(Jamie)  Pike,  Derrell  Powers,  Mila  Prill,  Lauren  Roper,  Hannah  Rosenblum,  Heather
Scobie, Andrea Sharma, David Shay, Tom Shimabukuro, Jordan Singleton, Tami Skoff,
Chris  Taylor,  Naomi  Tepper,  Natalie  Thornburg,  Megan  Wallace,  Denis  Wang,  Melinda
Wharton, Raigan Wheeler, Amber Winn, Patricia (Akpobome) Wodi. Top Corresponding
author:  Katherine  E.  Fleming-Dutra,  media@cdc.gov.  Top  1Coronavirus  and  Other
Respiratory  Viruses  Division,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory
Diseases, CDC; 2Immunization Safety Office, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious Diseases, CDC; 3Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic
Disease  Prevention  and  Health  Promotion,  CDC;  4Watts  Healthcare  Corporation,  Los
Angeles, California; 5The Research Institute at Nationwide Children’s Hospital, The Ohio
State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio; 6Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts; 7Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Top
All authors and work group members have completed and submitted the International
Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of
interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *  These  authors
contributed
 equally
 to
 this
 report.
 †
https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2023/han00498.asp;
https://www.cdc.gov/surveillance/nrevss/rsv/index.html  §  Critical  outcomes:  medically
attended  RSV-associated  LRTI  in  infants,  hospitalization  for  RSV-associated  LRTI  in
infants, serious adverse events in pregnant persons, serious adverse events in infants,
and  preterm  birth  (<37  weeks’  gestation).  Important  outcomes:  intensive  care  unit
(ICU)  admission  from  RSV  hospitalization  in  infants,  mechanical  ventilation  from  RSV
hospitalization in infants, RSV-associated death in infants, all-cause medically attended
LRTI in infants, all-cause hospitalization for LRTI in infants, and reactogenicity (grade 3
or  higher)  in  pregnant  persons.  ¶  Trial  conducted  in  Argentina,  Chile,  New  Zealand,
South  Africa,  and  United  States.  **  Trial  conducted  in  Argentina,  Australia,  Brazil,
Canada,  Chile,  Denmark,  Finland,  The  Gambia,  Japan,  Mexico,  Netherlands,  New
Zealand,  Philippines,  South  Africa,  South  Korea,  Spain,  Taiwan,  and  United  States.  ††
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/about-grade.html
 §§
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/grade/downloads/acip-evidence-recs-framework
.pdf  ¶¶  A  serious  adverse  event  is  defined  as  any  untoward  medical  occurrence  that
results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of
existing hospitalization, results in persistent disability or incapacity, or is a congenital
anomaly or birth defect. Serious adverse events in pregnant persons were collected ≤6
months  after  delivery.  Serious  adverse  events  in  infants  were  collected  ≤12  months
after delivery. Reactogenicity events were collected ≤7 days following injection. *** The
outcome  of  preterm  birth  was  rated  as  very  low  certainty.  Very  serious  concern  for
imprecision was noted because of the CI range containing estimates for which different
policy  decisions  might  be  considered  as  well  as  not  meeting  optimum  information
requirements.  In  addition,  serious  concern  for  indirectness  was  present  as  55%  of
participants in the phase 3 trial and 62% of participants in the phase 2b trial did not
receive vaccine or placebo in the approved dosing interval (32–36 weeks’ gestation). In
the  approved  dosing  interval,  there  is  less  opportunity  for  serious  adverse  events,
including  preterm  birth,  compared  with  the  trial  dosing  interval  (24–36  weeks’
gestation). ††† In the phase 3 trial among 3,663 RSVpreF recipients and 3,638 to 3,639
placebo recipients, injection site pain was reported by 40.6% of RSVpreF and 10.1% of
placebo  recipients;  headache  by  31.0%  of  RSVpreF  and  27.6%  of  placebo  recipients;
muscle pain by 26.5% of RSVpreF and 17.1% placebo recipients; and nausea by 20.0%
of RSVpreF and 19.2% of placebo recipients. §§§ Low birthweight ≤5.5 lbs (≤2,500 g)
and  neonatal  jaundice  are  more  common  among  infants  born  preterm  than  among
infants
 born
 at
 term.
https://www.marchofdimes.org/find-support/topics/birth/premature-babies  ¶¶¶  Among
the
 full
 trial
 population,
 gestational
 hypertension
 occurred
 in
 1.1%
 (95%
CI  =  0.8%–1.5%)  of  vaccine  recipients  and  1.0%  (95%  CI  =  0.7%–1.4%)  of  placebo
recipients. Hypertension occurred in 0.4% (95% CI = 0.2%–0.6%) of vaccine recipients
and 0.2% (95% CI = 0.1%–0.4%) of placebo recipients. **** On September 22, 2023,
ACIP  voted  11–1  in  favor  of  the  recommendation:  maternal  RSV  vaccine  is
recommended  for  pregnant  persons  during  32–36  weeks’  gestation,  using  seasonal
administration, to prevent RSV-associated LRTI in infants. †††† The timing of maternal
RSVpreF vaccination might vary in these jurisdictions because the historic timing of RSV
circulation differs from the rest of the United States. As maternal RSVpreF vaccination
should start 1–2 months before the anticipated start of the RSV season and continue
through 2–3 months before the anticipated end of the RSV season, it is not feasible to
change  maternal  RSVpreF  vaccination  timing  based  on  year-to-year  variations  in  RSV
circulation.  Thus,  in  most  of  the  continental  United  States,  maternal  RSVpreF
vaccination should be given in September–January, regardless of year-to-year variation
in  RSV  circulation.  Top  Top  Abbreviations:  GRADE  =  Grading  of  Recommendations,
Assessments,  Development,  and  Evaluations;  LRTI  =  lower  respiratory  tract  infection;
RR = relative risk; RSV = respiratory syncytial virus; VE = vaccine efficacy.
* 95% CI unless otherwise noted. When 95% CI not used, the CI was adjusted using the
Bonferroni procedure, accounting for the primary endpoints’ results.
† Vaccine efficacy was calculated as (1 – [P / (1 – P)]) x 100%, where P is the number of
cases in the RSVpreF group divided by the total number of cases.
§ Vaccine efficacy was calculated as (1 − [hP / (1 − P)]) x 100%, where P is the number
of cases in the RSVpreF group divided by the total number of cases and h is the ratio of
number of participants at risk in the placebo group to the number of participants at risk
in the RSVpreF group.
¶ 97.58% CI.
**  Severe  medically  attended  RSV-associated  LRTI  was  a  co-primary  endpoint  of  the
phase 3 clinical trial. This outcome was not included by CDC’s Advisory Committee on
Immunization  Practices  RSV  Vaccines  Pediatric/Maternal  Work  Group  as  an  a  priori
GRADE outcome critical or important to vaccine policy decision making.
†† 99.17% CI.
§§  Pooled  RR  estimates  were  independently  calculated  using  counts  of  events  and
participants in the phase 3 trial interim analysis and phase 2b trial among those who
received the phase 3 vaccine formulation.
¶¶ Serious adverse events in pregnant persons were collected through 6 months after
delivery.
***  Up  to  7  days  after  injection.  When  selecting  the  a  priori  harm  outcomes,  CDC’s
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices RSV Vaccines Pediatric/Maternal Work
Group  defined  reactogenicity  as  both  local  and  systemic  reactions.  These  data  only
reflect systemic reactions.
††† Serious adverse events in infants were collected through 6 months after delivery.
Top * All differences between vaccine group and placebo group were not statistically
significant, as determined by nonoverlapping CIs.
† https://www.fda.gov/media/168889/download?attachment
§ Data obtained directly from the sponsor during August, 2023.
¶ Less than 37 weeks’ gestation.
**  Less  than  ≤5.5  lbs  (2,500  g).  Top  Advantages  •  Provides  protection  immediately
after birth • Might be more resistant to potential mutations in F protein* Disadvantages
•  Protection  potentially  reduced  if  fewer  antibodies  are  produced  or  are  transferred
from pregnant person to baby (e.g., pregnant person is immunocompromised or infant
born  soon  after  vaccination)  •  Potential  risk  for  preterm  birth  and  hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy Advantages • Studies of antibody levels suggest that protection
might  wane  more  slowly  than  protection  from  the  maternal  RSV  vaccine  •  Assures
direct receipt of antibodies rather than relying on transplacental transfer • No risk for
adverse  pregnancy  outcomes  Disadvantages  •  Potentially  limited  availability  during
2023–24  RSV  season  •  Requires  infant  injection  Abbreviation:  RSV  =  respiratory
syncytial  virus.  *  Maternal  RSV  vaccination  results  in  a  polyclonal  immune  response,
which is expected to be more resistant to potential mutations in the RSV F protein than
a monoclonal antibody product. Top Suggested citation for this article: Fleming-Dutra
KE,  Jones  JM,  Roper  LE,  et  al.  Use  of  the  Pfizer  Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus  Vaccine
During  Pregnancy  for  the  Prevention  of  Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus–Associated  Lower
Respiratory Tract Disease in Infants: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization  Practices  —  United  States,  2023.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep
2023;72:1115–1122. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7241e1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7241e1.htm
