Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Two  vaccines  may  be  used  to  prevent  mpox:  JYNNEOS  is  a
third-generation  vaccine based  on  a  live,  attenuated  orthopoxvirus,  Modified  Vaccinia
Ankara (MVA). MVA is a live virus that does not replicate efficiently in humans. JYNNEOS
is known internationally as Imvamune® or Imvanex®; it is manufactured by Bavarian
Nordic. It is fully licensed in the U.S. for subcutaneous administration in individuals 18
years of age and older. As of April 1, 2024, JYNNEOS is commercially available in the
U.S. In addition, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued an Emergency Use
Authorization (EUA) in August 2022 to allow JYNNEOS vaccine to be used: ACAM2000 is
a second-generation vaccine that contains a live vaccinia virus that replicates efficiently
in  humans.  It  is  manufactured  by  Emergent  Bio  Solutions  and  is  indicated  for  the
prevention of smallpox. It has been made available for use against mpox in the current
outbreak under an Expanded Access Investigational New Drug (EA-IND) protocol, which
requires informed consent along with completing additional forms. Available evidence
supporting the use of smallpox vaccine for mpox prevention is derived from experience
with  Dryvax®,  the  vaccine  used  during  smallpox  eradication.  Dryvax  was  a
first-generation smallpox vaccine manufactured by Wyeth Laboratories. Routine use of
this vaccine ended in the United States in 1972, and smallpox was declared eradicated
globally in 1980 by the World Health Assembly. The license for Dryvax was withdrawn
in 2008 and no supplies of this vaccine remain. Although the United States has a large
supply  of  ACAM2000,  this  vaccine  has  more  side  effects  and  contraindications  than
JYNNEOS.  *Public  health  authorities  determine  whether  there  is  an  mpox  outbreak;  a
single  case  may  be  considered  an  mpox  outbreak  at  the  discretion  of  public  health
authorities.  Other  circumstances  in  which  a  public  health  response  may  be  indicated
include ongoing risk of introduction of mpox into a community due to disease activity in
another geographic area. The mpox outbreak that started in 2022 is still ongoing. †This
recommendation is on the CDC’s Adult Immunization Schedule (for people 19 years of
age and older) and Child & Adolescent Immunization Schedule (for people 18 years of
age). Currently, CDC does not recommend routine immunization against mpox for the
general  public.  JYNNEOS  is  not  recommended  as  a  routine  vaccination  for  healthcare
personnel  unless  sexual  risk  factors  are  present.  Recommendations  by  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) are available for laboratory personnel and
health care worker response teams who may be at risk for exposure to orthopoxviruses.
Evaluating and counseling patients who could benefit from mpox vaccination is critical.
To do so, healthcare professionals should perform a comprehensive social and sexual
history. Attention should be paid to sexual behaviors (e.g. frequency and types of sex)
and  partners  (e.g.  number  and  frequency),  due  to  the  populations  that  have  been
disproportionately affected by the current mpox outbreak. Such evaluation should have
health  equity  principles  as  a  foundation  and  allow  individuals  to  self-attest  vaccine
eligibility (i.e., providing mpox vaccination without requiring individuals to specify which
criterion they meet). A Guide to Taking a Sexual History National Coalition for Sexual
Health (NCSH) Tools for Educating Patients Mpox vaccine can be given as post-exposure
prophylaxis (PEP) both to people with known or presumed exposure to monkeypox virus
(MPXV). Mpox vaccine can also be given to people with certain risk factors and recent
experiences that might make them more likely to have been exposed to mpox. As PEP,
vaccine  should  be  given  as  soon  as  possible,  ideally  within  four  days  of  exposure;
administration  4  through  14  days  after  exposure  may  still  provide  some  protection
against mpox. After 14 days, clinicians should consider the benefits of receiving vaccine
on a case-by-case basis; benefits might still outweigh risks when administering vaccine
in some clinical situations (e.g., for a severely immunosuppressed person with a recent
sex partner confirmed to have mpox). Any person with ongoing risk of mpox exposure
should be offered vaccination, even if previously exposed, and regardless of time since
exposure,  as  long  as  they  have  not  yet  developed  signs  or  symptoms  of  mpox.
Vaccination given after the onset of signs or symptoms of mpox, after a diagnosis of
mpox,  or  after  recovery  from  mpox  is  not  expected  to  provide  benefit.  At  this  time,
naturally acquired mpox is believed to confer immune protection, although duration of
immunity  is  unknown.  JYNNEOS  vaccine  is  licensed  as  a  series  of  two  doses
administered 28 days (4 weeks) apart. The standard regimen involves a subcutaneous
(Subcut)  route  of  administration  with  an  injection  volume  of  0.5mL.  The  standard
regimen  is  the  FDA-approved  dosing  regimen.  Since  August  9,  2022,  the  standard
regimen has also been authorized for people aged <18 years under an Emergency Use
Authorization. An alternative regimen may be used for people age ≥18 years under an
Emergency Use Authorization which was issued on August 9, 2022, to make more doses
available  at  a  time  when  vaccine  supply  was  limited.  The  authorized  alternative
regimen involves an intradermal (ID) route of administration with an injection volume of
0.1mL.  Results  from  a  clinical  study  showed  that  the  lower  intradermal  dose  was
immunologically  non-inferior  to  the  standard  subcutaneous  dose  [Frey  SE  et  al.,
Vaccine,  2015;  33(39):5225-5234].  Recently  published  studies  show  similar  vaccine
effectiveness  for  vaccines  administered  subcutaneously  or  intradermally.  Either  the
standard  (0.5mL  subcutaneous)  or  the  alternative  (0.1mL  ID)  regimen  may  be  used.
There  is  currently  adequate  supply  of  JYNNEOS  vaccine.  Therefore,  clinicians  can
preferentially administer JYNNEOS via the subcutaneous route. 1For patients less than 6
months of age, Vaccinia Immune Globulin Intravenous (VIGIV) should be considered in
lieu  of  JYNNEOS  vaccine.  Clinicians  should  first  contact  their  jurisdictional  health
department  (Jurisdictional  Contacts).  Jurisdictional  health  departments  can  facilitate
consultation with CDC and access to VIGIV. Peak immunity is expected to be reached
14 days after the second dose of JYNNEOS vaccine. Administration of additional vaccine
doses (more than 2 doses) is currently not recommended for most people. For people at
risk
 for
 occupational
 exposure
 to
 orthopoxviruses
 (e.g.,
 certain
 research
laboratorians§), booster doses are recommended at 2-10 years depending on the type
of work being performed. (ACIP Smallpox and Mpox Vaccine Recommendations | CDC).
§Research  laboratory  personnel  are  those  who  directly  handle  cultures  or  animals
contaminated  or  infected  with  monkeypox  virus  (MPXV).  Vaccination  is  not  routinely
recommended  for  clinical  laboratory  personnel  who  perform  routine  chemistry,
hematology, and urinalysis testing, including for patients with suspected or confirmed
MPXV  infection,  healthcare  personnel  who  care  for  patients  with  mpox  or  administer
ACAM2000.  Recommended  infection  prevention  and  control  practices  are  effective  in
minimizing transmission. Vaccination can be offered based on site- and activity- specific
biosafety  risk  assessments  (e.g.,  identification  of  laboratory  procedures  with  a  high
likelihood  of  generating  aerosols  or  inadequate  PPE  availability).  Recommended
interval: The second dose of JYNNEOS vaccine should be given 28 days (4 weeks) after
the  first  dose.  Based  on  available  clinical  study  data  [13  MB,  93  pages],  the  second
dose may be given up to 7 days later than the minimum interval of 28 days (i.e., up to
35 days after the first dose). Maximum interval: If the second dose is not administered
during the recommended interval, it should be administered as soon as possible based
on ACIP’s general best practices. There is no need to restart or add doses to the series
if  there  is  an  extended  interval  between  doses.  Minimum  interval:  The  vaccine
manufacturer advises against giving the second dose before the minimum interval of
28 days. However, based on ACIP’s general best practices, a dose may be administered
up  to  4  days  before  the  minimum  interval  of  28  days  (known  as  the  “grace  period,”
which would be a minimum of 24 days after the first dose). Vaccine doses should not be
administered before the minimum interval (i.e., 28 days). Nevertheless, if the second
dose is inadvertently administered before the minimum interval, the dose may not need
to be repeated. Please refer to “Table 7. Vaccine Administration Errors and Deviations.”
Subcutaneous  administration  involves  injecting  the  vaccine  into  the  fatty  tissue,
typically over the triceps in people aged 12 months and older, or in the anterolateral
thigh for people younger than age 12 months. CDC offers a short training video about
subcutaneous vaccine administration and job aid [PDF – 1 page, 200KB]. Learn about
intradermal administration of JYNNEOS. In eligible individuals, the dosing regimens are
interchangeable.  For  example,  a  person  aged  18  years  or  older  who  received  one
JYNNEOS vaccine dose intradermally may receive a second dose subcutaneously at the
recommended  interval  (i.e.,  28  days)  to  complete  the  vaccination  series.  There  is
currently adequate supply of JYNNEOS vaccine. Therefore, clinicians can preferentially
administer  JYNNEOS  via  the  subcutaneous  route.  Doses  that  were  previously
administered intradermally are equally effective as doses administered subcutaneously
and do not need to be repeated.
 Currently, there are no data on administering JYNNEOS vaccine at the same time as
other  vaccines.  Because  JYNNEOS  is  based  on  a  live,  attenuated  non-replicating
orthopoxvirus, JYNNEOS typically may be administered without regard to timing of most
other  vaccines.  This  includes  simultaneous  administration  of  JYNNEOS  and  other
vaccines, including influenza vaccine, on the same day, but at different anatomic sites
if  possible.  There  is  no  required  minimum  interval  between  receiving  any  COVID-19
vaccine (i.e., Moderna, Novavax, or Pfizer-BioNTech) and JYNNEOS vaccine, regardless
of  which  vaccine  is  administered  first.  People,  particularly  adolescent  or  young  adult
males, who are recommended to receive both vaccines might consider waiting 4 weeks
between vaccines. This is because of the observed risk for myocarditis and pericarditis
after  receipt  of  ACAM2000  orthopoxvirus  vaccine  and  COVID-19  vaccines,  and  the
hypothetical risk for myocarditis and pericarditis after JYNNEOS vaccine. However, if a
patient  is  at  increased  risk  for  mpox  or  severe  disease  due  to  COVID-19  disease,
administration  of  JYNNEOS  and  COVID-19  vaccines  should  not  be  delayed.  There  is
currently adequate supply of JYNNEOS vaccine. Therefore, clinicians can preferentially
administer  JYNNEOS  via  the  subcutaneous  route.  Adolescents  at  risk  for  mpox  may
receive the JYNNEOS vaccine before an exposure. JYNNEOS is available for use as post
exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for children and adolescents under 18 years determined to
be at high risk for mpox under the Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) issued by the US
Food and Drug Administration. Vaccination with JYNNEOS for children and adolescents
aged  <18  years  should  be  administered  via  subcutaneous  injection.  For  patients  <6
months of age, Vaccinia Immune Globulin Intravenous (VIGIV) should be considered in
lieu  of  JYNNEOS  vaccine.  Clinicians  should  first  contact  their  jurisdictional  health
department  (Jurisdictional  Contacts).  Jurisdictional  health  departments  can  facilitate
consultation  with  CDC  and  access  to  VIGIV.  Available  human  data  on  JYNNEOS
administered to people who are pregnant are insufficient to determine if there are any
vaccine-associated  risks  in  pregnancy.  Studies  of  JYNNEOS  vaccine  in  animals  have
shown no evidence of harm to a developing fetus. While there are no data for people
who  are  breastfeeding,  animal  data  do  not  show  evidence  of  reproductive  harm;
breastfeeding is not a contraindication to receiving JYNNEOS. It is not known whether
JYNNEOS  is  excreted  in  human  milk.  Data  are  not  available  to  assess  the  impact  of
JYNNEOS  on  milk  production  or  the  safety  of  JYNNEOS  in  breastfed  infants.  However,
because  JYNNEOS  vaccine  is  replication-deficient,  it  likely  does  not  present  a  risk  of
transmission to breastfed infants. JYNNEOS can be offered to people who are pregnant
or breastfeeding who are otherwise eligible. The risks and benefits of JYNNEOS should
be discussed with the patient using shared clinical decision-making. Studies evaluating
JYNNEOS  in  people  with  atopic  dermatitis  have  demonstrated  immunogenicity  in
eliciting a neutralizing antibody response. No concerning safety signals were revealed.
Administer 0.5mL subcutaneously. Administer as indicated based on age and history of
keloids.  Previous  smallpox  vaccination  probably  does  provide  some  protection,  but  it
may not necessarily be lifelong. During the 2003 mpox outbreak and during the current
outbreak, several people who were infected with mpox had previously been vaccinated
against smallpox decades prior. In response to the current outbreak, vaccines and other
medical measures should be given to eligible people who were previously vaccinated
against  smallpox.  In  the  context  of  the  current  mpox  outbreak  the  following  are
exceptions to the recommended two-dose series: Recipients should be informed of the
risks  and  benefits  of  JYNNEOS  prior  to  vaccination.  Healthcare  providers  should
determine the medical history of recipients to appropriately decide whether intradermal
administration  would  be  appropriate  if  it  is  being  considered.  Recipients  should  be
counseled about possible side effects from vaccination and be provided with a JYNNEOS
vaccine  information  statement  (VIS)  or  FDA  JYNNEOS  EUA  Fact  Sheet,  as  applicable.
Side effects after vaccination can vary from person to person. Before vaccination, each
recipient  should  be  counselled  on  the  possibility  of  experiencing  the  following  side
effects: Local Side Effects: Systemic Side Effects: Local side effects may be more severe
with  intradermal  administration  compared  with  subcutaneous  administration.  Side
effects  may  appear  soon  after  vaccination,  and  some  local  reactions,  such  as
hyperpigmentation,  may  persist  for  several  weeks  or  months.  One  study  noted  mild
injection  site  skin  discoloration  lasting  greater  than  six  months  for  some  individuals
receiving  intradermal  administration.  Recipients  should  be  counseled  that  such
long-lasting  local  reactions  are  expected  and  may  be  part  of  the  normal  immune
response to vaccination. Patients should also be counseled that these side effects are
usually self-limiting and will generally resolve over time. While the presence of local or
systemic side effects may indicate the development of a robust immune response, the
absence of such reactions should not be construed as not mounting adequate immune
protection, as the severity and duration of side effects can vary from person to person.
Local  and  systemic  reactions  experienced  after  vaccination  may  be  managed
conservatively. Evidence does not support the use of antipyretics before or at the time
of  vaccination.  However,  they  can  be  used  for  the  treatment  of  fever  and  local
discomfort that might occur following vaccination. Topical emollients, cold compresses,
and  oral  antihistamines  may  be  used  to  treat  local  side  effects  as  needed.  Do  NOT
apply  topical  corticosteroids  or  antihistamines  to  local  reactions.  Weeping  or  open
wounds should be covered by a sterile gauze or bandage. People who are vaccinated
should continue to take steps to protect themselves from infection by avoiding close,
skin-to-skin contact, including intimate contact, with someone who has mpox. JYNNEOS
is  contraindicated  in  patients  with  severe  allergic  reaction  (e.g.,  anaphylaxis)  after  a
previous dose, or to a vaccine component. JYNNEOS vaccine contains small amounts of
gentamicin and ciprofloxacin and is produced using chicken embryo fibroblast cells. See
package insert [PDF – 11 pages, 301 KB] for a full list of vaccine ingredients. Vaccine
providers  should  be  familiar  with  identifying  immediate-type  allergic  reactions,
including anaphylaxis, and be competent in treating these events at the time of vaccine
administration.  Providers  should  also  have  a  plan  in  place  to  contact  emergency
medical  services  immediately  in  the  event  of  a  severe  acute  vaccine  reaction.  (ACIP
Adverse Reactions Guidelines for Immunization). People presenting with minor illnesses,
such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill with or
without  fever  should  usually  wait  until  they  have  recovered  to  their  baseline  state  of
health  before  routine  vaccination;  waiting  might  not  be  appropriate  if  vaccination  is
used  for  post  exposure  prophylaxis.  CDC’s  Clinical  Immunization  Safety  Assessment
(CISA)  Project  is  available  to  provide  consultation  to  U.S.  healthcare  providers  and
health  departments  about  complex  mpox  vaccine  safety  questions  for  their  patients.
See Clinical Immunization Safety Assessment (CISA) Project. The Vaccine Adverse Event
Reporting System (VAERS) is the nation’s early warning system that monitors the safety
of  vaccines  after  they  are  authorized  or  licensed  for  use  by  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug
Administration.  VAERS  accepts  and  analyzes  reports  of  adverse  events  following
vaccination. The following requirements are stipulated as part of the HHS mpox vaccine
provider agreement: *Serious adverse events are defined as: On August 9, 2022, FDA
issued an EUA for JYNNEOS mpox vaccine. It authorizes the vaccine to be administered
in  one  of  two  ways:  These  are  considered  routes  of  vaccination.  When  submitting  a
VAERS report, ensure that you document the Route in Section 17 of the VAERS form, by
choosing “intradermal” or “subcutaneous” from the selection menu. For information on
how to submit a report to VAERS, visit VAERS—Report an Adverse Event (hhs.gov) or
call 1-800-822-7967.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/interim-considerations/overview.html
