Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Women should receive a dose of the tetanus toxoid, reduced
diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular  pertussis  (Tdap)  vaccine  during  each  pregnancy,
preferably during the early part of gestational weeks 27 through 36. The most recent
data estimate that only 44% of women receive Tdap during pregnancy. Studies show
that a strong recommendation coupled with an offer of Tdap from their prenatal care
provider is the single best predictor of vaccination. A healthcare professional’s decision
to recommend and stock Tdap ultimately influences whether their patients’ newborns
are born with protection against pertussis. It is important for healthcare professionals
who do not stock or administer vaccines in office, to provide a strong recommendation
and then a referral to another immunization provider. Maternal Tdap vaccination A U.S.
study  looked  to  see  how  effective  Tdap  was  at  preventing  pertussis  in  infants  whose
mothers got vaccinated while pregnant or in the hospital after giving birth. The study
found  that  getting  Tdap  during  gestational  weeks  27  through  36  weeks  is  85%  more
effective  at  preventing  pertussis  in  infants  younger  than  2  months  old.  Vaccinating
women  with  Tdap  during  pregnancy  also  prevents  more  infant  hospitalizations  and
deaths  from  pertussis  compared  to  other  prevention  strategies.  To  maximize  the
passive  antibody  transfer  to  the  infant,  administer  Tdap  during  the  early  part  of
gestational weeks 27 through 36. The level of pertussis antibodies decreases over time,
so you should administer Tdap during every pregnancy in order to transfer the greatest
number of protective antibodies to each infant. The American College of Obstetricians
and  Gynecologists  (ACOG)  and  the  American  College  of  Nurse-Midwives  [4
pages]  support  this  recommendation.  Postpartum  Tdap  administration  only  provides
protection to the mother — it does not provide immunity to the infant. It takes about 2
weeks after Tdap receipt for the mother to have protection against pertussis, thereby
putting her at risk for contracting and spreading the disease to her vulnerable newborn
during this time. Once the mother has protection, she is less likely to transmit pertussis
to  her  infant.  However,  the  newborn  remains  at  risk  of  contracting  pertussis  from
others, including siblings, grandparents, and other caregivers. The only time a woman
should  routinely  be  administered  Tdap  postpartum  is  if  she  has  never  received  Tdap
before. If a woman got Tdap after the birth of a prior child and doesn’t get vaccinated
during  any  subsequent  pregnancies,  she  is  not  recommended  to  receive  Tdap
postpartum  again.  However,  there  are  some  circumstances  when  administering  Tdap
postpartum would be warranted. For example, Tdap can be used as an option when the
10-year Td booster dose is indicated. Share these 5 strategies with your staff to provide
the  best  prenatal  care  to  prevent  pertussis.  The  strategy  of  protecting  infants  from
pertussis by vaccinating those in close contact with them is known as “cocooning.” Full
implementation  of  cocooning  is  challenging,  limiting  its  impact  as  an  independent
prevention strategy. Even though cocooning alone may not be sufficient, CDC continues
to  recommend  this  strategy  for  all  those  with  expected  close  contact  with  infants
younger  than  1  year  of  age.  Cocooning,  in  combination  with  Tdap  vaccination  during
pregnancy and administering the childhood DTaP series on schedule, provides the best
protection  to  the  infant.  In  addition  to  vaccinating  pregnant  patients  with  Tdap,
healthcare professionals should educate them about encouraging others who will have
contact with the infant – including fathers, grandparents, and other infant caregivers –
to be up to date with pertussis vaccination. For family members who aren’t up to date
with their pertussis vaccine, clinicians should vaccinate them at least 2 weeks before
coming  into  contact  with  the  infant.  Protection  from  pertussis  vaccines  is  not  long
lasting,  so  CDC  recommends  Tdap  during  pregnancy  in  order  to  provide  optimal
protection  (i.e.,  greatest  number  of  antibodies)  to  the  infant.  If  a  healthcare
professional administers Tdap at a preconception visit, they should administer it again
during  pregnancy  between  27  through  36  weeks  gestation.  Pregnant  women  should
receive  Tdap  anytime  during  pregnancy  if  it  is  indicated  (e.g.,  wound  care,  during  a
community pertussis outbreak). If a healthcare professional administers Tdap earlier in
pregnancy, they do not need to repeat it between 27 through 36 weeks gestation; CDC
recommends only one dose during each pregnancy.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/pregnant/hcp/pregnant-patients.html
