Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  The  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)
recommends  that  healthy  people  who  do  not  have  evidence  of  immunity  to
varicella should get vaccinated against this disease. For more information, see the ACIP
recommendations  for  varicella  vaccination.  Routine  2-dose  vaccination  Second  dose
catch-up vaccination Adolescents and Adults (≥ age 13 years) without other evidence
of immunity  Top of Page People with contraindications for varicella vaccine should not
receive  varicella  vaccine,  including  anyone  who:  In  addition,  MMRV  vaccine  is
contraindicated for people with impaired humoral immunity (hypogammaglobulinemia,
dysgammaglobulinemia)  and  HIV  infection.  Some  people  with  contraindications  for
varicella vaccine may receive varicella zoster immune globulin after being exposed to
varicella  or  herpes  zoster.  For  more  information,  see  Managing  People  at  Risk  for
Severe  Varicella.  For  more  information,  see  Contraindications  and  Precautions  for
varicella  vaccination.   Top  of  Page  Varicella  vaccine  is  recommended  for  vaccinating
people in the following groups who do not have evidence of immunity against varicella:
HIV-infected  people  eligible  for  vaccination  should  get  2  doses  of  single-antigen
varicella vaccine (Varivax®) separated by 3 months. HIV-infected children, adolescents,
or  adults  should  not  get  the  combination  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and  varicella
vaccine (ProQuad®). People who may have some degree of immunodeficiency should
not get the combination measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella vaccine (ProQuad®). A
woman who is or may be pregnant should not receive varicella vaccination. For more
information,  see  Guidelines  for  Vaccinating  Pregnant  Women:  Varicella  and  Varicella
Vaccination  Recommendations  for  Specific  Groups  Postpartum  mothers  should  get  2
doses of varicella vaccine after their pregnancy  Top of Page The Advisory Committee
on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP),  with  support  from  the  Hospital  Infection  Control
Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC),  recommends  that  healthcare  institutions
ensure that all healthcare personnel have evidence of immunity against varicella. Those
without evidence of immunity should receive 2 doses of varicella vaccine 4 to 8 weeks
apart or, if previously received 1 dose, the second dose at least 4 weeks after the first
dose.  For  more  information,  see  Healthcare  personnel  without  evidence  of
immunity against varicella may get serologic screening before being vaccinated. This is
likely  to  be  cost  effective  since  70%  to  90%  of  adults  who  do  not  remember  having
varicella actually have antibodies in their blood. ACIP or HICPAC do not recommend that
healthcare  personnel  get  tested  for  immunity  to  varicella  after  2  doses  of  vaccine.
Commercial  assays  are  not  sensitive  enough  to  always  detect  antibodies  after
vaccination.  Documented receipt of 2 doses of varicella vaccine supersedes results of
subsequent serologic testing. It is rare for vaccinated people to spread varicella vaccine
virus,  especially  if  they  do  not  have  rash.  Worldwide,  since  the  varicella  vaccine
programs started, only 11 healthy vaccinated people (6 with varicella-like rash and 5
with herpes zoster postvaccination) have been documented as spreading vaccine virus
to  others.  All  of  these  vaccinated  people  had  rash  after  vaccination.  As  a  result,  13
people,  including  household  members  and  people  in  long-term  care  facilities,  got
infected with vaccine virus varicella. One additional case had a mechanism other than
direct  transmission  from  a  vaccine  recipient,  possibly  exposure  to  vaccine  aerosol
during  preparation  of  the  vaccine  for  administration.  There  has  not  been  any
documented transmission of varicella from vaccinated healthcare personnel. Recently
vaccinated healthcare personnel do not require any restriction in their work activities.
However, healthcare personnel who develop varicella-like rash after vaccination should
stay away from people who do not have evidence of immunity and are at risk for severe
varicella. They should wait until all lesions resolve (crust over). If they develop lesions
that  do  not  crust  (macules  and  papules  only),  they  should  wait  until  no  new  lesions
appear  within  a  24-hour  period.  The  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices
(ACIP) recommends that after being exposed to varicella or herpes zoster, people who
do not have evidence of immunity and are eligible for vaccination should get varicella
vaccine.  People  who  previously  got  the  first  dose  should  get  a  second  dose  at  the
appropriate  time  interval.   For  more  information,  see  About  the  Varicella  Vaccines.
There  are  no  data  available  on  the  use  of  the  combination  measles,  mumps,  rubella,
and varicella vaccine (ProQuad®) for post-exposure vaccination. Varicella vaccination is
recommended  for  controlling  outbreaks.  People  who  do  not  have  evidence  of
immunity  should  get  a  first  or  second  dose  as  needed.  For  information  about
chickenpox  (varicella)  outbreaks,  see  Outbreak  Identification,  Investigation,  and
Control. See Managing People at Risk of Severe Varicella for information on prevention
and treatment options for people at risk of severe varicella who cannot get vaccinated.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/hcp/recommendations.html
