A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 The varicella vaccines licensed in the United States are single-antigen varicella vaccine
and the measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella (MMRV) vaccine. MMRV is only licensed
for  children  1  year  to  12  years  old.  Help  parents  and  caregivers  make  a  decision  on
which  vaccine  their  child  should  get.   This  page  summarizes  CDC's  current  varicella
vaccine recommendations. Access the official, full text below: Evidence of immunity to
varicella includes any of the following: Healthcare providers should inquire about either:
People  who  have  neither  of  the  above  criteria  should  not  be  considered  as  having  a
valid history of disease. For these people, a 2nd dose of vaccine is recommended if they
previously received only 1 dose. If a healthcare provider verifies the diagnosis based on
the above criteria, then vaccination is not needed. If the 2nd dose is administered after
the  7th  birthday,  the  minimum  interval  between  doses  is:  MMRV  vaccine  is  not
approved for people in this age group, so use the single-antigen varicella vaccine. Give
2  doses  4  to  8  weeks  apart  to  adolescents  and  adult  13  years  and  older  without
evidence of immunity. If it's been more than 8 weeks since the 1st dose, the 2nd dose
may be given without restarting the schedule.  Varicella vaccine is recommended for
vaccinating  people  in  specific  groups  who  do  not  have  evidence  of  immunity  against
varicella, including: ACIP recommends that after being exposed to varicella or herpes
zoster, people with no evidence of immunity and who are eligible for vaccination should
get varicella vaccine. People who previously got the first dose should get a second dose
at  the  appropriate  time  interval.   There  are  no  data  available  on  the  use  of  the
combination  MMRV  vaccine  for  post-exposure  vaccination.  Varicella  vaccination  is
recommended for controlling outbreaks. People who do not have evidence of immunity
should  get  a  first  or  second  dose  as  needed.   Additional  resources:  Contraindications
and precautions to vaccination generally dictate circumstances when vaccines will not
be  given.  In  addition,  MMRV  vaccine  is  contraindicated  for  people  with  impaired
humoral
 immunity
 (hypogammaglobulinemia,
 dysgammaglobulinemia)
 and
 HIV
infection.  Some  people  with  contraindications  for  varicella  vaccine  may  receive
varicella-zoster  immune  globulin  after  being  exposed  to  varicella  or  herpes  zoster.  
Clinical  information  Chickenpox  is  a  highly  contagious  disease  caused  by  the
varicella-zoster  virus  (VZV).  Protect  your  child  from  severe  symptoms  with  the
chickenpox vaccine. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/chickenpox/hcp/vaccine-considerations/index.html
