Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Employers have the responsibility to provide a safe workplace.
Effective  safety  and  health  programs  (also  known  as  injury  and  illness  prevention
programs) have been shown to reduce workplace injuries and illnesses and associated
costs.  Employers  should  develop  a  comprehensive  written  safety  and  health
program  that  addresses  key  elements:  Employers  of  veterinary  medicine  and  animal
care workers should: One of the best ways to prevent and control workplace injuries,
illnesses,  and  fatalities  is  to  “design  out”  or  minimize  hazards  and  risks  early  in  the
design process. Prevention through design efforts in veterinary facilities and processes
can  protect  workers  and  animals  and  be  cost-effective.  NIOSH  Prevention  through
Design Temple Grandin Livestock Behavior, Design of Facilities, and Humane Slaughter
The  hierarchy  of  controls  listed  below  should  be  followed  to  most  effectively  protect
veterinary  medicine  and  animal  care  workers  from  workplace  hazards.  Different
categories  of  methods  for  controlling  hazards  are  listed  in  general  order  of
effectiveness.  However,  an  individual  preventive  intervention  may  be  more  or  less
important than suggested by its’ general category. Some examples are provided. Often
a  combination  of  engineering  and  administrative  controls  and  personal  protective
equipment  (PPE)  are  needed  to  adequately  protect  workers  from  workplace  hazards.
PPE  should  be  used  only  when  other  controls  cannot  effectively  reduce  hazardous
exposures.  Veterinary  medicine  and  animal  care  workers  should  be  trained  about
hazards  before  they  begin  work.  Refresher  training  should  be  conducted  at  regular
intervals  as  required  or  as  needed.  Training  should  include  information  about  the
following:  OSHA  Hazard  Communication  National  Association  of  State  Public  Health
Veterinarians  (NASPHV)  Veterinary  Standard  Precautions  Compendium  NASPHV  Model
Infection Control Plan for Veterinary Practices CDC Healthy Pets Healthy People Center
for Food Security and Public Health, Iowa State University – Infection Control Canadian
Council  on  Antibiotic  Resistance,  Infection  Prevention  and  Control  Best  Practices  for
Small Animal Veterinary Clinics Ontario Veterinary College Centre for Public Health and
Zoonoses: Worms & Germs Blog
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/veterinary/hazard.html
