A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Evidence  Review  from  the  Guideline  for
the  Prevention  and  Control  of  Norovirus  Gastroenteritis  Outbreaks  in  Healthcare
Settings (2011). To answer this question, the quality of evidence was evaluated among
risk  factors  identified  in  57  studies.  In  areas  for  which  the  outcome  of  symptomatic
norovirus  infection  was  available,  this  was  considered  the  critical  outcome  in
decision-making. The evidence for this question consisted of one systematic review,56
51 observational,57-62,62-64,64-77,77-107and 4 descriptive studies,108-111 as well as
one basic science study.112 The paucity of randomized controlled trials (RCT) and the
large  number  of  observational  studies  greatly  influenced  the  quality  of  evidence
supporting the conclusions in the evidence review. Based on the available evidence, the
risk  factors  were  categorized  as  host,  viral  or  environmental  characteristics.  Host
characteristics were further categorized into demographics, clinical characteristics, and
laboratory characteristics. Environmental characteristics were further categorized into
institution, pets, diet, and exposure. The findings of the evidence review and the grades
for  all  clinically  relevant  outcomes  are  shown  in  Evidence  and  Grade  Table  1.
Low-quality  evidence  was  available  to  support  age  as  a  risk  factor  for  norovirus
infection,57-60,62-64  and  very  low-quality  evidence  to  support  black  race  as  a
protective factor.64 Three studies indicated that persons over the age of 65 may be at
greater risk than younger patients for prolonged duration and recovery from diarrhea in
healthcare  settings.57-59  Studies  including  children  under  the  age  of  five  showed  an
increased risk of household transmission as well as asymptomatic infection compared
with older children and adults.60,62 A single but large-scale observational study among
military  personnel  found  blacks  to  be  at  lower  risk  of  infection  than  whites.64  Very
low-quality  evidence  failed  to  demonstrate  meaningful  differences  in  the  risk  of
infection  corresponding  to  strata  on  the  basis  of  educational  background  (in  the
community  setting).61  Based  upon  very  low-quality  evidence,  outbreaks  originating
from  patients  were  more  likely  to  affect  a  large  proportion  of  patients  than  were
outbreaks  originating  from  staff.56  Exposure  to  vomitus  and  patients  with  diarrhea
increased  the  likelihood  that  long-term  care  facility  staff  would  develop  norovirus
infection.66  The  search  did  not  identify  studies  that  established  a  clear  association
between  sex  and  symptomatic  norovirus  infection  or  complications  of  norovirus
infection.57,59,  79,  98  Low-quality  evidence  from  one  prospective  controlled  trial  did
not  identify  sex  as  a  significant  predictor  of  symptomatic  norovirus  in  univariate
analyses.57  There  is  low-quality  evidence  suggesting  that  sex  is  not  a  risk  factor  for
protracted  illness  or  complications  of  norovirus  infection  including  acute  renal  failure
and hypokalemia.57 Review of the available studies revealed very low-quality evidence
identifying clinical characteristics as risk factors for norovirus infection.57,60,65,68 One
small study found hospitalized children with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and
chronic  diarrhea  were  more  likely  to  have  symptomatic  infection  with  small  round
structured virus (SRSV) than those without HIV and affected with chronic diarrhea.65,68
Adult  patients  with  symptomatic  norovirus  receiving  immunosuppressive  therapy  or
admitted with underlying trauma were at risk for a greater than 10% rise in their serum
creatinine.57  Norovirus-infected  patients  with  cardiovascular  disease  or  having  had  a
renal transplant were at greater risk for a decrease in their potassium levels by greater
than 20%.57 Observational, univariate study data also supported an increased duration
of  diarrhea  (longer  than  two  days)  among  hospitalized  patients  of  advanced  age  and
those  with  malignancies.57This  search  did  not  reveal  data  on  the  risk  of  norovirus
acquisition  among  those  co-infected  with  other  acute  gastrointestinal  infections,  such
as C. difficile. There was very low-quality evidence to support limited protective effects
of serum antibody levels against subsequent norovirus infection.74-76 In two challenge
studies,  adult  and  pediatric  subjects  with  prior  exposure  to  norovirus  showed  higher
antibody  titers  than  found  in  previously  unexposed  subjects  after  initial  infection  and
after challenge.74,76 The detection of preexisting serum antibody does not appear to
correlate  with  protection  against  subsequent  norovirus  challenge,  nor  did  increasing
detectable  pre-existing  antibody  titres  correlate  with  attenuations  in  the  clinical
severity of disease.7475 In one study, symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, headaches,
and arthralgia were correlated with increasing antibody titres.74 In a serial challenge
study, 50% of participants (n=6) developed infection, and upon subsequent challenge
27-42  months  later,  only  those  same  participants  developed  symptoms.  A  third
challenge  4-8  weeks  after  the  second  series  resulted  in  symptoms  in  just  a  single
volunteer.76 Pre-existing antibody may offer protection to susceptible persons only for
a  limited  window  of  time,  on  the  order  of  a  few  weeks.  The  search  strategy  did  not
reveal data on the persistence of immunity to norovirus nor elevations in antibody titers
that  were  consistently  suggestive  of  immunity.  Review  of  the  outlined  studies
demonstrated  high-quality  evidence  to  support  the  protective  effects  of  human  host
non-secretor  genotypes  against  norovirus  infection.70-72,113  Two  observational
studies  and  one  intervention  study  examined  volunteers  with  and  without  the
expression of the secretor (FUT2) genotype after norovirus challenge.70-72 Statistically
significant  differences  were  reported  with  secretor-negative  persons  demonstrating  a
greater  likelihood  of  protection  against,  or  innate  resistance  to  symptomatic  and
asymptomatic  norovirus  infection  than  seen  in  persons  with  secretor-positive
genotypes. This search did not reveal data on the dose-response effects of norovirus in
persons  with  homozygous  and  heterozygous  secretor  genotypes.  Because  the
FUT2-mediated  secretor  positive  phenotype  appears  to  confer  susceptibility  to
subsequent norovirus infection following challenge, there is an association between this
phenotype  and  measurable  circulating  antibody  (suggesting  prior  infection)  in  the
population.  One  study  estimated  that  80%  of  the  population  is  secretor-positive  (or
susceptible to norovirus) and 20% is secretor-negative (resistant to norovirus challenge
independent  of  inoculum  dose).  Among  susceptible  persons,  approximately  35%  are
protected  from  infection.  This  protection  is  potentially  linked  to  a  memory-mediated
rapid mucosal IgA response to norovirus exposure that is not seen in the other 45% of
susceptibles,  who  demonstrate  delayed  mucosal  IgA  and  serum  IgG  responses.72
Although elevated antibody levels following infection appear to confer some protective
immunity  to  subsequent  challenge,  paradoxically,  measurable  antibody  titers  in  the
population  may  be  a  marker  of  increased  susceptibility  to  norovirus  because  of  the
association  between  such  antibodies  and  FUT2-positive  status.  There  was  low-quality
evidence  suggesting  any  association  of  ABO  blood  type  with  the  risk  of  norovirus
infection.69,72,73,77,78,114,115  An  RCT  suggested  that  persons  with  histo-blood
group type O was associated with an increased risk of symptomatic or asymptomatic
norovirus  infection  among  secretor-positive  patients.72  Binding  of  norovirus  to  the
mucosal  epithelium  may  be  facilitated  by  ligands  associated  with  type-O  blood.  The
other  blood  types—A,  B,  and  AB—were  not  associated  with  norovirus  infection  after
controlling for secretor status. Three studies showed no protective effect of any of the
blood types against norovirus.69,77,78 The search strategy did not reveal prospective
cohort  data  to  correlate  the  role  of  ABO  blood  types  with  risk  of  norovirus  infection.
There was very low-quality evidence to suggest an association of virus characteristics
with  norovirus  infection.57,108-110  Very  low-quality  descriptive  evidence  suggested
that  increases  in  overall  norovirus  activity  may  result  from  the  emergence  of  new
variants  among  circulating  norovirus  strains,  and  strains  may  differ  in  pathogenicity,
particularly  among  GII.3  and  GII.4  variants.108-110  In  recent  years,  GII.4  strains  are
increasingly  reported  in  the  context  of  healthcare-associated  outbreaks,  but  further
epidemiologic  and  laboratory  studies  are  required  to  expand  on  this  body  of
information. This search did not identify studies examining genotypic characteristics of
viruses  associated  with  healthcare-acquired  norovirus  infection.  Very  low-quality
evidence  was  available  to  support  the  association  of  institutional  characteristics  with
symptomatic norovirus infection.82,99 Among two observational studies, the number of
beds within a ward, nurse understaffing, admission to an acute care hospital (compared
to  smaller  community-based  facilities),  and  having  experienced  a  prior  outbreak  of
norovirus gastroenteritis within the past 30 days were all possible risk factors for new
infections.82,99  These  increased  institutional  risks  were  identified  from  univariate
analyses in pediatric and adult hospital populations. There were statistically significant,
increased  risks  of  infection  among  those  admitted  to  geriatric,  mental  health,
orthopedic, and general medicine wards. The review process did not reveal data on the
comparative  risks  of  infection  among  those  admitted  to  private  and  shared  patient
rooms.  Review  of  the  outlined  studies  demonstrated  very  low-quality  evidence  to
support exposure to pets (e.g., cats and dogs) as a risk factor for norovirus infection.61
One  case-control  study  examined  pet  exposure  among  households  in  the  community
and  concluded  that  the  effect  of  cats  was  negligible.61  The  single  study  did  not
demonstrate  any  evidence  of  transmission  between  pets  and  humans  of  norovirus
infection.  This  search  strategy  did  not  reveal  studies  that  evaluated  the  impact  of
therapy pets in healthcare settings during outbreaks of norovirus gastroenteritis or data
examining  domestic  animals  as  reservoirs  for  human  infection.  There  was  low-quality
evidence  to  suggest  that  extrinsically  contaminated  food  items  are  commonly
implicated
 as
 vehicles
 of
 norovirus
 exposure
 in
 healthcare
settings.61,77,80,84,86,87,89-97,100-102,104-107,111  Nineteen  observational  studies
itemized
 statistically
 significant
 food
 sources
 implicated
 in
 community
outbreaks.80,81,84,86,87,89-97,100,101,104-106  Common  to  most  of  these  food
sources was a symptomatic or asymptomatic food-handler. Sauces, sandwiches, fruits
and vegetables, salads, and other moisture-containing foods were most often cited as
extrinsically
 contaminated
 sources
 of
 outbreaks
 of
 norovirus
 gastroenteritis.
Importantly, these data reflected the breadth of foods that can become contaminated.
Tap  water  and  ice  were  also  associated  with  norovirus  contamination  during  an
outbreak  with  an  ill  food-handler.  This  literature  review  did  not  identify  studies  that
examined the introduction of intrinsically contaminated produce or meats as a nidus for
norovirus  infection  and  dissemination  within  healthcare  facilities.  This  review
demonstrated high-quality evidence to suggest that proximity to infected persons with
norovirus
 is
 associated
 with
 increased
 risk
 of
 symptomatic
infection.61,62,64,79,83,88,98,103,111  Eight  observational  studies  found  statistically
significant factors such as proximate exposure to an infected source within households
or  in  crowded  quarters  increased  infection  risk,  as  did  exposures  to  any  or  frequent
vomiting  episodes  61,62,64,79,83,88,98,103.  These  data  suggest  person-to-person
transmission  is  dependent  on  close  or  direct  contact  as  well  as  short-range  aerosol
exposures.  One  observational  study  established  a  linear  relationship  between  a  point
source  exposure  and  attack  rate  based  on  proximity  to  an  infected  and  vomiting
source.88 This search process did not identify studies that quantified the spatial radius
necessary  for  transmission  to  successfully  occur.  1.A.1  Avoid  exposure  to  vomitus  or
diarrhea. Place patients on Contact Precautions in a single occupancy room if they have
symptoms  consistent  with  norovirus  gastroenteritis.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  1A)
1.A.2.a  Consider  longer  periods  of  isolation  or  cohorting  precautions  for  complex
medical patients (e.g., those with cardiovascular, autoimmune, immunosuppressive, or
renal disorders) as they can experience protracted episodes of diarrhea and prolonged
viral shedding. Patients with these or other comorbidities have the potential to relapse
and  facilities  may  choose  longer  periods  of  isolation  based  on  clinical  judgment.
(Category II) (Key Question 1A) 1.C.1 Consider the development and adoption of facility
policies  to  enable  rapid  clinical  and  virological  confirmation  of  suspected  cases  of
symptomatic  norovirus  infection  while  implementing  prompt  control  measures  to
reduce the magnitude of a potential norovirus outbreak. (Category II) (Key Question 1C)
1.C.3.a  To  prevent  food-related  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis  in  healthcare
settings,  food  handlers  must  perform  hand  hygiene  prior  to  contact  with  or  the
preparation  of  food  items  and  beverages  (FDA  Food  CodeExternalExternal[Current
version  of  this  document  may  differ  from  original.]).  (Category  IC)  (Key  Question  1C)
1.C.3.b  Personnel  who  work  with,  prepare  or  distribute  food  must  be  excluded  from
duty if they develop symptoms of acute gastroenteritis. Personnel should not return to
these activities until a minimum of 48 hours after the resolution of symptoms or longer
as  required  by  local  health  regulations  (FDA  Food  CodeExternalExternal  [Current
version  of  this  document  may  differ  from  original.]).  (Category  IC)  (Key  Question  1C)
1.C.4 If norovirus infection is suspected, adherence to PPE use according to Contact and
Standard  Precautions  is  recommended  for  individuals  entering  the  patient  care  area
(i.e., gowns and gloves upon entry) to reduce the likelihood of exposure to infectious
vomitus  or  fecal  material.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  1C)  To  address  this  question,
studies that provided test characteristics for the diagnosis of norovirus or outbreaks of
norovirus gastroenteritis were critically reviewed. The available data examined the use
of clinical criteria for the diagnosis of an outbreak of norovirus, methods of specimen
collection for the diagnosis of a norovirus outbreak, and characteristics of tests used to
diagnose norovirus. The evidence consisted of 33 diagnostic studies.17,18,116-146 The
findings  from  the  evidence  review  and  the  grades  of  evidence  for  clinically  relevant
outcomes  are  shown  in  Evidence  and  Grade  Table  2.  There  was  moderate  quality
evidence  from  a  single  diagnostic  study  supporting  the  use  of  the  Kaplan  criteria  to
detect  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis.16,116  Of  362  confirmed  gastroenteritis
outbreaks with complete clinical or laboratory data, the sensitivity of the Kaplan Criteria
to  detect  an  outbreak  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis  without  an  identified  bacterial
pathogen  was  68.2%,  with  a  specificity  of  98.6%.  The  positive  predictive  value  (PPV)
was  97.1%  and  the  negative  predictive  value  was  81.8%.  Individual  criteria,  such  as
vomiting  among  >50%  of  a  patient  cohort,  brief  duration  of  illness  (12-60  hours),  or
mean incubation time of 24-48 hours, demonstrated high sensitivities (85.8-89.2%), but
specificities were low (60.7-69.6%). The use of additional criteria, such as the ratios of
fever-to-vomiting and diarrhea-to-vomiting, provided sensitivities of 90.1% and 96.6%,
and  specificities  of  46.6%  and  44.5%,  respectively.  Applied  to  the  1141  outbreaks  of
unconfirmed etiology, suspected norovirus or bacterial sources with complete data, the
Kaplan criteria estimated that 28% of all 1998-2000 CDC-reported foodborne outbreaks
might be attributable to norovirus. The searchstrategy did not identify studies that have
assessed  the  utility  of  the  Kaplan  criteria  in  healthcare-associated  outbreaks  of
norovirus gastroenteritis. There was low-quality evidence from three diagnostic studies
outlining the minimum number of stool samples from symptomatic patients required to
confirm  an  outbreak  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis.117,119,120,122,123  In  modeling
analyses  using  a  hypothetical  test  demonstrating  100%  sensitivity  and  100%
specificity,  obtaining  a  positive  EIA  result  from  two  or  more  submitted  samples
demonstrated  a  sensitivity  of  52.2-57%,  with  a  peak  in  sensitivity  when  at  least  one
from a total of six submitted samples was positive for norovirus (71.4-92%). Specificity
was  100%  when  at  least  one  positive  EIA  was  obtained  from  a  minimum  of  two
submitted  stool  samples.  Using  a  reverse  transcriptase  polymerase  chain  reaction
(RT-PCR) method, if at least one positive test was identified among 2 to 4 submitted
stool specimens from symptomatic persons, the test sensitivity was greater than 84%.
When 5-11 stool samples were submitted and at least 2 were confirmed as positive, the
sensitivity  of  PCR  was  greater  than  92%.  When  at  least  one  stool  specimen  was
submitted for identification, PCR confirmed norovirus as the causative agent in a larger
proportion  of  outbreaks  than  those  using  EM  or  ELISA  methods,  and  is  currently  the
Gold  Standard.  This  evaluation  was  unable  to  determine  how  diagnostic  test
characteristics are affected by the timing of specimen collection relative to the disease
process.
 28
 diagnostic
 studies17,18,118-120,122,124-139,141-145,147
 and
 1
descriptive study121 that evaluated the test characteristics of EIA such as ELISA, EM,
reverse  transcriptase  PCR,  and  nucleic  acid  sequence-based  amplification  (NASBA)  in
the  detection  of  norovirus  in  human  fecal  specimens  were  summarized.  Test
characteristics  for  the  most  common  or  commercially-available  norovirus  diagnostics
are  summarized  in  the  following  Box.  2.A.1  In  the  absence  of  clinical  laboratory
diagnostics or in the case of delay in obtaining laboratory results, use Kaplan's clinical
and epidemiologic criteria to identify a norovirus gastroenteritis outbreak (see Table 3
for Kaplan's criteria (Category IA) (Key Question 2A) 2.A.2 Further research is needed to
compare  the  Kaplan  criteria  with  other  early  detection  criteria  for  outbreaks  of
norovirus  gastroenteritis  in  healthcare  settings,  and  to  assess  whether  additional
clinical  or  epidemiologic  criteria  can  be  applied  to  detect  norovirus  clusters  or
outbreaks in healthcare settings. (No recommendation/ unresolved issue)(Key Question
2A)  2.B  Consider  submitting  stool  specimens  as  early  as  possible  during  a  suspected
norovirus gastroenteritis outbreak and ideally from individuals during the acute phase
of illness (within 2-3 days of onset). It is suggested that healthcare facilities consult with
state or local public health regarding the types of and number of specimens to obtain
for  testing.  (Category  II)  (Key  Question  2B)  2.C  Use  effective  laboratory  diagnostic
protocols  for  testing  of  suspected  cases  of  viral  gastroenteritis  (e.g.,  refer  to  the
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC's  Updated  Norovirus  Outbreak
Management  and  Disease  Prevention  Guidelines[PDF  –  854  KB]).  (Category  IB)  (Key
Question 2C) (%) Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%) Positive Predictive Value (%) Negative
Predictive Value * Range from studies that reported test characteristics To address this
question,  69  studies58,63,66,79,83-85,87,89,92,102,103,112,148-203  were  critically
reviewed for evidence of interventions that might prevent or attenuate an outbreak of
norovirus.  The  available  data  dealt  with  viral  shedding,  recovery  of  norovirus,  and
components  of  an  outbreak  prevention  or  containment  program,  including  the  use  of
medications. The evidence consisted of 1 randomized controlled trial,202 1 systematic
review,153
 20
 basic
 science
 studies,112,162,163,185-201
 43
 descriptive
studies,58,63,79,83-85,87,89,92,102,103,149-152,154-161,165-184
 and
 4
observational  studies.66,148,164,203  The  findings  from  the  evidence  review  and  the
grades of evidence for clinically relevant outcomes are shown in Evidence and Grade
Tables  for  Question  3  in  the  Appendix.  This  review  did  not  identify  studies
demonstrating  direct  associations  between  viral  shedding  and  infectivity.  However,
there was low-quality evidence to support an association between age and duration of
viral shedding.149,150 One observational study suggested that children under the age
of six months may be at an increased risk of prolonged viral shedding (greater than two
weeks), even after the resolution of symptoms.148 Other findings suggest that infants
can shed higher titers of virus than levels reported in other age groups.149 High-quality
evidence was available to demonstrate the presence of viral shedding in asymptomatic
subjects, and low-quality evidence demonstrating that shedding can persist for up to 22
days  following  infection  and  5  days  after  the  resolution  of  symptoms.150-152  The
search strategy employed did not identify studies that correlated other clinical factors
to  duration  of  viral  shedding.  There  was  low-quality  evidence  positively  associating
fomite contamination with norovirus infection.153-159,161,163,194 Similarly, there was
low-quality  evidence  demonstrating  transfer  of  norovirus  from  fomites  to  hands.194
One  basic  science  study  demonstrated  that  norovirus  on  surfaces  can  be  readily
transferred to other fomites (telephones, taps, door handles) via fingertips in 30-50% of
opportunities  even  when  virus  has  been  left  to  dry  for  15  minutes.194  There  was
moderate
 quality
 evidence
 examining
 the
 norovirus
 contamination
 of
 the
environment.153-159,161,163  A  single  systematic  review  evaluated  5  outbreaks  with
environmental  sampling  data.153  Three  of  those  outbreaks  confirmed  environmental
contamination with norovirus. Of the over 200 swabs examined from the 5 outbreaks in
this review, 36% identified norovirus contamination on various fomites such as curtains,
carpets, cushions, commodes and toilets, furnishings and equipment within 3-4 feet of
the  patient,  handrails,  faucets,  telephones,  and  door  handles.  However,  in  two
outbreaks  from  which  47  environmental  samples  were  collected,  norovirus  was  not
detected. Additional studies detected norovirus on kitchen surfaces, elevator buttons,
and other patient equipment. 154-157, 194 There was low-quality evidence regarding
the  duration  of  norovirus  persistence.154,155,157-159,161  Norovirus  can  persist  in  a
dried  state  at  room  temperature  for  up  to  21-28  days  and,  in  a  single  observational
study,  was  undetectable  in  areas  of  previously  known  contamination  after  5  months
had  elapsed.159  Laboratory  studies  comparing  FCV  and  MNV-1  also  demonstrated
persistence of virus in both dried and in fecal suspensions for a minimum of seven days
on stainless steel preparations at 4ºC and at room temperature.20 Within a systematic
review,  it  was  observed  that  norovirus  may  remain  viable  in  carpets  up  to  12  days,
despite  regular  vacuuming.153  Similarly,  a  cultivable  surrogate  for  human  strains  of
norovirus (FCV) was detected on computer keyboards and mice, as well as telephone
components  up  to  72  hrs  from  its  initial  inoculation.156  This  search  strategy  did  not
find studies in which the recovery of norovirus from fomites, food, and water sources
was directly associated with transmission of infection in healthcare settings; however
transmission  from  these  sources  has  been  well  documented  in  other  settings.  There
was  low-quality  evidence  suggesting  that  foods  and  food-preparation  surfaces  are
significant sources of norovirus transmission in healthcare settings.112,162,163 There
was  moderate  quality  evidence  among  three  basic  science  studies  to  suggest  that
norovirus  can  be  recovered  from  foods  such  as  meats  and  produce  as  well  as  from
utensils and non-porous surfaces (e.g., stainless steel, laminate, ceramics) upon which
foods  are  prepared.112,162,163  Two  of  these  studies,  comprised  of  low-quality
evidence,  suggested  that  the  transfer  of  diluted  aliquots  of  norovirus  from  stainless
steel surfaces to wet and dry food, and through contaminated gloves was detectable
using  PCR  methods.  Norovirus  transfer  was  statistically  more  efficient  when  it  was
inoculated  onto  moist  surfaces  compared  to  dry  ones.162,163  There  was  low-quality
evidence  to  suggest  that  norovirus  persists  for  longer  periods  in  meats  compared  to
other foods and non-porous surfaces, both at 4ºC and at room temperature.112 There
was  moderate  quality  evidence  demonstrating  that  over  a  period  of  7  days  after
application, both human norovirus genogroup I and a surrogate (FCV) could be detected
among all surfaces tested.112,162 Within the first hour, the log10 of FCV titers declined
by  2-3,  with  an  additional  drop  of  2-4  after  48  hours  elapsed.162  Food  and
food-preparation areas can serve as a common source of contamination with norovirus
in the absence of cleaning and disinfection. This search strategy did not identify studies
that  measured  the  contribution  of  norovirus-contaminated  water  to  outbreaks  in  the
healthcare  setting.  However,  there  was  moderate  quality  evidence  to  suggest  that
norovirus  could  be  recovered  from  water.155,158,160  Among  three  outbreaks  that
examined  water  as  a  source,  one  identified  norovirus  in  3  of  7  water  samples.160In
outbreaks in the community, which were outside the scope of this review, contaminated
surface water sources, well water, and recreational water venues have been associated
with  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis.204  As  with  most  infection-prevention  and
control activities, multiple strategies are instituted simultaneously during outbreaks in
healthcare settings. Thus, it is difficult to single out particular interventions that may be
more  influential  than  others,  as  it  is  normally  a  combination  of  prudent  interventions
that reduce disease transmission. Numerous studies cite the early recognition of cases
and  the  rapid  implementation  of  infection  control  measures  as  key  to  controlling
disease  transmission.  The  following  interventions  represent  a  summary  of  key
components in light of published primary literature and addressed in seminal guidelines
on outbreaks of norovirus gastroenteritis. Q3.C.1.a Handwashing with soap and water
Very  low-quality  evidence  was  available  to  confirm  that  handwashing  with  soap  and
water
 prevents
 symptomatic
 norovirus
infections.63,66,79,85,89,102,103,165,166,168-171,173-177,183  Several  descriptive
studies  emphasized  hand  hygiene  as  a  primary  prevention  behavior  and  promoted  it
simultaneously  with  other  practical  interventions.  Several  outbreaks  centered  in
healthcare  augmented  or  reinforced  hand  hygiene  behavior  as  an  early  intervention
and
 considered
 it
 an
 effective
 measure
 aimed
 at
 outbreak
control.103,165,168,170,174,176,177,183  The  protocols  for  hand  hygiene  that  were
reviewed included switching to the exclusive use of handwashing with soap and water,
and  a  blend  of  handwashing  with  the  adjunct  use  of  alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers.
Additional  guidance  is  available  in  the  2002  HICPAC  Guideline  for  Hand  Hygiene  in
Health-Care  Settings  Cdc-pdfCdc-pdf[PDF  –  494  KB].  Q3.C.1.b  Alcohol-based  hand
sanitizers Very low-quality evidence was available to suggest that hand hygiene using
alcohol-based  hand  sanitizers  may  reduce  the  likelihood  of  symptomatic  norovirus
infection.66,87,169,171,205  Several  studies  used  FDA-compliant  alcohol-based  hand
antiseptics  during  periods  of  norovirus  activity  as  an  adjunct  measure  of  hand
hygiene.66,87,168,169,171,205,206  Two  studies  used  a  commercially  available  95%
ethanol-based hand sanitizer along with handwashing with soap and water; but without
a  control  group  and  with  hand  hygiene  comprising  one  of  several  interventions,  the
relative  contribution  of  hand  hygiene  to  attenuating  transmission  was  difficult  to
evaluate.169,171  In  the  laboratory,  even  with  95%  ethanol  products,  the  maximum
mean reduction in log10 titer reduction was 2.17.193 Evidence to evaluate the efficacy
of alcohol-based hand disinfectants consisted of basic science studies using FCV as a
surrogate  for  norovirus.  Moderate  quality  evidence  supported  ethanol  as  a  superior
active  ingredient  in  alcohol-based  hand  disinfectants  compared  to  1-propanol,
particularly when simulated organic loads (e.g. fecal material) were used in conjunction
with exposure to norovirus.189,191,193,196 The use of hand sanitizers with mixtures of
ethanol and propanol have shown effectiveness against FCV compared to products with
single  active  ingredients  (70%  ethanol  or  propanol)  under  controlled  conditions.189
There  were  no  studies  available  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  non-alcohol  based  hand
sanitizers on norovirus persistence on skin surfaces. Q3.C.1.c Role of artificial nails Very
low-quality  evidence  suggested  that  the  magnitude  in  reduction  of  a  norovirus
surrogate  (FCV)  using  a  spectrum  of  soaps  and  hand  disinfectants  was  significantly
greater among volunteers with natural nails compared to those with artificial nails.197
A subanalysis showed that longer fingernails were associated with consistently greater
hand  contamination.  Further  evidence  summarizing  the  impact  of  artificial  and  long
fingernails  in  healthcare  settings  can  be  found  in  the  HICPAC  Guideline  for  Hand
Hygiene  in  Health-Care  Settings  Cdc-pdfCdc-pdf[PDF  –  494  KB].  Very  low-quality
evidence among 1 observational66 and 13 descriptive studies167-173,176-179,181,183
support  the  use  of  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  as  a  prevention  measure
against symptomatic norovirus infection. A single retrospective study failed to support
the  use  of  gowns  as  a  significantly  protective  measure  against  norovirus  infection
during  the  outbreak  among  staff  but  did  not  consider  the  role  of  wearing  gowns  in
avoiding patient-to-patient transmission.66 Mask or glove use was not evaluated in the
self-administered  questionnaire  used  in  the  study.  Several  observational  and
descriptive studies emphasized the use of gloves and isolation gowns for routine care of
symptomatic  patients,  with  the  use  of  masks  recommended  when  staff  anticipated
exposure
 to
 emesis
 or
 circumstances
 where
 virus
 may
 be
aerosolized.167-173,176-179,181,183 The use of PPE was advocated for both staff and
visitors  in  two  outbreak  studies.169,179  There  was  very  low-quality  evidence  among
several  studies  to  support  the  implementation  of  staff  exclusion  policies  to  prevent
symptomatic
 norovirus
 infections
 in
 healthcare
settings.84,85,92,165,167-169,172,174,176,177,179-181,183,184  Fifteen  descriptive
studies  emphasized  granting  staff  sick  time  from  the  time  of  symptom  onset  to  a
minimum
 of
 24
 hours
 after
 symptom
resolution.84,85,92,167-169,172,176,177,179,180,183,184  The  majority  of  studies
opted  for  48  hours  after  symptom  resolution  before  staff  could  return  to  the
workplace.84,92,167,169,172,176,177,179,180,183,184 One study instituted a policy to
exclude  symptomatic  staff  from  work  until  they  had  remained  symptom-free  for  72
hours.168 While selected studies have identified the ability of persons to shed virus for
protracted  periods  post-infection,  it  is  not  well  understood  whether  virus  detection
translates  to  norovirus  infectivity.  The  literature  search  was  unable  to  determine
whether  return  to  work  policies  were  effective  in  reducing  secondary  transmission  of
norovirus  in  healthcare  facilities.  There  was  very  low-quality  evidence  among  several
descriptive  studies  to  support  patient  cohorting  or  placing  patients  on  Contact
Precautions  as  an  intervention  to  prevent  symptomatic  norovirus  infections  in
healthcare settings.87,166-171,173,176,177,179-182,184 No evidence was available to
encourage the use of Contact Precautions for sporadic cases, and the standard of care
in these circumstances is to manage such cases with Standard Precautions (See 2007
Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of  Infectious  Agents  in
Healthcare Settings). Fifteen descriptive studies used isolation precautions or cohorting
practices
 as
 a
 primary
 means
 of
 outbreak
management.87,166-171,173,176,177,179-182,184  Patients  were  cared  for  in  single
occupancy  (e.g.,  private)  rooms,  physically  grouped  into  cohorts  of  symptomatic,
exposed  but  asymptomatic,  or  unexposed  within  a  ward,  or  alternatively,  with  entire
wards  placed  under  Contact  Precautions.  Exposure  status  typically  was  based  on  a
person's symptoms and/or physical and temporal proximity to norovirus activity. A few
studies  cited  restricting  patient  movements  within  the  ward,  suspending  group
activities, and special considerations for therapy or other medical appointments during
outbreak
 periods
 as
 adjunct
 measures
 to
 control
 the
 spread
 of
norovirus.63,169,182,183  Very  low-quality  evidence  supported  the  implementation  of
staff  cohorting  and  the  exclusion  of  non-essential  staff  and  volunteers  to  prevent
symptomatic  norovirus  infections.87,103,165,168-170,172,173,177,179,180,182,183
All studies addressing this topic were descriptive. Staff was designated to care for one
cohort of patients (symptomatic, exposed but asymptomatic, or unexposed). Exposed
staff was discouraged from working in unaffected clinical areas and from returning to
care  for  unexposed  patients  before,  at  a  minimum,  allowing  48  hours  from  their  last
putative  exposure  to  elapse.177  The  search  strategy  did  not  identify  healthcare
personnel other than nursing, medical, environmental services, and paramedical staff
who were assigned to staff cohorting. There were no identified studies that evaluated
the infectious risk of assigning recovered staff as caregivers for asymptomatic patients.
Low-quality  evidence  was  available  to  support  ward  closure  as  an  intervention  to
prevent  symptomatic  norovirus  infections.85,164-166,168,173,176-179,183,184  Ward
closure  focused  on  temporarily  suspending  transfers  in  or  out  of  the  ward,  and
discouraged  or  disallowed  staff  from  working  in  clinical  areas  outside  of  the  closed
ward. One prospective controlled study evaluating 227 ward-level outbreaks between
2002  and  2003  demonstrated  that  outbreaks  were  significantly  shorter  (7.9  vs.  15.4
days, p<0.01) when wards were closed to new admissions.164 The mean duration of
ward closure was 9.65 days, with a loss of 3.57 bed-days for each day the ward was
closed.  The  duration  of  ward  closure  in  the  descriptive  studies  examined  was
dependent on facility resources and magnitude of the outbreaks. Allowing at least 48
hours from the resolution of the last case, followed by thorough environmental cleaning
and  disinfection  was  common  before  re-opening  a  ward.  Other  community-based
studies  have  used  closures  as  an  opportunity  to  perform  thorough  environmental
cleaning  and  disinfection  before  re-opening.  Two  studies  moved  all  patients  with
symptoms  of  norovirus  infection  to  a  closed  infectious  disease  ward  and  then
performed thorough terminal cleaning of the vacated area.170,172 In most instances,
studies defended that it was preferable to minimize patient movements and transfers in
an effort to contain environmental contamination. There was very low-quality evidence
demonstrating  the  impact  of  restriction  and/or  screening  of  visitors  for  symptoms
consistent  with  norovirus  infection.168,170,173,182,183  In  two  studies,  visitors  were
screened for symptoms of gastroenteritis using a standard questionnaire or evaluated
by  nursing  staff  prior  to  ward  entry  as  part  of  multi-faceted  outbreak  control
measures.168,170 Other studies restricted visitors to immediate family, suspended all
visitor privileges, or curtailed visitors from accessing multiple clinical areas.182,183 The
reviewed  literature  failed  to  identify  research  that  considered  the  impact  of  different
levels  of  visitor  restrictions  on  outbreak  containment.  There  was  very  low-quality
evidence  on  the  impact  of  staff  and/or  patient  education  on  symptomatic  norovirus
infections.166,168,169,172,173,182  Six  studies  simply  described  education  promoted
during outbreaks.166,168,169,172,173,182 Content for education included recognizing
symptoms  of  norovirus,  understanding  basic  principles  of  disease  transmission,
understanding  the  components  of  transmission-based  precautions,  patient  discharges
and  transfer  policies,  as  well  as  cleaning  and  disinfection  procedures.  While  many
options are available, the studies that were reviewed used posters to emphasize hand
hygiene  and  conducted  one-on-one  teaching  with  patients  and  visitors,  as  well  as
holding  departmental  seminars  for  staff.  The  literature  reviewed  failed  to  identify
research  that  examined  the  impact  of  educational  measures  on  the  magnitude  and
duration  of  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis,  or  what  modes  of  education  were
most  effective  in  promoting  adherence  to  outbreak  measures.  There  was  very
low-quality  evidence  to  suggest  that  surveillance  for  norovirus  activity  was  an
important measure in preventing symptomatic infection.58,84,166,170 Four descriptive
studies  identified  surveillance  as  a  component  of  outbreak  measurement  and
containment. Establishing a working case definition and performing active surveillance
through contact tracing, admission screening, and patient chart review were suggested
as  actionable  items  during  outbreaks.  There  was  no  available  literature  to  determine
whether  active  case-finding  and  tracking  of  new  norovirus  cases  were  directly
associated  with  shorter  outbreaks  or  more  efficient  outbreak  containment.  Very
low-quality evidence was available to support the benefits of having established written
policies and a pre-arranged communication framework in facilitating the prevention and
management  of  symptomatic  norovirus  infections.63,84,172,182-184Six  descriptive
studies  outlined  the  need  for  mechanisms  to  disseminate  outbreak  information  and
updates to staff, laboratory liaisons, healthcare facility administration, and public health
departments. 63,84,172,182-184 The search of the literature did not yield any studies
to demonstrate that facilities with written norovirus policies already in place had fewer
or shorter outbreaks of norovirus gastroenteritis. There was very low-quality evidence
examining the benefit of delayed discharge or transfer for patients with symptomatic
norovirus infection.172,179,183,184 Transfer of patients after symptom resolution was
supported  in  one  study  but  discouraged  unless  medically  necessary  in  three  others.
Discharge  home  was  supported  once  a  minimum  of  48  hours  had  elapsed  since  the
patient's  symptoms  had  resolved.  For  transfers  to  long-term  care  or  assisted  living,
patients were held for five days after symptom resolution before transfer occurred. The
literature  search  was  unable  to  identify  studies  that  compared  the  impact  of
conservative  patient  discharge  policies  for  recovered,  asymptomatic  patients.
Q3.C.12.a  Targeted  surface  disinfection  Very  low-quality  evidence  was  available  to
support  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  frequently  touched  surfaces  to  prevent
symptomatic  norovirus  infection.79,153,168,183  One  systematic  review153  and  three
descriptive  studies79,168,183  highlighted  the  need  to  routinely  clean  and  disinfect
frequently  touched  surfaces  (e.g.,  patient  and  staff  bathrooms  and  clean  and  dirty
utility  rooms,  tables,  chairs,  commodes,  computer  keyboards  and  mice,  and  items  in
close  proximity  to  symptomatic  patients).  One  systematic  review153  and  two
descriptive  studies102,177,183,184  supported-steam  cleaning  carpets  once  an
outbreak  was  declared  over.  Within  the  review,  a  single  case  report  suggested  that
contaminated carpets may contain viable virus for a minimum of twelve days even after
routine  dry  vacuuming.153  Routine  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  non-porous  flooring
were  supported  by  several  studies,  with  particular  attention  to  prompt  cleaning  of
visible  soiling  from  emesis  or  fecal  material.153,168  There  were  no  studies  directly
addressing the impact of surface disinfection of frequently touched areas on outbreak
prevention or containment. Q3.C.12.b Process of environmental disinfection There was
very  low-quality  evidence  supportive  of  enhanced  cleaning  during  an  outbreak  of
norovirus
 gastroenteritis.168,170,177,179
 Several
 studies
 cited
 increasing
 the
frequency
 of
 cleaning
 and
 disinfection
 during
 outbreaks
 of
 norovirus
gastroenteritis.168,170,177,179 Ward-level cleaning was performed once to twice per
day,  with  frequently  touched  surfaces  and  bathrooms  cleaned  and  disinfected  more
frequently  (e.g.,  hourly,  once  per  shift,  or  three  times  daily).  Studies  also  described
enhancements to the process of environmental cleaning. Environmental services staff
wore
 PPE
 while
 cleaning
 patient-care
 areas
 during
 outbreaks
 of
 norovirus
gastroenteritis.176,177,179,205  Personnel  first  cleaned  the  rooms  of  unaffected
patients and then moved to the symptomatic patient areas 159. Adjunct measures to
minimize  environmental  contamination  from  two  descriptive  studies  included  labeling
patient commodes and expanding the cleaning radius for enhanced cleaning within the
immediate  patient  area  to  include  other  proximal  fixtures  and  equipment.170,177  In
another study, mop heads were changed at an interval of once every three rooms.168
This  literature  search  was  not  able  to  identify  whether  there  was  an  association  with
enhanced  cleaning  regimens  during  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis  and  the
attenuation in outbreak magnitude or duration. Q3.C.12.c Patient-service items There
was very low-quality evidence to support the cleaning of patient equipment or service
items  to  reduce  symptomatic  norovirus  infections.168,172,177  Three  descriptive
studies  suggested  that  patient  equipment/service  items  be  cleaned  and  disinfected
after  use,  with  disposable  patient  care  items  discarded  from  patient  rooms  upon
discharge.168,172,177 A single descriptive study used disposable dishware and cutlery
for symptomatic patients.172 There were no identified studies that directly examined
the  impact  of  disinfection  of  patient  equipment  on  outbreaks  of  norovirus
gastroenteritis. Q3.C.12.d Fabrics Very low-quality evidence was available to examine
the  impact  of  fabric  disinfection  on  norovirus  infections.153,168,177,183  One
systematic  review153  and  three  descriptive  studies168,177,183  suggested  changing
patient  privacy  curtains  if  they  are  visibly  soiled  or  upon  patient  discharge.  One
descriptive  study  suggested  that  soiled,  upholstered  patient  equipment  should  be
steam  cleaned135,  159.  If  this  was  not  possible,  those  items  were  discarded.  Two
descriptive  studies  emphasized  careful  handling  of  soiled  linens  to  minimize
re-aerosolization of virus.177,183 Wheeling hampers to the bedside or using hot soluble
hamper
 bags
 (e.g.,
 disposable)
 were
 suggested
 mechanisms
 to
 reduce
self-contamination.  This  literature  search  did  not  identify  studies  that  examined  the
direct  impact  of  disinfection  of  fabrics  on  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis  or
whether  self-  contamination  with  norovirus  was  associated  with  new  infection.
Q.3.C.12.e Cleaning and disinfection agents The overall quality of evidence on cleaning
and
 disinfection
 agents
 was
 very
low.63,83,87,89,153,167,168,170,174,176-179,182,184  The  outcomes  examined  were
symptomatic  norovirus  infection,  inactivation  of  human  norovirus,  and  inactivation  of
FCV. Evidence for efficacy against norovirus was usually based on studies using FCV as
a  surrogate.  However,  FCV  and  norovirus  exhibit  different  physiochemical  properties
and it is unclear whether inactivation of FCV reflects efficacy against human strains of
norovirus.
 One
 systematic
 review153
 and
 14
 descriptive
studies63,83,87,89,167,168,170,174,176-179,182,184
 outlined
 strategies
 for
containing  environmental  bioburden.  The  majority  of  outbreaks  were  managed  with
sodium  hypochlorite  in  various  concentrations  as  the  primary  disinfectant.  The
concentrations  for  environmental  cleaning  among  these  studies  ranged  from  0.1%  to
6.15% sodium hypochlorite. There was found moderate quality evidence to examine the
impact of disinfection agents on human norovirus inactivation.187,194,201 Three basic
science  studies  evaluated  the  virucidal  effects  of  select  disinfectants  against
norovirus.187,194,201  A  decline  of  3  in  the  log10  of  human  norovirus  exposed  to
disinfectants  in  the  presence  of  fecal  material,  a  fetal  bovine  serum  protein  load,  or
both was achieved with 5% organic acid after 60 minutes of contact time, 6000 ppm
free  chlorine  with  15  minutes  of  contact  time,  or  a  1  or  2%  peroxide  solution  for  60
minutes.187 This study also demonstrated that the range of disinfectants more readily
inactivated  FCV  than  human  norovirus  samples,  suggesting  that  FCV  may  not  have
equivalent  physical  properties  to  those  of  human  norovirus.  One  basic  science  study
demonstrated  a  procedure  to  eliminate  norovirus  (genogroup  II)  from  a  melamine
substrate  using  a  two  step  process  –  a  cleaning  step  to  remove  gross  fecal  material,
followed  by  a  5000-ppm  hypochlorite  product  with  a  one  minute  contact  time.194
Cleaning  with  a  detergent,  or  using  a  disinfectant  alone  failed  to  eliminate  the  virus.
Moderate  quality  evidence  was  available  on  the  impact  of  disinfection  agents  on  the
human  norovirus  surrogate,  FCV.185,187,188,190-192,198-200  Nine  basic  science
studies
 evaluated
 the
 activity
 of
 several
 disinfectants
 agents
 against
FCV.185,187,188,190-192,198-200  Only  a  single  study  showed  equivalent  efficacy
between  a  quaternary  ammonium  compound  and  1000  ppm  hypochlorite  on
non-porous  surfaces.188  In  contrast,  selected  quaternary  ammonium  based-products,
ethanol,  and  a  1%  anionic  detergent  were  all  unable  to  inactivate  FCV  beyond  a
reduction  of  1.25  in  the  log10  of  virus,  compared  to  1000  ppm  and  5000  ppm
hypochlorite, 0.8% iodine, and 0.5% glutaraldehyde products.200 4% organic acid, 1%
peroxide,  and  >2%  aldehyde  products  showed  inactivation  of  FCV  but  only  with
impractical  contact  times  exceeding  1  hour.187  Studies  of  disinfecting  non-porous
surfaces  and  hands  evaluated  the  efficacy  of  varying  dilutions  of  ethanol  and
isopropanol and determined that 70-90% ethanol was more efficacious at inactivating
FCV compared to isopropanol, but unable to achieve a reduction of 3 in the log10 of the
viral titer (99.9%), even after 10 minutes of contact.191 Other studies have shown that
combinations of phenolic and quaternary ammonium compounds and peroxyacetic acid
were  only  effective  against  FCV  if  they  exceeded  the  manufacturers'  recommended
concentrations  by  a  factor  of  2  to  4.199  The  included  basic  science  studies  agents
demonstrating  complete  inactivation  of  FCV  were  those  containing  hypochlorite,
glutaraldehyde,  hydrogen  peroxide,  iodine,  or  >5%  sodium  bicarbonate  active
ingredients.  Not  all  of  these  products  are  feasible  for  use  in  healthcare  settings.  In
applications to various fabrics (100% cotton, 100% polyester, and cotton blends), FCV
was inactivated completely by 2.6% glutaraldehyde, and showed >90% reductions of
FCV titers when phenolics, 2.5% or 10% sodium bicarbonate, or 70% isopropanol were
evaluated.190  In  carpets  consisting  of  olefin,  polyester,  nylon,  or  blends,  2.6%
glutaraldehyde  demonstrated  >99.7%  inactivation  of  FCV,  with  other  disinfectants
showing  moderate  to  modest  reductions  in  FCV  titers.190The  experimental  use  of
monochloramine  as  an  alternative  disinfectant  to  free  chlorine  in  water  treatment
systems  only  demonstrated  modest  reductions  in  viral  titer  after  3  hours  of  contact
time.  The  literature  search  did  not  evaluate  publications  using  newer  methods  for
environmental disinfection, such as ozone mist from a humidifying device, fumigation,
UV  irradiation,  and  fogging.  This  search  strategy  was  unable  to  find  well-designed
studies that compared virucidal efficacy of products on human norovirus, FCV, or other
surrogate  models  among  commonly  used  hospital  disinfectants  agents  to  establish
practical standards, conditions, concentrations, and contact times. Ongoing laboratory
studies  are  now  exploring  murine  models  as  a  surrogate  that  may  exhibit  greater
similarity to human norovirus than FCV. Forthcoming research using this animal model
may  provide  clearer  direction  regarding  which  disinfectants  reduce  norovirus
environmental
 contamination
 from
 healthcare
 environments,
 while
 balancing
occupational safety issues with the practicality of efficient and ready-to-use products.
There  was  very  low-quality  evidence  suggesting  that  select  medications  may  reduce
the  risk  of  illness  or  attenuate  symptoms  of  norovirus.202,203  Among  elderly
psychiatric patients, those on antipsychotic drugs plus trihexyphenidyl or benztropine
were  less  likely  to  become  symptomatic,  as  were  those  taking  psyllium  hydrophilic
mucilloid.203  The  pharmacodynamics  to  explain  this  outcome  are  unknown,  and  it  is
likely that these medications may either be a surrogate marker for another biologically
plausible protective factor, or may impact norovirus through central or local effects on
gastrointestinal motility. Those who received nitazoxanide, an anti-protozoal drug, were
more  likely  to  exhibit  longer  periods  of  norovirus  illness  than  those  patients  who
received placebo.202 The search strategy used in this review did not identify research
that considered the effect of anti-peristaltics on the duration or outcomes of norovirus
infection. 3.A.1 Consider extending the duration of isolation or cohorting precautions for
outbreaks among infants and young children (e.g., under 2 years), even after resolution
of  symptoms,  as  there  is  a  potential  for  prolonged  viral  shedding  and  environmental
contamination.  Among  infants,  there  is  evidence  to  consider  extending  contact
precautions  for  up  to  5  days  after  the  resolution  of  symptoms.  (Category  II)  (Key
Question 3A) 3.A.2 Further research is needed to understand the correlation between
prolonged  shedding  of  norovirus  and  the  risk  of  infection  to  susceptible  patients.  (No
recommendation/ unresolved issue) (Key Question 3A) 3.B.1 Perform routine cleaning
and  disinfection  of  frequently  touched  environmental  surfaces  and  equipment  in
isolation and cohorted areas, as well as high-traffic clinical areas. Frequently touched
surfaces  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  commodes,  toilets,  faucets,  hand/bedrailing,
telephones,  door  handles,  computer  equipment,  and  kitchen  preparation  surfaces.
(Category IB) (Key Question 3B) 3.B.2 Remove all shared or communal food items for
patients or staff from clinical areas for the duration of the outbreak. (Category IB) (Key
Question 3B) 3.C.1.a. Actively promote adherence to hand hygiene among healthcare
personnel,  patients,  and  visitors  in  patient  care  areas  affected  by  outbreaks  of
norovirus  gastroenteritis.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.1.b.  During  outbreaks,
use  soap  and  water  for  hand  hygiene  after  providing  care  or  having  contact  with
patients  suspected  or  confirmed  with  norovirus  gastroenteritis.  (Category  IB)  (Key
Question 3C) 3.C.1.b.1. For all other hand hygiene indications (e.g., when hands are not
visibly  soiled  and  have  not  been  in  contact  with  diarrheal  patients,  contaminated
surfaces, or other body fluids) refer to the 2002 HICPAC Guideline for Hand Hygiene in
Health-Care Settings Cdc-pdf[PDF – 494 KB]), which includes the indications for use of
FDA-compliant alcohol based hand sanitizer. (Category IB) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.1.b.2.
Consider  ethanol-based  hand  sanitizers  (60-95%)  as  the  preferred  active  agent
compared  to  other  alcohol  or  non-alcohol  based  hand  sanitizer  products  during
outbreaks of norovirus gastroenteritis. (Category II) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.1.b.3. Further
research is required to directly evaluate the efficacy of alcohol-based hand sanitizers
against  human  strains  of  norovirus,  or  against  a  surrogate  virus  with  properties
convergent  with  human  strains  of  norovirus.  (No  recommendation/  unresolved  issue)
(Key Question 3C) 3.C.2.a Use a surgical or procedure mask and eye protection or a full
face  shield  if  there  is  an  anticipated  risk  of  splashes  to  the  face  during  the  care  of
patients, particularly among those who are vomiting. (Category IB) (Key Question 3C)
3.C.3  Develop  and  adhere  to  sick  leave  policies  for  healthcare  personnel  who  have
symptoms consistent with norovirus infection. (Category IB) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.3.a
Exclude  ill  personnel  from  work  for  a  minimum  of  48  hours  after  the  resolution  of
symptoms. Once personnel return to work, the importance of performing frequent hand
hygiene  should  be  reinforced,  especially  before  and  after  each  patient  contact.
(Category IB) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.4.a During outbreaks, place patients with norovirus
gastroenteritis on Contact Precautions for a minimum of 48 hours after the resolution of
symptoms  to  prevent  further  transmission.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.4.b
When  patients  with  norovirus  gastroenteritis  cannot  be  accommodated  in  single
occupancy  rooms,  efforts  should  be  made  to  separate  them  from  asymptomatic
patients.  Dependent  upon  facility  characteristics,  approaches  for  cohorting  patients
during  outbreaks  may  include  placing  patients  in  multi-occupancy  rooms,  or
designating  patient  care  areas  or  contiguous  sections  within  a  facility  for  patient
cohorts.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.4.c  Consider  minimizing  patient
movements within a ward or unit during norovirus gastroenteritis outbreaks. (Category
II) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.4.c.1 Consider restricting symptomatic and recovering patients
from leaving the patient-care area unless it is for essential care or treatment to reduce
the  likelihood  of  environmental  contamination  and  transmission  of  norovirus  in
unaffected clinical areas. (Category II) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.4.d Consider suspending
group activities (e.g., dining events) for the duration of a norovirus outbreak. (Category
II)(Key  Question  3C)  3.C.5.a  Establish  protocols  for  staff  cohorting  in  the  event  of  an
outbreak of norovirus gastroenteritis. Ensure staff care for one patient cohort on their
ward  and  do  not  move  between  patient  cohorts  (e.g.,  patient  cohorts  may  include
symptomatic,  asymptomatic  exposed,  or  asymptomatic  unexposed  patient  groups).
(Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.5.b  Staff  who  have  recovered  from  recent
suspected norovirus infection associated with this outbreak may be best suited to care
for  symptomatic  patients  until  the  outbreak  resolves.  (Category  II)  (Key  Question  3C)
3.C.5.c  Exclude  non-essential  staff,  students,  and  volunteers  from  working  in  areas
experiencing  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)
3.C.6  Consider  the  closure  of  wards  to  new  admissions  or  transfers  as  a  measure  to
attenuate the magnitude of an outbreak of norovirus gastroenteritis. The threshold for
ward closure varies and depends on risk assessments by infection prevention personnel
and facility leadership. (Category II) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.7.a Establish visitor policies
for  acute  gastroenteritis  (e.g.,  norovirus)  outbreaks.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)
3.C.7.b  Restrict  non-essential  visitors  from  affected  areas  of  the  facility  during
outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.7.b.1  For
those affected areas where it is necessary to have continued visitor privileges during
outbreaks,  screen  and  exclude  visitors  with  symptoms  consistent  with  norovirus
infection  and  ensure  that  they  comply  with  hand  hygiene  and  Contact  Precautions.
(Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.8.a  Provide  education  to  staff,  patients,  and
visitors, including recognition of norovirus symptoms, preventing infection, and modes
of  transmission  upon  the  recognition  and  throughout  the  duration  of  a  norovirus
gastroenteritis  outbreak.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.8.b  Consider  providing
educational  sessions  and  making  resources  available  on  the  prevention  and
management of norovirus before outbreaks occur, as part of annual trainings, and when
sporadic  cases  are  detected.  (Category  II)(Key  Question  3C)  3.C.9.a  Begin  active
case-finding when a cluster of acute gastroenteritis cases is detected in the healthcare
facility. Use a specified case definition, and implement line lists to track both exposed
and  symptomatic  patients  and  staff.  Collect  relevant  epidemiological,  clinical,  and
demographic data as well as information on patient location and outcomes. (Category
IB) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.9.b As with all outbreaks, notify appropriate local and state
health  departments,  as  required  by  state  and  local  public  health  regulations,  if  an
outbreak  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis  is  suspected.  (Category  IC)  (Key  Question  3C)
3.C.10  Develop  written  policies  that  specify  the  chains  of  communication  needed  to
manage  and  report  outbreaks  of  norovirus  gastroenteritis.  Key  stakeholders  such  as
clinical  staff,  environmental  services,  laboratory  administration,  healthcare  facility
administration  and  public  affairs,  as  well  as  state  or  local  public  health  authorities,
should be included in the framework. (Category IB) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.10.a Provide
timely  communication  to  personnel  and  visitors  when  an  outbreak  of  norovirus
gastroenteritis is identified and outline what policies and provisions need to be followed
to prevent further transmission (Category IB)(Key Question 3C) 3.C.11 Consider limiting
transfers  to  those  for  which  the  receiving  facility  is  able  to  maintain  Contact
Precautions; otherwise, it may be prudent to postpone transfers until patients no longer
require
 Contact
 Precautions.
 During
 outbreaks,
 medically
 suitable
 individuals
recovering from norovirus gastroenteritis can be discharged to their place of residence.
(Category II) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.12.a Clean and disinfect shared equipment between
patients  using  EPA-registered  products  with  label  claims  for  use  in  healthcare.  Follow
the  manufacturer's  recommendations  for  application  and  contact  times.  The  EPA  lists
products  with  activity  against  norovirus  on  their  website  (Selected  EPA-registered
DisinfectantsExternal  [Current  version  of  this  document  may  differ  from  original.]).
(Category  IC)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.12.b.1  Increase  the  frequency  of  cleaning  and
disinfection of patient care areas and frequently touched surfaces during outbreaks of
norovirus  gastroenteritis  (e.g.,  consider  increasing  ward/unit  level  cleaning  to  twice
daily to maintain cleanliness, with frequently touched surfaces cleaned and disinfected
three  times  daily  using  EPA-approved  products  for  healthcare  settings).  (Category  IB)
(Key Question 3C) 3.C.12.b.2 Clean and disinfect surfaces starting from the areas with a
lower  likelihood  of  norovirus  contamination  (e.g.,  tray  tables,  counter  tops)  to  areas
with highly contaminated surfaces (e.g., toilets, bathroom fixtures). Change mop heads
when  a  new  bucket  of  cleaning  solution  is  prepared,  or  after  cleaning  large  spills  of
emesis or fecal material. (Category IB) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.12.c.1 Consider discarding
all disposable patient-care items and laundering unused linens from patient rooms after
patients  on  isolation  for  norovirus  gastroenteritis  are  discharged  or  transferred.
Facilities can minimize waste by limiting the number of disposable items brought into
rooms/areas  on  Contact  Precautions.  (Category  II)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.12.c.2  No
additional  provisions  for  using  disposable  patient  service  items  such  as  utensils  or
dishware are suggested for patients with symptoms of norovirus infection. Silverware
and dishware may undergo normal processing and cleaning using standard procedures.
(Category II) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.12.c.3 Use Standard Precautions for handling soiled
patient-service items or linens, including the use of appropriate PPE. (Category IB) (Key
Question 3C) 3.C.12.d.1 Consider avoiding the use of upholstered furniture and rugs or
carpets  in  patient  care  areas,  as  these  objects  are  difficult  to  clean  and  disinfect
completely. If this option is not possible, immediately clean soilage, such as emesis or
fecal  material,  from  upholstery,  using  a  manufacturer-approved  cleaning  agent  or
detergent. Opt for seating in patient-care areas that can withstand routine cleaning and
disinfection.  (Category  II)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.12.d.2  Consider  steam  cleaning  of
upholstered  furniture  in  patient  rooms  upon  discharge.  Consult  with  manufacturer's
recommendations  for  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  these  items.  Consider  discarding
items that cannot be appropriately cleaned/disinfected. (Category II) (Key Question 3C)
3.C.12.d.3 During outbreaks, change privacy curtains when they are visibly soiled and
upon patient discharge or transfer. (Category IB) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.12.d.4 Handle
soiled linens carefully, without agitating them, to avoid dispersal of virus. Use Standard
Precautions, including the use of appropriate PPE (e.g., gloves and gowns), to minimize
the  likelihood  of  cross-contamination.  (Category  IB)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.12.d.5
Double  bagging,  incineration,  or  modifications  for  laundering  are  not  indicated  for
handling  or  processing  soiled  linen.  (Category  II)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.12.e.1  Clean
surfaces  and  patient  equipment  prior  to  the  application  of  a  disinfectant.  Follow  the
manufacturer's  recommendations  for  optimal  disinfectant  dilution,  application,  and
surface  contact  time  with  an  EPA-approved  product  with  claims  against  norovirus.
(Category  IC)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.12.e.2  More  research  is  required  to  clarify  the
effectiveness of cleaning and disinfecting agents against norovirus, either through the
use  of  surrogate  viruses  or  the  development  of  human  norovirus  culture  system.  (No
recommendation/  unresolved  issue)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.C.12.e.3  More  research  is
required to clarify the effectiveness and reliability of fogging, UV irradiation, and ozone
mists  to  reduce  norovirus  environmental  contamination.  (No  recommendation/
unresolved issue) (Key Question 3C) 3.C.12.e.4 More research is required to evaluate
the virucidal capabilities of alcohol-based as well as non-alcohol based hand sanitizers
against  norovirus.  (No  recommendation/  unresolved  issue)  (Key  Question  3C)  3.D
Further research is required to evaluate the utility of medications that may attenuate
the duration and severity of norovirus illness. (No recommendation/ unresolved issue)
(Key Question 3D) CDC provides information on infection control and clinical safety to
help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/norovirus-guidelines/evidence-review.html
