Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Viral Hepatitis Surveillance and Case Management: Guidance
for State, Territorial, and Local Health Departments is published by the Division of Viral
Hepatitis, National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta,
Georgia  in  collaboration  with  viral  hepatitis  subject  matter  experts  from  health
departments,  the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists,  and  the  National
Alliance  of  State  and  Territorial  AIDS  Directors.  The  purpose  of  this  document  is  to
provide jurisdictional guidance to implement and improve hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and
hepatitis  C  surveillance  and  case  management,  including  reporting  requirements,
collection  of  relevant  laboratory  data,  and  case  investigation.  Given  that  current
systems for the surveillance and follow-up of cases differ by jurisdiction, the standards
outlined  in  this  document  are  designed  to  provide  models  for  best  practices,
recognizing  that  not  every  jurisdiction  can  meet  those  standards  with  available
resources. All material contained in this report is in the public domain and may be used
and reprinted without special permission; however, citation as to source is appreciated.
Terms, Abbreviations,
and Acronyms Index of
Figures  and  Tables  Appendices  Since  the  2005  edition  of  the  Guidelines  for  Viral
Hepatitis Surveillance and Case Management, the epidemiology of viral hepatitis in the
United  States  has  changed  substantially.  Decreases  in  hepatitis  A  incidence  that
occurred following release of the hepatitis A vaccine in the late 1990s ended in 2016,
when  large  person-to-person  outbreaks  of  hepatitis  A  began  being  reported  primarily
among  people  who  use  drugs  (PWUD)  and  people  experiencing  homelessness.
Decreases in acute hepatitis B incidence that occurred after release of the hepatitis B
vaccine  in  the  1980s  ceased  in  2010.  Also  in  2010,  decreases  in  acute  hepatitis  C
incidence  that  were  first  observed  in  the  1990s  began  to  reverse.  Rates  of  acute
hepatitis C have most notably increased among people 20–49 years of age, American
Indian/Alaska Native people, and non-Hispanic White people. The shift in acute hepatitis
B and hepatitis C incidence is most evident in jurisdictions disproportionately affected
by the opioid crisis. Cases of hepatitis A; acute, chronic, and perinatal hepatitis B; and
acute, chronic, and perinatal hepatitis C should be classified in accordance with their
respective  CDC/CSTE  surveillance  case  definition.  The  scenarios  provided  in  the
following  tables  can  serve  as  guidance  for  classification  of  these  cases.  Technical
assistance is available for more complex scenarios by contacting the assigned regional
CDC  DVH  technical  assistance  team.  The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention
(CDC)  editor  of  the  Viral  Hepatitis  Surveillance  and  Case  Management:  Guidance  for
State,  Territorial,  and  Local  Health  Departments  was  Kathleen  Ly,  Epidemiologist
(Surveillance  Team/Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis)  with  leadership  and  guidance  from  Dr.
Ruth Jiles (currently Senior Scientist, Surveillance Team/Division of Viral Hepatitis). Dr.
Alfred DeMaria, Medical and Laboratory Consultant at the Massachusetts Department of
Public  Health,  served  as  the  external  editor.  This  guidance  was  developed  in
collaboration with staff from state, territorial, and local health departments, with input
from  Ashley  Vineyard  (Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologist)  and  Boatemaa
Nitri-Reed  (National  Alliance  of  State  and  Territorial  AIDS  Directors).  Rachel  Wilson
(Division  of  Viral  Hepatitis)  reviewed  and  edited  this  document  for  clarity  and
consistency  with  CDC  publishing  guidelines.  View  the  list  of  experts  in  viral  hepatitis
surveillance contributed to the condition-specific sections. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. Viral Hepatitis Surveillance and Case Management: Guidance for State,
Territorial, and Local Health Departments.
https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/GuidelinesAndForms.htm.
 Published
 August
2021.  Accessed  August  16,  2021.  View  list  of  references  cited  throughout  the
document. CDC disclaimer: The findings and conclusions in this document are those of
the  author(s)  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  official  position  of  the  Centers  for
Disease Control and Prevention/Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Fair
Use  disclaimer:  This  document  contains  some  copyrighted  content  not  authorized  for
use by the owner. Use of copyrighted content falls under the guidelines of fair use per
Section 107 of the Copyright Act. Attribution is provided for all copyrighted content.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/surveillanceguidance/index.htm
