  On August 4, 2015, this report was posted as an MMWR Early Release on the MMWR
website  (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).  Rachel  B.  Slayton,  PhD1;  Damon  Toth,  PhD2;
Bruce Y. Lee, MD3; Windy Tanner, PhD2; Sarah M. Bartsch, MPH3; Karim Khader, PhD2;
Kim Wong, PhD4; Kevin Brown, PhD2; James A. McKinnell, MD5; William Ray2; Loren G.
Miller, MD6; Michael Rubin, MD, PhD2; Diane S. Kim7; Fred Adler, PhD8; Chenghua Cao,
MPH7;  Lacey  Avery,  MA1;  Nathan  T.B.  Stone,  PhD9;  Alexander  Kallen,  MD1;  Matthew
Samore, MD2; Susan S. Huang, MD7; Scott Fridkin, MD1; John A. Jernigan, MD1 Abstract
Background:  Treatments  for  health  care–associated  infections  (HAIs)  caused  by
antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  and  Clostridium  difficile  are  limited,  and  some  patients
have developed untreatable infections. Evidence-supported interventions are available,
but coordinated approaches to interrupt the spread of HAIs could have a greater impact
on  reversing  the  increasing  incidence  of  these  infections  than  independent
facility-based  program  efforts.  Methods:  Data  from  CDC's  National  Healthcare  Safety
Network  and  Emerging  Infections  Program  were  analyzed  to  project  the  number  of
health  care–associated  infections  from  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  or  C.  difficile  both
with  and  without  a  large  scale  national  intervention  that  would  include  interrupting
transmission  and  improved  antibiotic  stewardship.  As  an  example,  the  impact  of
reducing  transmission  of  one  antibiotic-resistant  infection  (carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae [CRE]) on cumulative prevalence and number of HAI transmission
events  within  interconnected  groups  of  health  care  facilities  was  modeled  using  two
distinct  approaches,  a  large  scale  and  a  smaller  scale  health  care  network.  Results:
Immediate nationwide infection control and antibiotic stewardship interventions, over 5
years, could avert an estimated 619,000 HAIs resulting from CRE, multidrug-resistant
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA),
or  C.  difficile.  Compared  with  independent  efforts,  a  coordinated  response  to  prevent
CRE  spread  across  a  group  of  inter-connected  health  care  facilities  resulted  in  a
cumulative 74% reduction in acquisitions over 5 years in a 10-facility network model,
and  55%  reduction  over  15  years  in  a  102-facility  network  model.  Conclusions:  With
effective action now, more than half a million antibiotic-resistant health care–associated
infections could be prevented over 5 years. Models representing both large and small
groups of interconnected health care facilities illustrate that a coordinated approach to
interrupting  transmission  is  more  effective  than  historical  independent  facility-based
efforts.  Implications  for  Public  Health:  Public  health–led  coordinated  prevention
approaches  have  the  potential  to  more  completely  address  the  emergence  and
dissemination of these antibiotic-resistant organisms and C. difficile than independent
facility–based  efforts.  With  the  continuing  emergence  of  antibiotic  resistance,
treatments  for  bacterial  infections  are  increasingly  limited,  and  in  some  patients,
effective treatment options do not exist. Antibiotics are a lifesaving medical tool, and
antibiotic resistance undermines the ability to fight infectious diseases. CDC estimates
that  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  cause  2  million  illnesses  and  approximately  23,000
deaths  each  year  in  the  United  States  (1).  Infections  caused  by  resistant  pathogens
have the potential to affect persons both in and out of health care settings. In addition,
almost 250,000 persons each year require hospital care for C. difficile infections (CDIs),
which  are  typically  associated  with  antibiotic  use  (1).  Despite  success  in  preventing
these  infections  at  individual  health  care  facilities  (2,3),  the  continued  spread  of
antibiotic  resistant  pathogens  and  C.  difficile  has  outpaced  the  development  of  new
therapies (1). Historically, infection control interventions designed to prevent spread of
C. difficile and antibiotic-resistant pathogens have been independently implemented by
individual health care facilities, without clear coordination among other facilities in the
community,  which  often  care  for  the  same  patients.  Although  improvements  within
independent  facilities  are  necessary,  they  might  not  be  sufficient  to  reduce  spread.
These  independent  efforts  do  not  account  for  the  importance  of  inter-facility  spread
through movement of patients who are colonized or infected with these organisms, or
the  impact  that  one  institution's  practices  might  have  on  the  antibiotic  resistance
encountered by neighboring facilities (4–6). To date, even when fully implemented, this
independent facility–based effort has not adequately controlled inter-facility spread of
antibiotic-resistant pathogens (7). In addition to optimizing implementation of infection
control  in  every  facility,  an  inter-facility  coordinated  approach  to  interrupt  spread,
facilitated  by  local  or  state-based  oversight,  has  the  potential  to  more  effectively
reduce  the  overall  prevalence  of  antibiotic-resistant  infections  across  all  health  care
facilities  within  a  community.  The  impact  of  such  coordinated  responses  can  be
estimated  through  mathematical  modeling,  and  assessment  of  the  expected  benefits
can  inform  the  development  and  implementation  of  these  programs.  Estimating
infection incidence and deaths. Projections of infections and deaths in the United States
during 2014–2019 were derived from data obtained through CDC's National Healthcare
Safety  Network  (NHSN)  and  Emerging  Infections  Program  (EIP).  Four  particularly
problematic
 health
 care–associated
 infections
 (HAIs)
 were
 included:
 CRE,
multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, invasive MRSA, and CDIs (1). To estimate
the percentage of antibiotic-resistant HAIs over the next 5 years, logarithmic models for
multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa and CRE were generated from the annual percentage
of  resistant  isolates  from  device  and  procedure–associated  HAIs  reported  to  NHSN
during 2009–2013, and the percentage resistant by year was estimated through 2019.
To  obtain  the  annual  number  of  infections,  the  2011  national  estimates  of
pathogen-specific HAIs were multiplied by the projected percentage resistant for each
pathogen  (8).  Projections  for  invasive  MRSA  and  CDI  were  derived  from  EIP  national
surveillance from 2005–2012 for MRSA and 2011 for CDI (3,9). Mortality rates from EIP
data  or  published  literature  were  applied  to  the  projected  number  of  infections  to
determine  associated  mortality  (1).  Estimated  numbers  of  infections  and  deaths
averted with the implementation of an immediate national intervention were based on
published  reports  of  national  interventions  in  other  countries,  where  interventions
combining  interrupting  transmission  with  improved  inpatient  antibiotic  prescribing
resulted  in  roughly  30%–50%  fewer  infections  over  5  years  (reductions  varied  by
pathogen)  (10–12).  Estimating  effect  of  a  coordinated  approach  in  a  network.  Two
independently  developed  and  complementary  agent-based  mathematical  simulation
models  were  used  to  measure  the  impact  of  a  coordinated  approach  to  prevent  the
spread  of  antibiotic-resistant  organisms  within  a  group  of  health  care  facilities
interconnected  through  patient  sharing  (i.e.,  a  network),  using  CRE  as  a  test  case.
These  agent-based  models  are  computer  simulations  that  represent  hospitalized
patients as "agents" and track their dynamic interactions with other patients and CRE
status throughout the health care system. The first model assessed the impact of the
coordinated approach in a simulated network of 10 health care facilities consisting of
four  acute  care  hospitals  (including  one  long-term  acute  care  hospital),  and  six
free-standing  nursing  homes  serving  adult  patients.  Transfer  of  patients  between
facilities  was  calibrated  based  on  actual  transfer  data  from  the  U.S.  Department  of
Veterans  Affairs,  supplemented  with  state  inpatient  database  data  (11).  The  period
used to measure the impact was 5 years. The second model assessed the impact of a
coordinated approach in a larger region and used the Regional Healthcare Ecosystem
Analyst  (RHEA),  a  simulation  based  on  data  from  the  network  of  all  28  acute  care
hospitals  (including  five  long-term  acute  care  hospitals)  and  74  free-standing  nursing
homes serving adult patients in Orange County, California. The RHEA model, originally
developed  to  simulate  MRSA  transmission  (13–16),  was  re-parameterized  to  simulate
spread of CRE within this larger health care network, and the period used to measure
impact was 15 years. With each model, the spread of CRE was simulated under three
hypothetical scenarios (1): infection control activity currently in common use (common
approach/status  quo,  or  baseline  activity  with  no  augmented  intervention)  (2),
augmented  efforts  implemented  independently  at  individual  subsets  of  facilities
(independent  efforts),  and  (3)  coordinated  augmented  approach  across  a  health  care
network  (coordinated  approach).  Baseline  activity  simulations  assumed  that  facilities
applied  contact  precautions  only  to  colonized  or  infected  patients  identified  through
routine tests. The independent efforts allowed for up to 15% of hospitals to begin active
detection (i.e., CRE surveillance cultures) and isolation of CRE-colonized patients after a
predetermined number of patients had been identified through routine clinical tests at
each individual hospital. The coordinated approach allowed for all health care facilities
to  share  CRE  test  results  with  a  central  public  health  authority,  which  used  that
information  to  strategically  target  prevention  activity  across  multiple  facilities.
Notification of patient status as CRE-colonized or CRE-infected to facilities receiving a
patient  upon  inter-facility  transfer  varied  by  model,  and  increased  in  frequency  from
independent efforts to coordinated approaches. Both models simulated the movement
of patients within and between different health care facilities and transmission of CRE in
a health care network based upon key parameter estimates that included inter-facility
patient  movement,  the  proportion  of  colonized  patients  recognized  by  routine  clinical
tests, and effectiveness of barrier precautions in preventing transmission. Models were
parameterized  based  on  published  data  or  calibrated  to  published  estimates  of  CRE
incidence and prevalence at acute care hospitals, long-term acute care hospitals, and
nursing homes in regions where CRE outbreaks have occurred. Mean values for number
of acquisitions and cumulative prevalence were calculated from simulations.* Projected
national incidence of infections and deaths from several resistant organisms. In 2011,
an estimated 310,000 HAIs from CRE, multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa, invasive MRSA,
or CDI occurred in the United States. Based on current trends, in 5 years the number of
infections caused by these pathogens is estimated to increase by approximately 10%,
to 340,000 per year, unless additional interventions are implemented. With immediate
implementation  of  national  interventions  combining  infection  control  and  antibiotic
stewardship and, assuming similar effectiveness to that reported in other countries, an
estimated  619,000  health  care–associated  infections  and  37,000  deaths  could  be
averted in 5 years (Figure 1). Estimated effect of coordinated approach in a network for
reducing CRE spread. For the 10-facility model, after the first introduction of CRE into
the network, with baseline activity alone (no augmented intervention), the prevalence
of  health  care–associated  CRE  infection  or  colonization  after  5  years  could  be  12.2%
with  2,141  patients  acquiring  CRE  (Figure  2).  With  independent  facility–augmented
efforts,  the  prevalence  of  CRE  after  5  years  could  be  8.6%  with  1,590  patient
acquisitions of CRE. Simulating a coordinated augmented approach, the model predicts
a  prevalence  of  2.1%  with  406  patient  acquisitions  after  5  years;  the  coordinated
response resulted in a cumulative 81% reduction in CRE acquisitions, with 1,735 patient
acquisitions  prevented  when  compared  with  baseline  activity  (Figure  2)  and  a  74%
reduction when compared with independent-facility efforts (Figure 2). On average, over
this 5-year period, the coordinated approach resulted in 35 patients protected from CRE
acquisition  per  1,000  screening  tests  compared  with  11  patients  per  1,000  screening
tests  with  the  independent-facility  efforts.†  Using  the  102-facility  model  of  Orange
County  simulations  over  15  years,  the  model  estimated  that  the  average  network
prevalence  of  CRE  after  15  years  would  be  15%  with  35,159  patients  acquiring  CRE
(Figure  3).  With  independent  facility-augmented  efforts,  the  average  network
prevalence of CRE after 15 years could be 14% with 31,885 patient acquisitions of CRE.
Simulating  a  coordinated  approach  in  a  network,  the  model  predicted  an  average
prevalence after 15 years of 8% with 12,614 patient acquisitions. Over 15 years, the
coordinated response resulted in a cumulative 55% reduction in CRE prevalence with
19,271 patient acquisitions prevented, compared with independent-facility efforts. With
effective  action  now,  including  nationwide  antibiotic  stewardship  efforts  and
interventions to prevent spread of antibiotic-resistant infections, an estimated 619,000
infections  caused  by  three  problematic  antibiotic-resistant  HAIs  or  CDIs,  and  37,000
deaths  among  infected  patients  might  be  averted  nationally  over  the  next  5  years.
When  considering  published  estimates  of  costs  related  to  these  four  infections  in  the
projections (17,18), an estimated $7.7 billion in direct medical costs could be averted
(not including costs of implementing interventions). Optimizing implementation of basic
infection control practice within individual facilities will be of fundamental importance to
this  effort.  Further,  models  representing  both  large  and  small  networks  of
interconnected  health  care  facilities  illustrate  that  a  coordinated  approach  to
interrupting transmission is more effective than traditional approaches that have relied
on  individual  hospital  efforts  to  independently  identify  and  implement  interventions.
Incorporating such coordinated approaches at a national level could help ensure such
actions  are  effective.   Several  methods  exist  to  coordinate  prevention  of  antibiotic
resistant  HAIs;  however,  public  health  departments,  particularly  large  local  or  state
health  departments,  are  uniquely  suited  to  facilitate  and  accelerate  this  approach.
Health departments are able to work with facilities within their jurisdiction in ways that
amplify  ongoing  efforts  of  individual  facilities  or  health  systems.  Because  health
departments possess substantial expertise in surveillance and prevention, they are well
equipped  to  partner  with  multiple  stakeholders,  including  hospitals,  corporate  and
academic  institutions,  hospital  associations,  professional  organizations,  quality
improvement
 organizations,
 and
 federal
 partners.
 Such
 state-based
 HAI
antibiotic-resistance prevention programs can enable communities to locate the threat
by  sharing  antibiotic  resistance  data  and  promoting  accurate  testing.  Such  programs
also  can  respond  quickly  to  prevent  spread  by  identifying  and  rapidly  responding  to
clusters, implementing a regionally coordinated response that includes opening lines of
communication  between  facilities,  helping  individual  hospitals  improve  infection
prevention  practices,  and  strategically  targeting  resources  to  prevent  spread  and
maximize  community  impact.  Sharing  the  responsibilities  to  establish  a  coordinated
program among communities of health care institutions with leadership by local health
authorities will bring about the collective, shared benefits of coordination. Shifting the
current  culture  to  one  of  sharing  information  and  sharing  responsibility  in  prevention
will require local leadership and commitment across various sectors. Developing a plan
to  share  facility-level  information  regarding  the  presence  and  incidence  of  important
antibiotic-resistant  infections  in  ways  that  acknowledge  the  importance  of  protecting
personally identifiable and other sensitive information, as occurred with facility-specific
disclosure of HAI rates over the past decade, will be essential. Several key steps need
to  be  taken  to  begin  a  coordinated  approach.  Health  care  facility  leaders  can  take
action  to  accelerate  efforts  to  improve  infection  control  practices  within  their  own
facilities and assure accurate and timely detection and reporting of antibiotic-resistant
infections.  In  addition  to  augmented  efforts,  facilities  can  alert  one  another  when
enhanced  infection  control  is  needed  for  transferred  patients  who  are  colonized  or
infected with resistant organisms. Facility leadership should work with their respective
health  departments  to  determine  best  data  sharing  practices.  Such  steps  improve
access by public health departments to an established flow of HAI data, including those
reported  from  hospitals  to  CDC's  NHSN.  CDC  is  working  to  better  assist  health
departments  and  health  care  facilities  to  collect,  access,  and  respond  to  their
HAI-related  data,  thereby  enabling  more  efficient  use  of  staff  time  and  resources  to
implement  effective  prevention  efforts.  A  number  of  states  have  begun  to  develop
programmatic capacity and experience in a coordinated approach for action to prevent
antibiotic-resistant  infections  in  health  care  settings.  For  example,  the  South  Dakota
Department  of  Health  identified  CRE  in  a  region  of  the  state,  and  in  response,
implemented  a  comprehensive  program  that  included  the  introduction  of  mandatory
reporting  of  CRE  in  2013.  The  educational  program  was  developed  to  increase  CRE
prevention  knowledge  among  health  care  providers,  and,  with  the  two  main  hospital
systems in the state, develop and implement interventions to reduce transmission. The
program  determines  extent  of  spread  and  has  worked  with  neighboring  states  to
prevent  cross-border  transmission.  This  coordinated  approach  in  oversight  and  rapid
and  efficient  response  resulted  in  a  statewide  decrease  in  CRE  infections  from  24  in
2012,  to  four  in  2014.  In  Tennessee,  the  Department  of  Health  has  begun  accessing
data reported to NHSN and using analytic methods similar to The Targeted Assessment
for  Prevention§  strategy  developed  by  CDC  to  target  health  care  facilities  with  a
disproportionate burden of CDI presenting to the hospital from the community or other
facilities  such  as  nursing  homes.  Such  a  strategy  can  identify  gaps  in  infection
prevention  and  antibiotic  stewardship  outside  of  hospitals.  The  Tennessee  approach
allows  for  prioritization  of  prevention  efforts  to  the  places  where  they  will  have  their
greatest impact. In Illinois, the Department of Public Health serves as a broker of data
to all facilities in the state, maintaining a registry of patients infected or colonized with
extensively drug-resistant bacteria. Currently, this registry is being used to report and
identify patients with a history of CRE colonization or infection. Any registered facility
can use the state-based notifiable disease reporting system to access the registry and
determine  if  an  anticipated  admission  involves  a  patient  with  a  history  of  CRE.  This
allows appropriate infection control precautions to be taken at the time of admission.
The findings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First, estimates of the
projected  number  of  infections  and  the  impact  of  interventions  are  based  on  the
assumption  that  rates  will  rise  yearly  according  to  current  trends  and  that  effective
interventions will reduce annual rates of infections by 30%–50%. Second, reductions in
infections  with  these  four  pathogens  over  the  next  5  years  might  not  translate  into
fewer HAIs overall; however, even if the infections prevented with these four pathogens
are replaced by infections caused by less resistant organisms, such infections would be
easier to treat. Third, the models were focused on interventions that are designed for
interrupting transmission within and between health care facilities. Antibiotic resistant
pathogens, such as MRSA, can also be spread in community settings; parallel efforts to
prevent  AR  in  the  community  are  also  of  great  importance.  Fourth,  illustration  of  the
impact  of  coordinated  approaches  to  preventing  transmission  as  presented  here  is
based  on  current  understanding  of  CRE  transmission  within  facilities  and  inter-facility
transfer  patterns,  and  some  of  the  simplifying  assumptions  used  in  the  simulations
might bias the results. The use of Veterans Affairs data in the 10-facility model made it
feasible  to  represent  dependencies  between  lengths  of  stay,  probabilities  of
readmission, and infection status. These are relationships that, in their basic form, likely
are generalizable across health systems, and other models using different assumptions
have  suggested  a  similar  advantage  to  regionally  coordinated  interventions  involving
other  pathogens  (4,5).  Although  the  model  assumptions  incorporate  active  detection
and isolation of CRE patients, the benefits illustrated in the model would be the same
for  any  intervention  (e.g.,  augmented  hand  hygiene  efforts  or  skin  antisepsis)  that
reduces  transmission  by  the  amount  incorporated  into  the  models.  The  analysis
assumes  no  more  than  15%  of  hospitals  would  implement  augmented  independent
efforts. If a larger number of facilities implemented augmented independent efforts, the
relative benefits of the coordinated approach would be lower, although as illustrated in
the analysis, the resource utilization is much more efficient with coordination. Finally,
the projected impact of interventions nationally include data for only four of the most
problematic pathogens identified in the CDC Threat Assessment (1). These were chosen
because they are propagated primarily in health care settings, are particularly difficult
to  treat,  and  have  great  potential  to  spread.  Of  note,  the  cost  estimates  assume  the
infections are not simply replaced with more susceptible bacteria and do not take into
account  the  costs  of  implementing  prevention  programs,  although  a  study  on  CDI
prevention suggests such multifaceted prevention programs would be cost-saving (18).
The  threat  of  antibiotic-resistant  infections  and  CDI  is  not  limited  to  certain  areas  or
types of health care facilities. The current threat of antibiotic resistance in health care
settings  suggests  that  historical  independent  institution-based  efforts  to  prevent
transmission have been inadequate. Coordinated prevention approaches led by public
health  agencies,  when  coupled  with  intensified  facility-based  prevention  programs,
have  the  potential  to  more  completely  address  the  emergence  and  dissemination  of
these organisms.  1National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases; 2VA
Salt  Lake  City  Health  Care  System  and  Division  of  Epidemiology,  University  of  Utah,
3Public  Health  Computational  and  Operations  Research,  Johns  Hopkins  Bloomberg
School of Public Health, 4Center for Simulation and Modeling, University of Pittsburgh;
5Torrance  Memorial  Medical  Center;  6Infectious  Disease  Clinical  Outcomes  Research
Unit, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center; 7Division
of  Infectious  Diseases  and  Health  Policy  Research  Institute,  University  of  California
Irvine  Health  School  of  Medicine;  8Department  of  Mathematics,  University  of  Utah;
9Pittsburgh
 Super
 Computing
 Center.
 Corresponding
 author:
 Rachel
 Slayton,
rslayton@cdc.gov, 404-639-4566. Emerging Infections Programs participants (Colorado
Department  of  Public  Health  and  Environment;  Oregon  Public  Health  Authority;  New
York–Rochester  Emerging  Infections  Program  and  University  of  Rochester  Medical
Center; Tennessee Department of Health; Minnesota Department of Health; Connecticut
Department of Public Health; California Emerging Infections Program; Georgia Emerging
Infections  Program;  Atlanta  VA  Medical  Center;  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,
Atlanta,  Georgia;  New  Mexico  Department  of  Health;  Maryland  Emerging  Infections
Program; Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene). Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality; University of Pittsburgh Center for Simulation and Modeling; VA
Salt
 Lake
 City
 Health
 Care
 System.
 *Additional
 information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/publications.html. †A video of the model
simulations  is  available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/videos.html.
§Additional  information  available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/hai/prevent/tap.html.    Key
Points  FIGURE  1.  Comparison  between  the  projected  number  of  annual  health
care–associated  infections  from  selected  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria*  and  Clostridium
difficile  with  no  intervention  and  the  projected  number  with  an  aggressive  national
intervention — United States, 2014–2019† *Methicillin-resistant Staphlococcus aureus,
carbapenem-resistant
 Enterobacteriaceae,
 and
 multidrug-resistant
 Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.
 †Additional
 information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/publications.html.  Alternate  Text:  The
figure  above  is  a  line  graph  comparing  the  projected  number  of  annual  health
care-associated  infections  from  selected  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  and  Clostridium
difficile  with  no  intervention  and  the  projected  number  with  an  aggressive  national
intervention in the United States during 2014-2019. Additional information is available
at http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/publications.html.  FIGURE 2. Projected
regional  prevalence  of  carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacteriaceae  (CRE)  over  a  5-year
period under three different intervention scenarios — 10-facility model, United States*
*Additional
 information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/publications.html.  A  video  of  the  model
simulations  is  available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/videos.html.
Alternate  Text:  The  figure  above  is  a  line  graph  showing  the  projected  regional
prevalence  of  carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacteriaceae  in  the  United  States  over  a
5-year  period  under  three  different  intervention  scenarios,  using  a  10-facility  model.
Additional
 information
 is
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/publications.html.   FIGURE  3.  Projected
countywide  prevalence  of  carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacteriaceae  (CRE)  over  a
15-year  period  under  three  different  intervention  scenarios  —  102-facility  model,
Orange
 County,
 California*
 *Additional
 information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/publications.html.  Alternate  Text:  The
figure  above  is  a  line  graph  showing  the  projected  countywide  prevalence  of
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae in Orange County, California, over a 15-year
period  under  three  different  intervention  scenarios,  using  a  102-facility  model.
Additional
 information
 is
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/resources/publications.html. Use of trade names and
commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply  endorsement  by  the
U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6430a4.htm
