Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / March 11, 2016 / 65(9);235–241 On March 3, 2016,
this  report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Lindsey  M.  Weiner,  MPH1;
Scott  K.  Fridkin,  MD1;  Zuleika  Aponte-Torres,  MPH1;  Lacey  Avery,  MA1;  Nicole  Coffin,
MA1; Margaret A. Dudeck, MPH1; Jonathan R. Edwards, MStat1; John A. Jernigan, MD1;
Rebecca  Konnor,  MPH1;  Minn  M.  Soe,  MBBS,  MPH1;  Kelly  Peterson1;  L.  Clifford
McDonald, MD1 (View author affiliations) • Antibiotic-resistant (AR) bacteria can make
infections  impossible  to  treat,  especially  given  the  extensive  resistance  frequently
encountered  in  health  care  facilities.  Of  18  AR  bacteria  identified  by  CDC  as  public
health  threats,  six,  in  addition  to  Clostridium  difficile,  cause  health  care–associated
infections (HAIs). • Three common HAIs associated with catheters placed in a vein or
the bladder and procedures (operations) include: central-line associated blood stream
infections (CLABSIs), catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs), and surgical
site infections (SSIs). • Preventing these HAIs is an important strategy for reducing the
impact of AR bacteria on human health, including the prevention of sepsis and death.
Considerable  progress  has  been  made  for  some  but  not  all  HAIs.  Compared  with
baseline historic data from 5–8 years earlier, CLABSIs decreased by 50% and SSIs by
17%  in  2014.  Whereas  CAUTIs  appear  unchanged  from  baseline,  there  have  been
recent decreases. C. difficile infections in hospitals decreased 8% during 2011–2014. •
In 2014, the chance that an HAI was caused by one of the six AR threat bacteria was
one in seven in short-term acute care hospitals but higher in other health care settings
such as long-term acute care hospitals where it was one in four. • Physicians, nurses,
and health care leaders, working together with the help of CDC, other federal agencies,
and other partners, need to consistently combine strategies to prevent catheter- and
procedure-related HAIs, prevent the spread of AR bacteria, and improve antibiotic use,
thereby  preventing  further  patient  harm  caused  by  AR  HAIs.  •  Additional  information
available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns.  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF
downloads  Background:  Health  care–associated  antibiotic-resistant  (AR)  infections
increase patient morbidity and mortality and might be impossible to successfully treat
with  any  antibiotic.  CDC  assessed  health  care–associated  infections  (HAI),  including
Clostridium difficile infections (CDI), and the role of six AR bacteria of highest concern
nationwide  in  several  types  of  health  care  facilities.  Methods:  During  2014,
approximately  4,000  short-term  acute  care  hospitals,  501  long-term  acute  care
hospitals, and 1,135 inpatient rehabilitation facilities in all 50 states reported data on
specific  infections  to  the  National  Healthcare  Safety  Network.  National  standardized
infection ratios and their percentage reduction from a baseline year for each HAI type,
by facility type, were calculated. The proportions of AR pathogens and HAIs caused by
any  of  six  resistant  bacteria  highlighted  by  CDC  in  2013  as  urgent  or  serious  threats
were determined. Results: In 2014, the reductions in incidence in short-term acute care
hospitals and long-term acute care hospitals were 50% and 9%, respectively, for central
line-associated  bloodstream  infection;  0%  (short-term  acute  care  hospitals),  11%
(long-term  acute  care  hospitals),  and  14%  (inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities)  for
catheter-associated  urinary  tract  infection;  17%  (short-term  acute  care  hospitals)  for
surgical site infection, and 8% (short-term acute care hospitals) for CDI. Combining HAIs
other  than  CDI  across  all  settings,  47.9%  of  Staphylococcus  aureus  isolates  were
methicillin  resistant,  29.5%  of  enterococci  were  vancomycin-resistant,  17.8%  of
Enterobacteriaceae  were  extended-spectrum  beta-lactamase  phenotype,  3.6%  of
Enterobacteriaceae  were  carbapenem  resistant,  15.9%  of  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa
isolates were multidrug resistant, and 52.6% of Acinetobacter species were multidrug
resistant. The likelihood of HAIs caused by any of the six resistant bacteria ranged from
12%  in  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities  to  29%  in  long-term  acute  care  hospitals.
Conclusions: Although there has been considerable progress in preventing some HAIs,
many  remaining  infections  could  be  prevented  with  implementation  of  existing
recommended  practices.  Depending  upon  the  setting,  more  than  one  in  four  of  HAIs
excluding  CDI  are  caused  by  AR  bacteria.  Implications  for  Public  Health  Practice:
Physicians, nurses, and health care leaders need to consistently and comprehensively
follow all recommendations to prevent catheter- and procedure-related infections and
reduce the impact of AR bacteria through antimicrobial stewardship and measures to
prevent  spread.  Top  Antibiotic-resistant  (AR)  bacteria  are  a  worldwide  public  health
threat.  A  2013  CDC  report  outlined  the  top  18  urgent,  serious,  and  concerning  AR
threats in the United States (1). Among the 15 urgent and serious threats, seven are
bacteria  predominately  acquired  during  health  care.  Clostridium  difficile  is  included
among these; although C. difficile is not drug-resistant, the infections it causes and its
spread  are  exacerbated  by  inappropriate  antibiotic  use  and  inadequate  infection
control,  similar  to  the  six  other  AR  bacteria.  Preventing  health  care–associated
infections  (HAIs)  provides  immediate  benefit  in  reducing  the  impact  of  antibiotic
resistance on human health. When combined with antibiotic stewardship and steps to
prevent  transmission  as  outlined  in  the  National  Action  Plan  to  Combat  Antibiotic
Resistant Bacteria (2), preventing HAIs is critical to reducing the public health threat of
AR  bacteria.  More  than  half  of  hospitalized  patients  are  receiving  antibiotics  on  any
given  day  (3),  and  about  one  in  25  have  one  or  more  HAIs  (4).  During  2011  an
estimated 722,000 HAIs occurred in U.S acute care hospitals, and approximately 75,000
patients with HAIs died during hospitalization (4). More than half of these HAIs include
C. difficile infections (CDIs), urinary tract infections, bloodstream infections, or surgical
site infections (SSIs). The HAI National Action Plan (5) calls for CDC to monitor progress
toward established goals through the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN). This
report describes progress toward reducing HAIs in the United States and describes the
frequency of six AR bacteria of urgent or serious public health concern among reported
HAIs in 2014. Top HAI data on central line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSIs),
catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs), surgical site infections (SSIs), and
laboratory-identified CDI events for 2014 were reported to NHSN from hospitals in all 50
states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, using standard NHSN definitions (6–8).
Data  are  presented  separately  for  acute  care  hospitals  (including  critical  access
hospitals),  long-term  acute  care  hospitals,  and  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities,
because  reporting  timelines  and  type  of  HAIs  reported  varied  among  the  different
settings. Standardized infection ratios (SIRs), a statistic used to track HAIs over time,
were used to compare the observed number of infections reported during 2014 with the
predicted  number  of  infections,  based  on  national  aggregate  data  reported  during  a
historical baseline time period. SIRs for different infections were adjusted for key risk
factors  (9–11).  Baseline  time  periods  among  short-term  acute  care  hospitals  were
2006–2008  for  CLABSIs  and  SSIs,  2009  for  CAUTIs,  and  2010–2011  for  CDIs.  Among
long-term  acute  care  hospitals  and  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities  the  baseline  time
period was 2013 for both CLABSIs and CAUTIs. The SSI data include 10 procedures that
approximate  procedures  included  in  the  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services
Surgical  Care  Improvement  Project  and  were  performed  during  2014  (10).  Pathogen
and  susceptibility  data  are  provided  by  the  facility’s  designated  clinical  microbiology
laboratory.  No  more  than  three  pathogens  per  HAI  could  be  reported.  Susceptibility
results for each pathogen were reported as “susceptible,” “intermediate,” “resistant,”
or  “not  tested”  (12).  The  six  AR  phenotypes  included  the  urgent  threat  of
carbapenem-resistant
 Enterobacteriaceae,
 along
 with
 the
 serious
 threats
 of
methicillin-resistant
 Staphylococcus
 aureus,
 vancomycin-resistant
 enterococci,
extended-spectrum beta-lactamase phenotype Enterobacteriaceae, multidrug-resistant
(MDR) P. aeruginosa, and MDR Acinetobacter species. The criteria used to define each
phenotype approximated interim standard definitions for defining multidrug resistance
as  used  in  the  CDC  AR  Threat  Report  (1),  along  with  updated  criteria  for
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (13). A pooled mean percentage of resistant
pathogens, based on the sum of pathogens that tested resistant, divided by the sum of
pathogens  tested,  was  calculated  for  each  threat  pathogen  by  HAI  type  and  facility
type.  In  addition,  the  likelihood  that  an  HAI  was  associated  with  any  of  the  six
antibiotic-resistant  threat  pathogens  was  calculated  as  the  sum  of  HAIs  with  any
resistant phenotype divided by the sum of HAIs reported (regardless of whether another
pathogen or, in the case of SSI, no pathogen was reported). Top In 2014, approximately
4,000 acute care hospitals (3,655 reported CLABSI data, 3,791 reported data on CAUTI,
3,994 reported CDI, and 3,618 reported SSI), 501 long-term acute care hospitals, and
1,135  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities  contributed  data.  Within  acute  care  hospitals,
17,758  CLABSIs,  35,760  CAUTIs,  101,074  hospital-onset  CDIs,  and  15,927  SSIs  from
selected  procedures  were  reported.  The  corresponding  SIRs  (and  95%  confidence
intervals)  were  0.495  (0.488–0.502)  for  CLABSI,  1.00  (0.990–1.010)  for  CAUTI,  0.924
(0.918–0.929)  for  CDI,  and  0.827  (0.815–0.840)  for  SSI,  corresponding  to  percentage
decreases compared with the historical baseline assessment ranging from 0% (CAUTI)
to  50%  (CLABSI)  (Figure).  The  percentage  change  from  2013  to  2014  was  −8%  for
CLABSI,  −5%  CAUTI,  +4%  for  CDI,  and  +2%  for  SSI.  Among  long-term  acute  care
hospitals,  2,928  CLABSIs  and  4,467  CAUTIs  were  reported;  after  risk  adjustment,  the
SIRs  were  0.909  (0.876–0.942)  for  CLABSI  and  0.893  (0.867–0.920)  for  CAUTI,
corresponding to 9% and 11% decreases, respectively, compared with baseline. Within
inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities,  1,449  CAUTIs  were  reported,  for  an  SIR  of  0.856
(0.813–0.901) or a 14% reduction compared with baseline. Combining HAIs across all
settings,  47.9%  of  S.  aureus  infections  were  resistant  to  methicillin,  29.5%  of
enterococci  were  resistant  to  vancomycin,  17.8%  of  Enterobacteriaceae  were
extended-spectrum  beta-lactamase  phenotype,  3.6%  of  Enterobacteriaceae  were
carbapenem-resistant,  15.9%  of  P.  aeruginosa,  and  52.6%  of  Acinetobacter  species
were  MDR.  Notably,  the  percentage  resistance  varied  by  facility  type  and  was
consistently  higher  in  long-term  acute  care  hospitals  (Table).  During  2014,  the
likelihood  of  any  of  the  six  AR  threat  bacteria  varied  by  HAI  type  and  facility  type.
Overall, among short-term acute care hospitals, 14% of all HAIs were caused by one of
the  six  AR  threat  bacteria,  including  18%  of  CLABSIs  (3,348  of  18,373),  15%  of  SSIs
(2,583  of  17,512),  10%  of  CAUTIs  (3,601  of  34,621).  Among  long-term  acute  care
hospitals,  28%  of  CLABSIs  (808  of  2,873)  and  29%  of  CAUTIs  (1,251  of  4,293)  were
caused by one of these organisms, and among inpatient rehabilitation facilities, 12% of
CAUTIs (164 of 1,349) were caused by one of these six bacteria. Pooled over all facility
types,  14.9%  of  the  79,021  HAIs  reported  were  associated  with  one  of  the  AR  threat
pathogens. Top In the United States, approximately 2 million persons become ill every
year  with  AR  infections,  and  approximately  23,000  die.  This  report  is  the  first  to
combine national data on AR bacteria threats with progress on HAI prevention. In 2014,
the incidence of CLABSI in acute care hospitals reached the 2013 goal established by
the HAI Action Plan (5), decreasing 50% during 2008–2014. This is important given the
high morbidity, mortality, and excess costs associated with CLABSIs (14,15), which are
partially  related  to  the  frequency  with  which  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus
aureus,  vancomycin-resistant  enterococci,  and  extended-spectrum  beta-lactamase
phenotype  Enterobacteriaceae  cause  these  infections  (Table).  In  addition,  CAUTIs  in
acute  care  hospitals  decreased  overall  by  5%  during  2013–2014  and,  although  not
quantified  in  this  report,  declined  24%  in  non–intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  settings  since
baseline.* In long-term acute care hospitals, both CLABSIs and CAUTIs have decreased
as  have  CAUTIs  in  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities.  The  importance  of  preventing
CAUTIs in all settings is highlighted by the frequency with which vancomycin-resistant
enterococci,  extended-spectrum  beta-lactamase  phenotype  Enterobacteriaceae,  and
(especially
 in
 long-term
 acute
 care
 hospitals)
 carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae,  cause  these  infections  (Table).  Collaboration  across  the  U.S.
Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS),  including  CDC,  the  Office  of  the
Assistant Secretary of Health, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and the
Agency for Health Research and Quality has been important in achieving this success.
For  example,  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  reporting  and  payment
incentives  have  led  to  greater  transparency  and  accountability,  and  their  Hospital
Engagement and Quality Innovation Networks have promoted best practices. C. difficile
has  been  recently  recognized  as  the  most  common  HAI  pathogen  in  acute  care
hospitals  (4).  In  2011,  it  caused  an  overall  total  of  453,000  infections,  and  29,000
patients died within 30 days of diagnosis (16); 94% of all CDIs are related to various
precedent or concurrent health care exposures (17). The CDI SIR in acute care hospitals
decreased  only  8%  overall  during  2011–2014,  and  more  concerning,  increased  4%
during 2013–2014. More work is needed to ensure that patients are safe from C. difficile
and AR bacteria. Controlling AR threats is linked to preventing the occurrence of HAIs,
reducing selective pressure by improving overall antibiotic stewardship, and preventing
the  spread  of  AR  bacteria  within  and  between  facilities.  Preventing  catheter-  and
procedure-related  infections  can  be  accomplished  by  always  following  recommended
indications  and  guidelines  for  insertion,  maintenance,  and  removal  of  vascular  and
bladder  catheters.  CDC  and  its  partners  are  implementing  new  HHS-proposed  HAI
targets for December 2020, using 2015 NHSN data as its new baseline. A key strategy
for reaching these goals is the Targeted Assessment for Prevention strategy to identify
gaps  in  infection  control  in  facilities  with  a  disproportionate  number  of  HAIs  (18).  In
addition  to  reducing  the  need  for  antibiotics  used  in  treatment,  preventing  HAIs
prevents  complications  of  infection,  including  sepsis,  a  major  cause  of  death  In
conjunction  with  HAI  prevention  is  implementation  of  hospital  antibiotic  stewardship
programs  (19).  This  is  accomplished  by  always  obtaining  cultures  when  starting
necessary antibiotics and, especially in septic patients, doing so promptly, using culture
results to reassess the continued need for antibiotics, discontinuing antibiotics that are
no longer needed or to which AR has developed, and using the appropriate drug at the
proper dose and administration frequency. Antibiotic exposure is well recognized as the
most important modifiable risk factor for CDI, and antibiotic stewardship is potentially
the most effective CDI prevention strategy (17,19). The emergence and spread of the
hypervirulent,  fluoroquinolone-resistant,  ribotype  027  strain  of  C.  difficile  in  North
America and Europe was facilitated by increased use of fluoroquinolones (20). Reducing
unnecessary use of this antibiotic class has been instrumental in facilities where control
of this strain has been achieved (21,22). What is less widely recognized is the role that
disruption of the human microbiome has on increasing patients’ risk for acquiring AR
strains  of  other  HAI  pathogens  (23)  and,  once  colonized,  developing  infection  (24).
Genes  that  confer  resistance  can  be  carried  on  the  same  plasmid  or  chromosome  as
genes that increase bacterial virulence, leading to the emergence of highly adapted AR
HAI  pathogens  (25).  CDC  summarizes  core  elements  of  successful  stewardship
programs,  which  can  help  assure  the  prompt  initiation  of  necessary  antibiotics  and
reduce unnecessary antibiotic use, thereby reducing the risk of CDI and AR infections,
improving  individual  patient  outcomes,  and  saving  health  care  dollars  (19).  In
conjunction  with  HAI  prevention  and  antibiotic  stewardship,  the  third  necessary
strategy  is  the  prevention  of  cross  transmission.  To  achieve  this,  physicians,  nurses,
and  health  care  leaders  need  to  improve  hand  hygiene,  room  cleaning,  and  use  of
personal protective equipment, and be aware of HAI outbreaks caused by AR bacteria in
their hospital or region. In the case of C. difficile, which is unique among the AR threat
bacteria  in  forming  spores,  special  environmental  measures  might  also  be  needed  to
prevent transmission (17). Because AR strains might be more virulent than other strains
and  thereby  more  likely  to  colonize  and  infect  patients  already  receiving  antibiotics,
interrupting  transmission  of  these  strains  reduces  both  the  number  of  HAIs  and  the
likelihood  that  an  HAI  is  caused  by  an  AR  threat.  To  assist  clinicians,  health  care
leaders,  and  state  and  local  public  health  authorities  to  learn  when  well-adapted
resistant strains are emerging and spreading in a region, CDC is working with partners
to  build  networks  to  better  detect  and  respond  to  AR  threats  and  to  make  antibiotic
resistance data from health care facilities more readily accessible through a new HAI
Antibiotic Resistance Patient Safety Atlas.† Over one of every four HAIs reported from
long-term  acute  care  hospitals  were  caused  by  AR  bacteria.  Moreover,  limited  data
suggest  CDI  incidence  in  long-term  acute  care  hospitals  might  be  several  fold  higher
than  in  short-term  acute  care  hospitals  (26,27).  One  contributing  factor  is  patient
transfer from intensive care units of acute care hospitals where their microbiomes have
been disrupted by exposure to antibiotics and where they have been colonized with AR
threat bacteria (28). Long-term acute care hospitals are facilities that can transmit or
amplify antibiotic resistance within a community of interconnected health care facilities
(29).  It  is  critical  for  interconnected  health  care  facilities  to  work  together  for  early
detection and response to emerging AR threats; coordinated prevention initiatives have
the  biggest  impact  on  a  community  or  region  overall  (30).  Through  sharing  of
information, practical expertise, and regional leadership, coordinated activity can have
a  larger  impact  on  preventing  transmission  and  infections  with  antibiotic-resistant
bacteria than hospitals working alone. The findings in this report are subject to at least
two  limitations.  First,  infections  included  in  SIR  calculations  were  a  subset  of  all  the
infections evaluated for AR. The latter included infection events reported from any type
of SSI, and infections occurring in locations regardless of eligibility to calculate a SIR.
Second,  the  reported  resistance  relied  on  the  manual  reporting  of  the  facility  staff,
based on reports provided by the clinical laboratory, and might contain inaccurate test
results, data entry errors, and some incomplete information. Despite these limitations,
these data provide important information on the status of HAI infection prevention in
the United States in 2014 and the persistent challenge of preventing the spread of AR
bacteria in a variety of inpatient health care settings. Preventing HAIs and the spread of
antibiotic  resistance  is  possible  if  physicians,  nurses,  and  health  care  leaders
consistently  and  comprehensively  follow  all  recommendations  to  prevent  HAIs,
including  prevention  of  catheter-  and  procedure-related  infections,  antimicrobial
stewardship,  and  implementation  of  measures  to  prevent  spread.  Top  Corresponding
author: L. Clifford McDonald, ljm3@cdc.gov, 404-639-3833. Top 1Division of Healthcare
Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC.
Top
 Top
 *
 http://www.cdc.gov/hai/progress-report/index.html.
 
 †
http://www.cdc.gov/hai/surveillance/ar-patient-safety-atlas.html.  Top  *  First  year  with
calculated SIR value, 1.00. Baseline periods were 2006–2008 for CLABSI and SSI, 2009
for  CAUTI,  and  2010–2011  for  CDI.  Data  were  calculated  using  the  latest  year  of  the
baseline period. † SSI data are inclusive of the 10 selected procedures that approximate
the procedures included in the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Surgical Care
Improvement Project and were performed during 2014. § Device-associated infections
include
 both
 intensive
 care
 unit
 (ICU)
 and
 non-ICU
 locations.
http://www.cdc.gov/hai/surveillance/nhsn_nationalreports.html.
 Top
 Abbreviations:
%R  =  %  resistant  to  antibiotics;  CAUTI  =  catheter-associated  urinary  tract  infection;
CLABSI  =  central  line-associated  bloodstream  infection;  ESBL  =  extended-spectrum
beta-lactamase;  SSI  =  surgical  site  infection.  *Empty  cells  indicate  no  reporting
occurred  for  that  HAI  type.  †Insufficient  data;  fewer  than  20  isolates  tested  for
resistance. Top Suggested citation for this article: Weiner LM, Fridkin SK, Aponte-Torres
Z,  et  al.   Vital  Signs:  Preventing  Antibiotic-Resistant  Infections  in  Hospitals  —  United
States,
 2014.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2016;65:235–241.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6509e1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6509e1.htm
