Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / March 8, 2019 / 68(9);220–224 On March 5, 2019,
this report was posted online as an MMWR Early Release. Makoto Jones, MD1,2; John A.
Jernigan, MD3; Martin E. Evans, MD4; Gary A. Roselle, MD5; Kelly M. Hatfield, MSPH3;
Matthew H. Samore, MD1,2 (View author affiliations) What is already known about this
topic? Staphylococcus aureus is an important cause of health care–associated infections
and  accounts  for  significant  morbidity  and  mortality.  What  is  added  by  this  report?
During  2005–2017,  U.S.  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  medical  centers  across  the
United States experienced a sharp decline in S. aureus infections following introduction
of  a  multifaceted  infection  control  intervention.  Most  reductions  were  explained  by
decreases in methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). Decreased MRSA transmission likely
played a substantial role. What are the implications for public health practice? These
findings  offer  important  insights  informing  S.  aureus  prevention  strategy.  Effective
prevention  strategies  require  a  multifaceted  approach,  including  efforts  to  prevent
transmission of MRSA as well as efforts directed at infection prevention. Views equals
page views plus PDF downloads Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3   Introduction: By 2007, all
Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  medical  centers  (VAMCs)  had  initiated  a  multifaceted
methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)  prevention  program.  MRSA  and
methicillin-susceptible  S.  aureus  (MSSA)  infection  rates  among  VAMC  inpatients  from
2005  to  2017  were  assessed.  Methods:  Clinical  microbiology  data  from  any  patient
admitted  to  an  acute-care  VAMC  in  the  United  States  from  2005  through  2017  and
trends  in  hospital-acquired  MRSA  colonization  were  examined.  Results:  S.  aureus
infections decreased by 43% overall during the study period (p<0.001), driven primarily
by decreases in MRSA, which decreased by 55% (p<0.001), whereas MSSA decreased
by  12%  (p  =  0.003).  Hospital-onset  MRSA  and  MSSA  infections  decreased  by  66%
(p<0.001)  and  19%  (p  =  0.02),  respectively.  Community-onset  MRSA  infections
decreased by 41% (p<0.001), whereas MSSA infections showed no significant decline.
Acquisition  of  MRSA  colonization  decreased  78%  during  2008–2017  (17%  annually,
p<0.001).  MRSA  infection  rates  declined  more  sharply  among  patients  who  had
negative admission surveillance MRSA screening tests (annual 9.7% decline) compared
with  those  among  patients  with  positive  admission  MRSA  screening  tests  (4.2%)
(p<0.05). Conclusions and Implications for Public Health Practice: Significant reductions
in S. aureus infection following the VAMC intervention were led primarily by decreases
in  MRSA.  Moreover,  MRSA  infection  declines  were  much  larger  among  patients  not
carrying MRSA at the time of admission than among those who were. Taken together,
these  results  suggest  that  decreased  MRSA  transmission  played  a  substantial  role  in
reducing  overall  S.  aureus  infections  at  VAMCs.  Recent  calls  to  withdraw  infection
control interventions designed to prevent MRSA transmission might be premature and
inadvisable, at least until more is known about effective control of bacterial pathogen
transmission in health care settings. Effective S. aureus prevention strategies require a
multifaceted  approach  that  includes  adherence  to  current  CDC  recommendations  for
preventing not only device- and procedure-associated infections, but also transmission
of  health  care–prevalent  strains.  Top  Staphylococcus  aureus  is  among  the  most
common  causes  of  health  care–associated  infections  and  accounts  for  significant
morbidity  and  mortality.  Beginning  in  2005,  in  response  to  high  rates  of
methicillin-resistant  S.  aureus  (MRSA)  infections,  the  U.S.  Department  of  Veterans
Affairs (VA) piloted an MRSA prevention program in 18 VA medical centers (VAMCs). By
October 2007, all 153 VAMCs had implemented the MRSA prevention program, which
included, among other components, admission screening for nasal MRSA carriage and
using contact precautions (i.e., wearing a gown and gloves for all interactions involving
contact with the patient or the patient’s environment) for patients found to be carriers
(1). To assess the impact of the intervention, the investigators tracked the incidence of
MRSA and methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) infections at 130 VAMCs from 2005
to 2017 and examined hospital-acquired MRSA colonization based on results of MRSA
surveillance tests collected during the same period. Top Clinical data from any patient
admitted to VAMCs in the United States from January 1, 2005 through December 31,
2017  were  analyzed.  Facilities  were  excluded  from  the  study  if  they  did  not  provide
acute care or if they did not report data to VA’s periodic complexity assessment (e.g.,
the  level  and  type  of  care  provided)  (2)  in  all  eligible  years  during  the  study  period.
Clinical  diagnostic  culture  and  MRSA  surveillance  test  results  were  extracted  from
electronic  health  records  as  described  elsewhere  (3).  Bloodstream  infections  were
defined as isolation of S. aureus from blood samples. Nonblood infections were defined
as  isolation  of  S.  aureus  from  any  other  sample  type,  excluding  those  obtained  for
surveillance  purposes  and  those  obtained  within  14  days  of  a  positive  blood  culture.
MRSA  isolates  from  samples  collected  from  the  same  patient  within  365  days  were
considered  duplicates  and  excluded;  MSSA  duplicates  were  defined  in  the  same
manner. Infections were classified as hospital-onset when the specimen was obtained
>3 days after admission, and as community-onset when the specimen was obtained ≤3
days
 after
 admission.
 Community-onset
 infection
 rates
 and
 total
 (combined
community-onset  and  hospital-onset)  infection  rates  were  calculated  per  admission.
Hospital-onset infection rates were expressed per 1,000 patient-days-at-risk, excluding
days after the patient had met one of the infection definitions. MRSA colonization status
at  admission  was  considered  positive  if  the  last  test  within  24  hours  after  admission
was positive. Patients were considered to have acquired MRSA if they had at least one
MRSA-positive test (clinical or surveillance) after a negative admission surveillance test.
Fluoroquinolone use was measured and defined according to National Healthcare Safety
Network methods to assess for potential changes in antimicrobial pressure exerted on
S.  aureus  (4).  To  model  rates,  trend  analyses  were  performed  with  generalized
estimating  equation  models  clustering  by  VAMC  and  using  a  negative  binomial
distribution,  patient  days  at  risk  as  the  exposure,  an  autoregressive  correlation
structure,  and  robust  error  estimation.  Models  were  adjusted  for  major  hospital
characteristics, including Medicare Relative Risk score, patient volume, resident slots,
intensive  care  unit  level,  and  number  of  advanced  specialty  clinical  programs  (2).
Proportions  were  modeled  similarly  but  with  a  binomial  distribution.  All  percentage
changes are based on modeled rates. Statistical analyses were performed using Stata
statistical  software  (release  15;  StataCorp,  LLC).  This  study  was  performed  with
approval from the University of Utah Institutional Review Board and the VA Salt Lake
City Health Care System Research and Development Office. Top The analysis included
130  VA  hospitals.  The  overall  rate  of  S.  aureus  infections  decreased  by  43%  during
2005–2017 (4.7% annually, p<0.001) (Table). The reductions were driven primarily by
decreases in MRSA infections, which declined by 55% (7.3% annual rate of decrease,
p<0.001); MSSA infection rates decreased much more slowly, by 12% (1.2% annually, p
= 0.003) (Figure 1). Hospital-onset MRSA infections decreased by 66% (p<0.001), and
hospital-onset  MSSA  infections  decreased  19%  (p  =  0.02);  similar  reductions  were
observed  in  both  bloodstream  and  nonbloodstream  infections  (Figure  2).  Among
community-onset infections, overall MRSA infection rates decreased by 41% (p<0.001),
and community-onset MSSA infection rates declined by 0.4% (p = 0.93) (Table) (Figure
3).  The  decreases  in  community-onset  MRSA  bloodstream  and  nonbloodstream
infections  were  greatest  among  infections  occurring  within  30  days  of  hospital
discharge (Table). Decreases in community-onset infections played a substantial role in
overall S. aureus trends: reduction in community-onset MRSA infections accounted for
48%  of  the  overall  MRSA  rate  decreases,  and  40%  of  decreases  in  overall  S.  aureus
infection rates. The rate of hospital-acquired MRSA colonization decreased 78% during
the study period 6.8 per 1,000 patient-days at risk (2008) to 1.5 per 1,000 patient-days
at  risk  (2017)  (16.7%  annually,  p<0.001).  When  hospital-onset  MRSA  infection  rates
were  stratified  according  to  results  of  admission  nasal  surveillance  tests,  MRSA
infection rates among patients whose admission screening tests were negative declined
by  58%  (9.7%  annually,  p<0.001).  In  contrast,  the  reduction  among  patients  with
positive  admission  screening  tests  was  significantly  less;  MRSA  infections  decreased
31%  (4.2%  annually,  p<0.001)  (p<0.05  compared  with  patients  with  a  negative
admission  test).  Fluoroquinolone  use  did  not  change  significantly  between  2005  and
2008,  but  between  2009  and  2017,  fluoroquinolone  use  rates  decreased  by  44%
(annual decrease = 4.8% p<0.001). Top During 2005–2017, following introduction of a
system-wide,  multifaceted  infection  control  intervention  that  included  admission
screening for nasal MRSA carriage and use of contact precautions for MRSA-colonized
patients,  VAMCs  across  the  United  States  experienced  a  sharp  decline  in  S.  aureus
infections  among  hospitalized  patients.  Most  of  the  reductions  were  explained  by
decreases in MRSA; reductions in MSSA rates were more modest. Although the precise
relationship  between  the  observed  trends  and  infection  control  interventions  are
difficult  to  demonstrate  and  likely  complex,  a  careful  examination  of  the  potential
mechanisms that could explain discordant MRSA and MSSA trends provides important
insights  for  S.  aureus  prevention  strategies.  One  potential  explanation  for  the
discordant MSSA and MRSA trends is that the observed trends represent an artifact of
differential detection bias, by which MRSA-infected patients would be progressively less
likely than would MSSA-infected patients to have cultures obtained over the course of
the study period. There is no obvious reason that likelihood of obtaining a diagnostic
culture  in  patients  with  suspected  infection  would  differ  according  to  a  provider’s
clinical suspicion of MSSA versus MRSA, and there was no change in rate of diagnostic
cultures  obtained  over  the  study  period,  nor  was  there  any  difference  in  diagnostic
culture rate based on admission MRSA carriage status. A second potential explanation
is that shifts in S. aureus epidemiology might have influenced the observed trends. It
has been suggested that downward temporal trends in community-associated infections
caused by community-associated MRSA strains (e.g., USA300) might explain decreases
in  health  care–associated  MRSA.  (5).  Although  strain  data  were  not  available  for  this
analysis, data describing the national MRSA experience do not support this hypothesis.
Population-based surveillance data from CDC’s Emerging Infections Program show that
although  rates  of  health  care–associated  MRSA  infection  rates  have  been  declining,
community-associated  MRSA  rates  have  remained  unchanged  since  2005  (6).  In
addition,  almost  all  MRSA  reductions  resulted  from  decreases  in  USA100,  a  strain
associated  with  health  care  system  transmission  (7).  Conversely,  only  modest
reductions were observed in USA300, a strain associated with community transmission.
In  the  absence  of  replacement  by  other  strains,  this  suggests  that  successful
interruption of MRSA transmission in health care settings is an important contributor to
national  trends.  Infection  control  interventions  might  produce  differential  trends  in
MRSA  and  MSSA  infection  rates.  Two  broad  approaches  to  preventing  health
care–associated  infection  include  reducing  the  likelihood  of  invasive  disease  given
colonization  or  exposure  and  decreasing  transmission  of  pathogens  (preventing
infection  by  avoiding  colonization  or  exposure  in  the  first  place).  The  VA  system
adopted  both  of  these  strategies.  Similar  to  programs  elsewhere,  the  VA  system
implemented bundled interventions designed to prevent device- and procedure-related
infections  (e.g.,  central  line–associated  bloodstream  and  surgical  site  infections).
However,  if  such  interventions  were  primarily  responsible  for  the  observed  S.  aureus
trends,  MSSA  and  MRSA  rates  would  have  been  expected  to  have  been  affected
approximately equally. Other evidence also suggests decreased MRSA transmission as
the primary mechanism for S. aureus reductions in VA hospitals. First, the discordance
between MRSA and MSSA trends is consistent with mathematical modeling studies of
health  care  transmission.  Models  predict  that  a  decrease  in  overall  transmission  of
bacterial  pathogens  in  health  care  settings  will  result  in  disproportionately  greater
impact on strains having characteristics that provide a selective advantage for health
care  transmission,  such  as  resistance  to  multiple  antibiotics,  including  MRSA  (8,9).
Thus,  the  VA  trends  are  consistent  with  decreased  S.  aureus  transmission  as  the
causative  mechanism,  regardless  of  whether  improvements  in  infection  control
practices  specifically  targeted  MRSA.  Second,  the  rate  of  MRSA  acquisition,  a  direct
measure  of  MRSA  transmission,  decreased  markedly  during  the  course  of  the  study.
Third,  reductions  in  hospital-onset  MRSA  infection  were  significantly  greater  among
patients  who  were  not  carrying  MRSA  at  the  time  of  admission,  suggesting  that
practices  preventing  acquisition  of  MRSA  colonization  had  a  greater  impact  than
practices preventing progressing to infection among colonized patients. These findings
are  not  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  that  device-  and  procedure-associated
prevention  bundles,  which  are  designed  to  prevent  progression  from  colonization  to
infection,  were  primary  drivers  of  S.  aureus  reduction  in  VA  hospitals.  Finally,  the
striking  reductions  in  MRSA  infection  rates  in  the  early  postdischarge  period  are
consistent with decreased acquisition during inpatient stays. The mechanisms by which
transmission  was  prevented  are  difficult  to  determine  with  precision,  in  part  because
multiple  interventions  were  occurring  simultaneously.  It  is  highly  plausible  that  the
aggressive and targeted approach to preventing MRSA transmission (i.e., screening for
MRSA carriage and implementation of contact precautions for all carriers) contributed
to the pronounced decrease in MRSA infections. However, the discordant MRSA/MSSA
trends might also be explained by infection control practices that prevent transmission
of all bacterial pathogens, but do not specifically target MRSA, such as hand hygiene. A
sustained decline in gram-negative rod bloodstream infections in the VA system after
implementation of the MRSA prevention program was also observed (10). However, it is
likely  that  contact  precautions  for  MRSA-colonized  patients  contributed  to  this  trend:
another VA study showed that 31% of patients with multidrug-resistant gram-negative
bacteria would have been under contact precautions because of a positive MRSA screen
(11). Changes in antibiotic use could have contributed as well. There is evidence that
fluoroquinolone  use  is  associated  with  increased  MRSA  colonization  (12),  and  the
reduction  in  fluoroquinolone  use  could  contribute  to  selective  reduction  in  MRSA
because  it  is  more  commonly  fluoroquinolone-resistant  than  is  MSSA.  The  VA  did
observe  a  substantial  reduction  in  fluoroquinolone  use,  but  the  fluoroquinolone
reductions  did  not  begin  until  2009,  after  substantial  MRSA  reductions  had  already
occurred.  The  findings  in  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  five  limitations.  First,  the
patient  population  in  VAMCs  is  predominately  male,  although  it  is  not  clear  that  this
characteristic would affect these findings. Second, the models used in this analysis did
not include data regarding adherence to infection control practices; including such data
might have provided additional insight into which components of the intervention might
have  had  the  most  impact.  Third,  information  about  MSSA  colonization  was  lacking,
making it difficult to characterize MSSA transmission dynamics. Fourth, no information
on MRSA or MSSA strain characteristics was available. Finally, simple exponential trends
improve interpretability but might not always closely reflect trends in complex systems.
The significant reduction in S. aureus infection observed across VAMCs, driven primarily
by a decrease in MRSA infection rates, offers important insights that can inform national
S.  aureus  prevention  strategy.  Although  the  causal  relationship  between  specific
components of the VA-wide infection control intervention and the reduction in infection
rates  is  difficult  to  determine  with  precision,  it  seems  likely  that  decreased  MRSA
transmission played a substantial role. These data suggest that recent calls to withdraw
infection control interventions (5) designed to prevent MRSA transmission, such as use
of  contact  precautions,  might  be  premature  and  inadvisable,  at  least  until  more  is
known  about  effective  control  of  bacterial  pathogen  transmission  in  health  care
settings.  Adherence  to  CDC  recommendations  (13)  for  antimicrobial  stewardship,
preventing device- and procedure-associated infections and interrupting transmission of
health care–prevalent strains (e.g., use of contact precautions for MRSA) continue to be
a  mainstay  of  S.  aureus  prevention.  Top  Tina  Willson,  McKenna  Nevers.  Top
Corresponding  author:  John  A.  Jernigan,  jqj9@cdc.gov,  404-639-4245.  Top  1Veterans
Affairs  Salt  Lake  City  Healthcare  System,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah;  2Division  of
Epidemiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah; 3Division of Healthcare Quality
Promotion,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;
4MRSA/MDRO  Prevention  Office,  National  Infectious  Diseases  Service,  Patient  Care
Services,  Veterans  Health  Administration,  Washington,  D.C.,  5National  Infectious
Diseases  Service,  Patient  Care  Services,  Veterans  Health  Administration,  Washington,
D.C.  Top  Top  Abbreviations:  MRSA  =  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus;
MSSA = methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus.
*  Based  on  multivariate  analysis.  Top  Abbreviations:  MRSA  =  methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus  aureus;  MSSA  =  methicillin-susceptible  Staphylococcus  aureus.  *
Unadjusted.  Top  Abbreviations:  MRSA  =  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus;
MSSA
 =
 methicillin-susceptible
 Staphylococcus
 aureus.
 *
 Unadjusted.
 Top
Abbreviations:
 MRSA
 =
 methicillin-resistant
 Staphylococcus
 aureus;
 MSSA
 =
methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. * Unadjusted. Top Suggested citation for
this article: Jones M, Jernigan JA, Evans ME, Roselle GA, Hatfield KM, Samore MH. Vital
Signs: Trends in Staphylococcus aureus Infections in Veterans Affairs Medical Centers —
United  States,  2005–2017.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  2019;68:220–224.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6809e2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6809e2.htm
