  On March 4, 2014, this report was posted as an MMWR Early Release on the MMWR
website  (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).  Scott  Fridkin,  MD1,  James  Baggs,  PhD1,  Ryan
Fagan, MD1, Shelley Magill, MD, PhD1, Lori A. Pollack, MD1, Paul Malpiedi, MPH1, Rachel
Slayton,  PhD1,  Karim  Khader,  PhD2  Michael  A.  Rubin,  MD,  PhD2,  Makoto  Jones,  MD1,
Matthew  H.  Samore,  MD2,  Ghinwa  Dumyati,  MD3,  Elizabeth  Dodds-Ashley,  PharmD3,
James  Meek,  MPH4,  Kimberly  Yousey-Hindes,  MPH4,  John  Jernigan,  MD1,  Nadine
Shehab,  PharmD1,  Rosa  Herrera1,  L.  Clifford  McDonald,  MD1,  Amy  Schneider,  MPH1,
Arjun  Srinivasan,  MD1  (Author  affiliations  at  end  of  text)  Background:  Antibiotics  are
essential to effectively treat many hospitalized patients. However, when antibiotics are
prescribed incorrectly, they offer little benefit to patients and potentially expose them
to  risks  for  complications,  including  Clostridium  difficile  infection  (CDI)  and
antibiotic-resistant  infections.  Information  is  needed  on  the  frequency  of  incorrect
prescribing in hospitals and how improved prescribing will benefit patients.  Methods: A
national  administrative  database  (MarketScan  Hospital  Drug  Database)  and  CDC's
Emerging  Infections  Program  (EIP)  data  were  analyzed  to  assess  the  potential  for
improvement  of  inpatient  antibiotic  prescribing.  Variability  in  days  of  therapy  for
selected  antibiotics  reported  to  the  National  Healthcare  Safety  Network  (NHSN)
antimicrobial  use  option  was  computed.  The  impact  of  reducing  inpatient  antibiotic
exposure on incidence of CDI was modeled using data from two U.S. hospitals.  Results:
In  2010,  55.7%  of  patients  discharged  from  323  hospitals  received  antibiotics  during
their  hospitalization.  EIP  reviewed  patients'  records  from  183  hospitals  to  describe
inpatient antibiotic use; antibiotic prescribing potentially could be improved in 37.2% of
the most common prescription scenarios reviewed. There were threefold differences in
usage rates among 26 medical/surgical wards reporting to NHSN. Models estimate that
the  total  direct  and  indirect  effects  from  a  30%  reduction  in  use  of  broad-spectrum
antibiotics will result in a 26% reduction in CDI.  Conclusions: Antibiotic prescribing for
inpatients is common, and there is ample opportunity to improve use and patient safety
by  reducing  incorrect  antibiotic  prescribing.  Implications  for  Public  Health:  Hospital
administrators  and  health-care  providers  can  reduce  potential  harm  and  risk  for
antibiotic resistance by implementing formal programs to improve antibiotic prescribing
in hospitals. Introduction Antibiotics offer tremendous benefit to patients with infectious
diseases  and  are  commonly  administered  to  patients  cared  for  in  U.S.  hospitals.
However,  studies  have  demonstrated  that  treatment  indication,  choice  of  agent,  or
duration of therapy can be incorrect in up to 50% of the instances in which antibiotics
are prescribed (1). One study reported that 30% of antibiotics received by hospitalized
adult  patients,  outside  of  critical  care,  were  unnecessary;  antibiotics  often  were  used
for longer than recommended durations or for treatment of colonizing or contaminating
microorganisms (2).  Incorrect prescribing of antibiotics exposes individual patients to
potential complications of antibiotic therapy, without any therapeutic benefit. One such
complication is infection with Clostridium difficile, an anaerobic, spore-forming bacillus
that causes pseudomembranous colitis, manifesting as diarrhea that often recurs and
can progress to sepsis and death; CDC has estimated that there are about 250,000 C.
difficile  infections  (CDI)  in  hospitalized  patients  each  year  (3).  Other  complications
related  to  unnecessary  use  of  antibiotics  include  infection  with  antibiotic-resistant
bacteria (4) and complications from adverse events (5).  Evidence is accumulating that
interventions to optimize inpatient antibiotic prescribing can improve patient outcomes
(6).  To  assist  health-care  providers  to  reduce  incorrect  inpatient  prescribing,
information is needed regarding how frequently incorrect prescribing occurs in hospitals
and how improving prescribing will benefit patients. In this report, current assessments
of the scope of inpatient antibiotic prescribing, the potential for optimizing prescribing,
and  the  potential  benefits  to  patients  are  described.  Methods  The  objectives  of  this
evaluation were to 1) describe the extent and rationale for antibiotic prescribing in U.S.
acute care hospitals, 2) present data illustrating the potential for improving prescribing
in  selected  clinical  scenarios,  and  3)  estimate  the  potential  reductions  in  CDI  among
patients when antibiotic use is improved. For this report, antibiotics include parenteral,
enteral,  and  inhaled  antibacterial  agents.  The  first  objective  was  accomplished  using
proprietary  administrative  data  from  the  Truven  Health  MarketScan  Hospital  Drug
Database  (HDD)  and  data  from  CDC's  Emerging  Infections  Program  (EIP).  EIP  is  a
network  of  state  health  departments,  academic  institutions,  and  local  collaborators
funded by CDC to assess the effect of emerging infections and evaluate methods for
their  prevention  and  control.*  Antibiotic  prescribing  data  and  patient  demographics
were obtained from HDD, which contains individual billing records for all patients from a
large sample of U.S. hospitals.† Antibiotic agents and doses provided were identified for
all patients discharged during 2010. Age group-specific proportions of hospitalizations
during which antibiotics were prescribed were calculated by antibiotic group. In 2011,
EIP performed an antibiotic use prevalence survey in acute care hospitals within the 10
EIP  sites.  Each  hospital  selected  a  single  day  on  which  to  conduct  the  survey  on  a
random  sample  of  inpatients.  EIP  data  collectors  gathered  information  on  antibiotics
given  to  patients  and  determined  the  rationale  for  antibiotic  use.   For  the  second
objective,  additional  data  from  the  EIP  were  used  to  determine  the  frequency  of
opportunities  to  improve  prescribing  for  selected  urinary  tract  infections  (UTIs)  and
prescribing  of  intravenous  vancomycin.  In  addition,  data  reported  during  October
2012–June2013  to  the  National  Healthcare  Safety  Network  (NHSN)  Antimicrobial  Use
Option  were  analyzed;  key  percentile  distributions  of  usage  rates  and  differences  in
usage (between usage at 90th percentile and at 10th percentile) were calculated. This
difference should be small when comparing usage rates among patient care locations
caring  for  similar  types  of  patients.  The  third  objective  was  accomplished  through
development  of  a  dynamic  model  that  was  used  to  interpret  the  findings  of  an
observational study and predict changes in CDI with changes in antibiotic use. First, a
retrospective  cohort  study  was  conducted  to  quantify  the  relative  risk  for  CDI  using
hospital discharge data and pharmacy data from two large academic centers, in New
York and Connecticut, linked to active population-based CDI surveillance data from the
EIP (6). The primary outcome was hospital-associated CDI (CDI >2 days after hospital
admission and ≤180 days after discharge). Primary exposure of interest was receipt of
inpatient  broad-spectrum  antibiotics  (i.e.,  3rd  and  4th  generation  cephalosporins,
beta-lactam/beta-lactamase  inhibitor  combinations,  and  fluoroquinolones)  during
hospitalization. A multivariate logistic model was used to estimate an adjusted risk ratio
controlling for age, sex, Gagne comorbidity score (7), hospital, and hospital CDI rates. A
stochastic,  compartmental  model  of  hospital  CDI  that  represented  distinct  states  of
infection  (uncolonized,  colonized,  and  symptomatic)  was  constructed.  Antibiotic  use
was classified with respect to type (high- and low-risk) and where the patient was in the
treatment pathway (untreated, treated, and post-treatment). The model was calibrated
based on the results of the epidemiologic analyses described in this report and drew
other  parameter  estimates  from  stochastic  distributions  based  on  a  previously
published agent-based model (8).§  Results In 2010, based on data obtained from all
323 hospitals by MarketScan HDD, 55.7% of patients received an antibiotic during their
hospitalization,  and  29.8%  received  at  least  1  dose  of  broad-spectrum  antibiotics
(Figure 1). The EIP evaluated 11,282 patients in 183 hospitals in 2011, of whom 4,189
(37.1%) had received one or more antibiotics to treat active infections; half (49.9%) of
all  treatment  antibiotics  were  prescribed  for  treatment  in  one  or  more  of  three
scenarios:  lower  respiratory  infections,  UTIs,  or  presumed  resistant  Gram-positive
infections  (Table  1).  Prescribing  scenarios  at  a  convenience  sample  of  36  hospitals
across  eight  EIP  sites  were  reviewed.  Reviews  of  296  instances  of  treatment  in  two
specific  scenarios  (UTIs  in  patients  without  indwelling  catheters,  and  treatment  with
intravenous  vancomycin)  identified  that  antibiotic  use  could  potentially  have  been
improved  in  37.2%  (39.6%  of  111  UTI  patients,  35.7%  of  185  vancomycin  patients);
improvement opportunities mostly involved better use of diagnostic testing (Table 2).
NHSN began receiving antibiotic use data in 2012. Among the 19 hospitals reporting to
the NHSN Antimicrobial Use Option that had completed data validation and submitted
antibiotic use data from one or more patient care locations, results were reported for
266  patient  care  locations.  Among  the  six  most  common  types  of  patient  locations,
critical  care  units  reported  higher  rates  of  antibiotic  use  (median  =  937  days  of
therapy/1,000  days-present)  compared  with  ward  locations  (median  =  549  days  of
therapy/1,000  days-present).  The  variability  in  usage  rates  within  any  one  patient
location  type  was  highest  (threefold  difference  between  90th  and  10th  percentile)
among  combined  medical/surgical  wards  (i.e.,  26  wards  categorized  as  caring  for  a
mixture  of  medical  and  surgical  patients).  When  limiting  the  comparisons  within
combined
 medical/surgical
 wards,
 differences
 in
 usage
 were
 eightfold
 for
fluoroquinolones,  sixfold  for  antipseudomonal  agents,  threefold  for  broad-spectrum
agents  (antibiotics  considered  high  risk  for  subsequent  CDI),  and  threefold  for
vancomycin  (Figure  2).  Overall,  in  the  cohort  study,  the  risk  for  CDI  among  patients
unexposed  and  exposed  to  antibiotics  was  6.8  and  24.9  per  1,000  discharges
respectively.  Multivariate  modelling  adjusting  for  covariates,  for  all  ages  combined,
estimated  the  adjusted  relative  risk  for  development  of  CDI  within  180  days  after
inpatient exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics to be 2.9 (95% confidence interval =
2.3–3.5).  The  dynamic  model,  which  accounts  for  both  direct  and  indirect  effects,
predicted that a 30% decrease in exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics in hospitalized
adults would lead to a 26% decrease in CDI (interquartile range = 15%–38%). Such a
reduction  in  broad-spectrum  use  equates  to  an  approximately  5%  reduction  in  the
proportion of hospitalized patients receiving any antibiotic.  Conclusions and Comment
Antibiotics  are  prescribed  for  the  majority  of  patients  hospitalized  in  U.S.  acute  care
hospitals,  usually  to  treat  infections.  This  post  prescription  review  of  two  common
prescribing  scenarios  for  treating  suspected  infections  identified  opportunities  to
improve  37.2%  of  prescriptions,  often  by  timely  use  of  diagnostic  tests  or
documentation of symptoms. This observation is similar to results of older studies (1)
and  a  recent  study  (2)  documenting  that  about  30%–50%  of  prescribing  might  be
incorrect.  Although  the  aspect  of  prescribing  that  could  be  improved  has  varied
between  studies,  it  usually  involves  the  wrong  dose  or  wrong  duration  (2).  The  EIP
review focused on relatively objective criteria, including established standards around
diagnostic  testing  and  documentation  of  symptoms  supporting  the  presence  of
infection.  A  threefold  difference  in  overall  antibiotic  use  in  the  most  common  patient
care location, where more similar usage rates would be expected, considering similar
types  of  patients  are  being  cared  for  in  these  locations,  is  additional  evidence  of
opportunities  for  improvement.  This  difference  is  a  conservative  measure  made  by
comparing usage reported at the 90th percentile distribution compared with that at the
10th  percentile  distribution,  among  locations  caring  for  similar  types  of  patients.  The
magnitude  of  differences  seen  in  some  antibiotic  groups  might  be  the  result  of
differences in formulary or clinical practice guidelines in place at different institutions.
However, within similar location types, twofold differences were consistently measured.
Although some of these differences might be attributable to differences in the mix of
patients within these similar patient care locations, it is likely some might be explained
by differences in prescribing practices. This type of monitoring system, which involves
antibiotic use measurement to inform quality improvement activities, has been cited as
an urgent need by a recent government report (10). The data in this report confirm the
findings  of  several  previous  studies  demonstrating  that  antibiotic  prescribing  in
hospitals  is  common  and  often  incorrect.  In  particular,  patients  are  often  exposed  to
antibiotics without proper evaluation and follow-up. Misuse of antibiotics puts patients
at  risk  for  preventable  health  problems.  These  include  immediate  complications;
antibiotics  are  among  the  most  frequent  causes  of  adverse  drug  events  among
hospitalized U.S. patients (11), and near-term complications, such as CDI, which can be
severe  and  even  deadly  (9).  The  analysis  of  risk  for  CDI  from  exposure  to
broad-spectrum antibiotics during hospitalization found an exposed patient was at three
times  greater  risk  than  a  patient  without  this  exposure.  Elevated  risks  of  similar
magnitude were observed in previous studies (12,13). An estimated 30% reduction in
use of these broad-spectrum antibiotics (which would reduce overall antibiotic use by
only 5%) would prevent 26% of CDI related to inpatient antibiotic use. Reductions in CDI
of this magnitude could also have additional positive effects in reducing transmission of
C.  difficile  throughout  the  community.   An  additional  near-term  complication  of  the
unnecessary  and  incorrect  use  of  inpatient  antibiotics  is  the  growing  problem  of
antibiotic  resistance  in  U.S.  hospitals,  creating  treatment  challenges  not  only  for
patients  who  are  exposed  to  the  antibiotics,  but  for  other  patients  to  whom  these
resistant bacteria spread (3). Some hospitalized patients now have infections for which
there are no available antibiotic treatments (14). Urgent action is required to address
this growing public health crisis. Improving the prescribing of antibiotics in hospitals is
one  important  part  of  a  broader  strategy  to  counter  the  increase  in  antibiotic
resistance.  The  CDC  report,  Antibiotic  Threats  in  the  United  States,  2013,  addresses
other priority needs to reduce antibiotic resistance, including preventing infections and
the spread of resistance, tracking resistance patterns, and developing new antibiotics
and  diagnostic  tests  (3).  Programs  dedicated  to  improving  antibiotic  prescribing  in
hospitals are commonly referred to as antibiotic stewardship programs. Such programs
serve to ensure optimal treatment for hospitalized patients with infection and reduce
unnecessary antibiotic use to minimize harm to patients and prolong the length of time
antibiotics are effective (15). Variability in the types of patients and available resources
and  expertise  between  hospitals  calls  for  flexibility  in  how  these  programs  are
implemented.  However,  experience  demonstrates  that  these  programs  can  be
successful in a wide variety of hospital types to reduce overall and incorrect antibiotic
prescribing,  decrease  drug  costs,  prevent  adverse  events  caused  by  antibiotics,  and
reduce  CDI  rates  and  antibiotic  resistance  locally  (6,15).  Although  cost  savings  from
these programs will vary depending on the size of the facility and the extent to which
interventions  are  implemented,  published  studies  from  mostly  larger  settings  have
consistently  shown  significant  annual  savings  ($200,000–$900,000)  (1).   Correct
antibiotic  treatment  (e.g.,  prompt  treatment  of  sepsis)  is  critical  to  saving  lives  of
hospitalized  patients  with  certain  infectious  diseases.  Given  the  proven  benefit  of
hospital stewardship programs to patients and the urgent need to address the growing
problem  of  antibiotic  resistance,  CDC  recommends  that  all  hospitals  implement  an
antibiotic stewardship program. CDC has developed guidance that can assist hospitals
in either starting or expanding a program to improve antibiotic prescribing (16). Central
to  this  guidance  are  seven  core  elements  that  have  been  critical  to  the  success  of
hospital  antibiotic  stewardship  programs  (Box).  In  addition  to  highlighting  these  key
elements  for  success  of  stewardship  programs,  the  CDC  guidance  also  provides
background  information  on  the  proven  benefits  of  improving  antibiotic  prescribing  in
hospitals  and  more  details  on  the  structural  and  functional  aspects  of  successful
programs.  To  accompany  the  guidance,  CDC  also  has  developed  a  stewardship
assessment  tool  that  includes  a  checklist  to  help  facilities  assess  the  status  of  their
efforts  to  improve  antibiotic  prescribing  and  point  out  potential  areas  for  further
improvement  (16).  National  Healthcare  Safety  Network  antimicrobial  use  option
participants; Emerging Infections Programs participants (Colorado Department of Public
Health and Environment, Oregon Public Health Authority, New York-Rochester Emerging
Infections Program and University of Rochester Medical Center, Tennessee Department
of Health, Minnesota Department of Health, Connecticut Department of Public Health,
California Emerging Infections Program, Georgia Emerging Infections Program, Atlanta
Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  New  Mexico
Department  of  Health,  Maryland  Emerging  Infections  Program  and  Maryland
Department  of  Health  and  Mental  Hygiene),  2011  Emerging  Infections  Program
Healthcare-Associated Infections and Antimicrobial Use Prevalence survey participants. 
1National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 2University of
Utah  and  VA  Salt  Lake  City  Health  System,  3University  of  Rochester  Medical  Center,
4Connecticut Emerging Infections Program, Yale School of Public Health (Corresponding
author:  Scott  K.  Fridkin,  sfridkin@cdc.gov,  404-639-4215)  *Additional  information
available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/ncezid/dpei/eip/index.html.   †A  proprietary  system
integrating  data  systems  from  claims  and  hospital-based  data  systems  among  a
convenience  sample  of  hospitals  and  providers.  Additional  information  available  at
http://truvenhealth.com.
 
 §Additional
 information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/healthcare/evidence/cdiff.html.   Key  Points  FIGURE  1.
Percentage of hospital discharges with at least one antibiotic day, by antibiotic group —
323  hospitals,  United  States,  2010*  *Data  provided  by  Truven  Health  MarketScan
Hospital Drug Database. †Antibiotics from these three groups, which are considered to
place  patients  at  high  risk  for  developing  Clostridium  difficile  infection,  were
administered  to  29.8%  of  the  patients.  Alternate  Text:  The  figure  above  shows  the
percentage of hospital discharges with at least 1 antibiotic day, by antibiotic group, in
323 hospitals in the United States during 2010. In 2010, based on data obtained from
all 323 hospitals, 55.7% of patients received an antibiotic during their hospitalization,
and 29.8% received at least 1 dose of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
                     TABLE 1. Prevalence of antibiotic use among randomly selected patients in
183  acute  care  hospitals  —  Emerging  Infections  Program  health-care–associated
infections and antimicrobial use prevalence survey, United States, 2011 Antibiotic use
assessment  No.  (%)  Total  no.  of  patients  in  the  survey  11,282  —  Patients  on  any
antibiotic to treat an active infection  4,189  (37.1) Treatment indication for antibiotic*
7,199  —  For  LRI  (community  onset),  with  or  without  BSI  1,596  (22.2)  For  UTI
(health-care  or  community  onset),  with  or  without  BSI  993  (13.8)  For  presumptive
resistant  Gram-positive  infection  treated  with  vancomycin  (intravenous),  linezolid,  or
daptomycin  1,270  (17.6)  No.  of  antibiotics  with  one  or  more  treatment  indications
above  3,592  (49.9)  Abbreviations:  LRI  =  lower  respiratory  tract  infection;  BSI  =
bloodstream  infection;  UTI  =  urinary  tract  infection.   *Indications  are  not  mutually
exclusive.  TABLE  2.  Assessment  of  antibiotic  prescribing  among  inpatients  in  36
hospitals treated for urinary tract infection (UTI) without indwelling catheter or treated
with  intravenous  vancomycin  —  Emerging  Infections  Program  health-care–associated
infections and antimicrobial use prevalence survey, United States, 2011 Treatment No. 
(%) Patients treated for UTI present on admission, without indwelling catheter 111 —
Urine culture was not ordered, although standard practice before treatment  18 (16.2)
Urine culture was positive, but no documented symptoms were present  23 (20.7) Urine
culture  was  negative,  and  no  documented  symptoms  were  present   3  (2.7)  No.  of
patients with potential for improvement in prescribing 44 (39.6) Patients treated with
intravenous  vancomycin  185  —  No  diagnostic  culture  obtained  around  antibiotic
initiation,  although  standard  practice  with  most  infections  17  (9.2)  Diagnostic  culture
showed no Gram-positive bacterial growth, but patient still treated for long duration (>3
days)  (excludes  presumed  SSTI,  which  often  can  be  culture  negative)  40  (21.6)
Diagnostic  culture  grew  only  oxacillin-susceptible  Staphylococcus  aureus,  but  patient
still treated for long duration (>3 days) (likely missed opportunity to switch antibiotic
based  on  culture  result)  9  (4.9)  No.  of  patients  with  potential  for  improvement  in
prescribing  66  (35.7)  Combined  UTI  or  vancomycin  prescribing  296  —  Total  no.  of
patients with potential for improvement in prescribing  110  (37.2) Abbreviation: SSTI =
skin  and  soft  tissue  infection.  FIGURE  2.  Rate  of  antibiotic  use,  by  antibiotic  group,
class, or specific agent, among medical and surgical patients in 26 wards at 19 acute
care hospitals — National Healthcare Safety Network Antimicrobial Use Option, October
2012–June 2013* *Horizontal lines represent median, 10th and 90th percentile values;
whisker points are the minimum and maximum values. Plus sign is the mean value. 
†Including fluoroquinolones, β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations, and 3rd and
4th  generation  cephalosporins.   Alternate  Text:  The  figure  above  shows  the  rate  of
antibiotic use, by antibiotic group, class, or specific agent, among medical and surgical
patients  in  26  wards  at  19  acute  care  hospitals  in  the  United  States  during  October
2012-June  2013.  When  limiting  the  comparisons  within  combined  medical/surgical
wards,  differences  in  usage  were  eightfold  for  fluoroquinolones,  sixfold  for
antipseudomonal agents, threefold for broad-spectrum agents (antibiotics con¬sidered
high risk for subsequent CDI), and threefold for vancomycin.
                     BOX. Seven core elements critical to the success of hospital antibiotic
stewardship  programs  Source:  CDC.  Core  elements  of  hospital  antibiotic  stewardship
programs.  Atlanta,  GA:  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC;  2014.
Available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/healthcare/implementation/core-elements.html.
 Use
 of
trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6309a4.htm
