Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Water  comes  from  a  variety  of  sources,  such  as  lakes  and
wells, which can be contaminated with germs that may make people sick. Germs can
also contaminate water as it travels through miles of piping to get to a community. To
prevent contamination with germs, water companies add a disinfectant—usually either
chlorine  or  chloramine—that  kills  disease-causing  germs  such  as  Salmonella,
Campylobacter, and norovirus. You can find out whether there is a disinfectant in your
water, what kind of disinfectant is used, and how well your utility has followed the rules
about  disinfection  by  obtaining  a  copy  of  your  utility’s  consumer  confidence  report  .
Most communities use either chlorine or chloramines. Some communities switch back
and forth between chlorine and chloramines at different times of the year or for other
operational reasons. Less commonly, utilities use other disinfectants, such as chlorine
dioxide.  Some  water  systems  that  use  water  from  a  groundwater  source  (like
community wells) do not have to add a disinfectant at all. Chlorination is the process of
adding  chlorine  to  drinking  water  to  kill  parasites,  bacteria,  and  viruses.  Different
processes  can  be  used  to  achieve  safe  levels  of  chlorine  in  drinking  water.  Using  or
drinking  water  with  small  amounts  of  chlorine  does  not  cause  harmful  health  effects
and  provides  protection  against  waterborne  disease  outbreaks.  Your  water  company
monitors water quality regularly to provide you with safe drinking water. Some people
are  more  sensitive  than  others  to  chemicals  and  changes  in  their  environment.
Individuals who have health concerns should seek medical advice from their healthcare
provider before contacting their local health department. During dialysis, large amounts
of  water  are  used  to  clean  waste  products  out  of  a  patient’s  blood.  Dialysis  centers
must  treat  the  water  to  remove  all  chemical  disinfectants,  including  chlorine  and
chloramine,  before  the  water  can  be  used  for  dialysis.  Home  dialysis  users  should
consult the machine manufacturer for instructions on how to properly treat their water
before  use.  Chlorine  levels  up  to  4  milligrams  per  liter  (mg/L  or  4  parts  per  million
(ppm)) are considered safe in drinking water. At this level, harmful health effects are
unlikely to occur. Chlorinated water can taste and smell different than untreated water.
Some people like the taste and smell of chlorinated water, and others do not. Taste and
smell problems may arise depending upon the water quality and amount of chlorine in
the water. Chlorine and chloramine are toxic to fish, other aquatic animals, reptiles, and
amphibians. Unlike humans and other household pets, these types of animals absorb
water directly into the blood stream. Don’t keep these animals in water that contains
these disinfectants. Chlorine can be removed from water by letting it sit out for a few
days or by buying a product at your local pet store that removes the chlorine. Ask your
local pet store about methods of removing disinfectants from water for these pets. The
small amount of chlorine added to water will not affect other pets (such as mammals
and  birds)  and  can  be  used  regularly  for  watering  and  bathing  animals.  The  U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) allows drinking water treatment plants to use
chloramine and chlorine to disinfect drinking water. Water system pipes develop a layer
of  biofilm  (slime)  that  makes  killing  germs  more  difficult.  Water  providers  may
temporarily  switch  from  chloramine  to  chlorine  disinfection  to  help  remove  this  slime
layer.  Chlorine  was  first  used  in  the  United  States  as  a  major  disinfectant  in  1908  in
Jersey City, New Jersey. Chlorine use became more and more common in the following
decades, and by 1995 about 64% of all community water systems in the United States
used  chlorine  to  disinfect  their  water.  Chloramination  is  the  process  of  adding
chloramine to drinking water to disinfect it and kill germs. It is sometimes used as an
alternative  to  chlorination.  Chloramines  are  a  group  of  chemical  compounds  that
contain chlorine and ammonia. The particular type of chloramine used in drinking water
disinfection is called monochloramine which is mixed into water at levels that kill germs
but  are  still  safe  to  drink.  Studies  indicate  that  using  or  drinking  water  with  small
amounts of chloramine does not cause harmful health effects and provides protection
against  waterborne  disease  outbreaks.  These  studies  reported  no  observed  health
effects from drinking water with chloramine levels of less than 50 milligrams per liter
(mg/L) in drinking water. A normal level for drinking water disinfection can range from
1.0 to 4.0 mg/L. Your water company monitors water quality regularly to provide you
with safe drinking water. Some people are more sensitive than others to chemicals and
changes  in  their  environment.  Individuals  who  have  health  concerns  should  seek
medical  advice  from  their  healthcare  provider  before  contacting  their  local  health
department.  Contact  your  local  health  department  for  more  information.  Chloramine
levels  up  to  4  milligrams  per  liter  (mg/L)  or  4  parts  per  million  (ppm)  are  considered
safe  in  drinking  water.  At  these  levels,  harmful  health  effects  are  unlikely  to  occur.
During  dialysis,  large  amounts  of  water  are  used  to  clean  waste  products  out  of  a
patient’s  blood.  Dialysis  centers  must  treat  the  water  to  remove  all  chemical
disinfectants,  including  chlorine  and  chloramine,  before  the  water  can  be  used  for
dialysis. Home dialysis users should consult the machine manufacturer for instructions
on  how  to  properly  treat  their  water  before  use.  The  U.S.  Environmental  Protection
Agency (EPA) allows drinking water treatment plants to use chloramine and chlorine to
disinfect  drinking  water.  Research  shows  that  chloramine  and  chlorine  both  have
benefits and drawbacks.
Chlorine  is  a  highly  effective  method  of  disinfection.  However,  while  in  the  pipes  it
produces small amounts of chemicals (called “disinfection by-products”) if the source
water has higher levels of dirt or germs that may react with chlorine. Chlorine is also
used up quickly in water systems. Sometimes there is not enough chlorine left to kill
germs  in  the  water  by  the  time  it  reaches  the  end  of  the  pipes.  Chloramine  can  last
longer  in  the  water  pipes  and  produces  fewer  disinfection  by-products.  To  meet  EPA
standards  intended  to  reduce  disinfection  by-products,  some  water  utilities  are
switching to chloramine. If you notice any change in the taste or smell of your water, it
may be that the water treated with chloramine has less of a “chlorine” taste and smell
than water treated with chlorine. Chloramine can change the chemical properties of the
water,  which  can  affect  lead  and  copper  pipes.  Lead  and  copper  levels  are  strictly
regulated in drinking water by the EPA Lead and Copper Rule. EPA provides guidance
for local water authorities switching to chloramine on how to minimize lead and copper
levels. If you are concerned about lead or copper levels in your household water, call
EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Hotline at 800-426-4791 for testing information. Chlorine and
chloramine  are  toxic  to  fish,  other  aquatic  animals,  reptiles  and  amphibians.  Unlike
humans and other household pets, these types of animals absorb water directly into the
blood  stream.  Don’t  keep  these  animals  in  water  that  contains  these  disinfectants.
Unlike chlorine, chloramine cannot be removed by letting water sit out for a few days.
However,  products  are  available  at  aquarium  supply  stores  that  can  remove
chloramine.  Ask  your  local  pet  store  about  methods  of  removing  disinfectants  from
water  for  these  pets.  The  small  amount  of  chloramine  added  to  water  will  not  affect
other  pets  (such  as  mammals  and  birds)  and  can  be  used  regularly  for  watering  and
bathing  animals.  Chloramine  has  been  used  as  a  drinking  water  disinfectant  in  the
United States in places like Cleveland, Ohio, Springfield, Illinois, and Lansing, Michigan
since 1929. In 1998, an EPA survey estimated 68 million Americans were drinking water
disinfected  with  chloramine.  Several  major  U.S.  cities  such  as  Philadelphia,  San
Francisco, Tampa Bay, and Washington, D.C. use chloramine to disinfect drinking water.
Chloramine is recognized as a safe disinfectant and a good alternative to chlorine. EPA:
Drinking Water Regulations
EPA: Drinking Water Treatability Database
EPA. Chloramines in Drinking Water
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/drinking/public/water_disinfection.html
