Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. How Water Treatment Plants Make Water Safe Public drinking
water systems use different water treatment methods to provide safe drinking water for
their  communities.  Public  water  systems  often  use  a  series  of  water  treatment  steps
that  include  coagulation,  flocculation,  sedimentation,  filtration,  and  disinfection.
Coagulation  is  often  the  first  step  in  water  treatment.  During  coagulation,  chemicals
with  a  positive  charge  are  added  to  the  water.  The  positive  charge  neutralizes  the
negative charge of dirt and other dissolved particles in the water. When this occurs, the
particles bind with the chemicals to form slightly larger particles. Common chemicals
used in this step include specific types of salts, aluminum, or iron. Flocculation follows
the  coagulation  step.  Flocculation  is  the  gentle  mixing  of  the  water  to  form  larger,
heavier  particles  called  flocs.  Often,  water  treatment  plants  will  add  additional
chemicals  during  this  step  to  help  the  flocs  form.  Sedimentation  is  one  of  the  steps
water  treatment  plants  use  to  separate  out  solids  from  the  water.  During
sedimentation, flocs settle to the bottom of the water because they are heavier than
water. Once the flocs have settled to the bottom of the water, the clear water on top is
filtered to separate additional solids from the water. During filtration, the clear water
passes through filters that have different pore sizes and are made of different materials
(such  as  sand,  gravel,  and  charcoal).  These  filters  remove  dissolved  particles  and
germs,  such  as  dust,  chemicals,  parasites,  bacteria,  and  viruses.  Activated  carbon
filters  also  remove  any  bad  odors.  Water  treatment  plants  can  use  a  process  called
ultrafiltration in addition to or instead of traditional filtration. During ultrafiltration, the
water goes through a filter membrane with very small pores. This filter only lets through
water and other small molecules (such as salts and tiny, charged molecules). Reverse
osmosis  is  another  filtration  method  that  removes  additional  particles  from  water.
Water treatment plants often use reverse osmosis when treating recycled water (also
called reused water) or salt water for drinking. After the water has been filtered, water
treatment  plants  may  add  one  or  more  chemical  disinfectants  (such  as  chlorine,
chloramine, or chlorine dioxide) to kill any remaining parasites, bacteria, or viruses. To
help keep water safe as it travels to homes and businesses, water treatment plants will
make  sure  the  water  has  low  levels  of  the  chemical  disinfectant  when  it  leaves  the
treatment plant. This remaining disinfectant kills germs living in the pipes between the
water  treatment  plant  and  your  tap.  In  addition  to  or  instead  of  adding  chlorine,
chloramine, or chlorine dioxide, water treatment plants can also disinfect water using
ultraviolet (UV) light [PDF – 7 pages] or ozone [PDF – 7 pages]. UV light and ozone work
well  to  disinfect  water  in  the  treatment  plant,  but  these  disinfection  methods  do  not
continue killing germs as water travels through the pipes between the treatment plant
and your tap. Water treatment plants also commonly adjust water pH and add fluoride
after  the  disinfection  step.  Adjusting  the  pH  improves  taste,  reduces  corrosion
(breakdown) of pipes, and ensures chemical disinfectants continue killing germs as the
water  travels  through  pipes.  Drinking  water  with  the  right  amount  of  fluoride  keeps
teeth strong and reduces cavities. Surface water collects on the ground or in a stream,
river, lake, reservoir, or ocean. Ground water is located below the surface of the earth
in  spaces  between  rock  and  soil.  Water  may  be  treated  differently  in  different
communities  depending  on  the  quality  of  the  source  water  that  enters  the  treatment
plant. The water that enters the treatment plant is most often either surface water or
ground  water.  Surface  water  typically  requires  more  treatment  and  filtration  than
ground  water  because  lakes,  rivers,  and  streams  contain  more  sediment  (sand,  clay,
silt,  and  other  soil  particles),  germs,  chemicals,  and  toxins  than  ground  water.  Some
water  supplies  may  contain  radionuclides  (small  radioactive  particles),  specific
chemicals  (such  as  nitrates),  or  toxins  (such  as  those  made  by  cyanobacteria).
Specialized methods to control or remove these contaminants can also be part of water
treatment. To learn more, visit EPA’s Ground Water and Drinking Water site.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/drinking/public/water_treatment.html
