Every  mother’s  experience  with  breastfeeding  is  different.  Whether  this  is  your  first
baby or you have many, each baby is unique. Breastfeeding will be a learning process.
Your  baby  is  learning  how  to:  You  are  learning  how  to:  Breastfeeding  support  is
available. Visit our resources page to find the right kind of help for you.
 At  birth,  your  breasts  will  make  a  thick,  yellowish  substance  called  colostrum.
Colostrum is packed with nutrients and other important substances that help your baby
start building up his or her immune system. There will not be a lot of this liquid at first,
but the amount will gradually increase over the first couple of days. Most babies will get
all the nutrition they need through colostrum during the first few days of life. As you
begin breastfeeding, your baby’s sucking will tell your body to start making milk. For
most mothers, this thinner, whiter form of milk comes in by about 3 days after birth, but
may take longer for first-time moms. You may notice your breasts feeling full, hard, and
warm  as  this  happens.  Your  baby  may  begin  to  want  to  breastfeed  more  frequently
around  this  time.  If  you  are  concerned  about  your  milk  coming  in,  talk  to  a  lactation
consultant  or  your  doctor  or  nurse.  Pacifiers  and  your  baby.  If  you  are  breastfeeding
your  baby,  you  may  want  to  wait  to  use  a  pacifier  until  breastfeeding  is
well-established. At that time, using a pacifier for naps and at bedtime can help reduce
the risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). Your breasts may feel full and leak.
Over time, the leaking may slow down as your body gets used to breastfeeding. If your
breasts leak, you may find it helpful to put disposable or cloth pads in your bra. Over
the  first  few  weeks  after  birth,  your  breasts  may  become  larger,  firm,  warm,  and
uncomfortable as your body adjusts to making milk. This is called engorgement. As your
breasts get used to filling and emptying as you feed your baby, this should improve.
Feeding your baby frequently should help to prevent severe engorgement and relieve
discomfort.  During  the  first  few  weeks  of  breastfeeding,  your  nipples  may  be  sore  or
sensitive as they adjust to your baby’s sucking. If you have cracked or damaged nipple
skin, or pain that is not improving over the first 1–2 weeks, talk to a lactation consultant
or  your  doctor  or  nurse.  Although  your  breasts  and  nipples  may  be  tender  or
uncomfortable,  once  your  baby  is  well-latched,  breastfeeding  should  not  be  painful.
Sometimes pain can happen if you have an improper latch, a milk duct that is clogged
with milk (plugged milk duct), a breast infection (mastitis), or other issues. If you have
pain while breastfeeding, especially with a fever, talk with your doctor or nurse to figure
out  why.  Postpartum  depression  is  depression  that  some  women  feel  after  having  a
baby. Feelings of postpartum depression are more intense and last longer than those of
“baby blues,” a term used to describe the worry, sadness, and tiredness many women
experience after having a baby. “Baby blues” symptoms typically resolve on their own
within  a  few  days.  Postpartum  depression  is  common  and  doesn’t  feel  the  same  for
everyone. How often symptoms occur, how long they last, and how intense they may
feel can be different for each person. Mothers with postpartum depression can usually
continue to breastfeed. If you think you may be experiencing postpartum depression, or
have  other  mental  health  concerns,  contact  your  healthcare  provider  for  help  right
away.   Many  medications  do  pass  into  breastmilk,  but  you  can  work  with  your
healthcare  provider  to  identify  treatment  options  that  are  safe  to  use  while
breastfeeding.  Human  milk  provides  the  best  nutrition  for  most  babies,  including
premature and sick newborns. However, there are rare exceptions when human milk or
breastfeeding  is  not  recommended.  Learn  more  about  when  breastfeeding  is  not
recommended.  Only  a  few  medications  are  not  recommended  while  breastfeeding.
Learn  more  about  safe  prescription  medication  use  while  breastfeeding.  Learn  more
about breastfeeding and certain illnesses and conditions.
 You can continue to breastfeed once your baby starts to get teeth. Babies use their
tongues,  not  their  teeth,  to  breastfeed.  If  your  baby  is  latched  well  and  sucking,  you
should not feel the teeth while your baby is feeding. Once in a while babies might bite
the nipple or breast, especially when they are teething. Talk to a lactation consultant
for  tips  on  how  to  teach  your  baby  not  to  bite.  Sometimes  babies  will  suddenly  stop
wanting  to  breastfeed.  Many  times  it  is  hard  to  know  why  this  happens.  Refusing  to
breastfeed is usually temporary and your baby will start breastfeeding again within a
few days. Some reasons your baby may refuse breastfeeding include teething, illness,
stress, a change in environment such as a new childcare situation, or a major change in
routine.  This  usually  does  not  mean  your  baby  is  ready  to  wean.  To  help  your  baby
return to breastfeeding: Your baby is starting to notice all the things going on around
him  or  her.  This  can  mean  that  your  baby  might  get  distracted  while  breastfeeding.
Help your baby focus by turning off the TV, dimming the lights, or feeding in a quiet
place.  Although  breastfeeding  is  recommended  until  your  baby  is  at  least  12  months
old, weaning may happen before then. Learn about when and how to wean your baby
from breastfeeding. Visit the Office on Women’s Health website for more information on
learning  to  breastfeed  and  breastfeeding  challenges.  To  receive  email  updates  about
this topic, enter your email address.
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/infantandtoddlernutrition/breastfeeding/what-to-expect.html
