A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  The  following  recommendations  are  for
buildings  in  community  settings  (such  as  offices,  gyms,  businesses,  and  community
centers)  and  is  not  intended  for  healthcare  settings  or  other  facilities  where  specific
regulations  or  practices  for  cleaning  and  disinfection  may  apply.  These  cleaning  and
disinfection  recommendations  are  intended  to  help  prevent  the  spread  of  harmful
germs and do not apply to other materials (such as chemicals) that can be found on
surfaces. Some germs are more difficult to remove or kill and might require specialized
cleaning and disinfection. Always follow standard practices and appropriate regulations
specific to your type of facility for cleaning and disinfection. Cleaning with commercial
cleaners  that  contain  soap  or  detergent  decreases  the  number  of  germs  on  surfaces
and  reduces  risk  of  infection  from  surfaces  in  your  facility.  Cleaning  alone  removes
most types of harmful germs (like viruses, bacteria, parasites, or fungi) from surfaces.
Sanitizing reduces the remaining germs on surfaces after cleaning. Disinfecting can kill
harmful  germs  that  remain  on  surfaces  after  cleaning.  By  killing  germs  on  a  surface
after  cleaning,  disinfecting  can  further  lower  the  risk  of  spreading  disease.  Clean
surfaces before sanitizing or disinfecting them, because impurities like dirt may make it
harder for sanitizing or disinfecting chemicals to kill germs. Consider the type of surface
and how often the surface is touched. Generally, high touch surfaces are more likely to
spread  germs.  If  the  space  is  a  high  traffic  area,  you  may  choose  to  clean  more
frequently or disinfect in addition to cleaning. In most situations, cleaning regularly is
enough to prevent the spread of germs. Always wash your hands with soap and water
for 20 seconds after cleaning. Follow these tips to safely clean different surfaces in your
facility: For hard surfaces, such as counters, light switches, desks, and floors: For soft
surfaces, such as carpet, rugs, and drapes: For laundry items, such as clothing, towels,
and linens: For electronics, such as tablets, touch screens, keyboards, remote controls,
and  ATM  machines:  For  outdoor  areas,  such  as  patios  and  sidewalks:  In  addition  to
cleaning,  disinfect  areas  of  your  facility  where  people  have  obviously  been  ill  (for
example,  vomiting  on  facility  surfaces).  If  the  space  is  a  high-traffic  area,  you  may
choose  to  clean  more  frequently  or  disinfect  in  addition  to  cleaning.  During  certain
disease  outbreaks,  local  health  authorities  might  recommend  specific  disinfection
procedures to reduce the risk of spreading disease within the facility. To disinfect, use
an EPA-registered disinfecting product for the specific harmful germ (such as viruses or
bacteria) if known. Not all disinfectants are effective for all harmful germs. Clean the
surface  with  soap  and  water  first.  Always  read  the  label  on  disinfecting  products  to
make sure the products can be used on the type of surface you are disinfecting (such
as  a  hard  or  soft  surface,  food  contact  surface,  or  residual  surface).  Follow  these
important safety guidelines when using chemical disinfectants: In most cases, fogging,
fumigation,  and  wide-area  or  electrostatic  spraying  are  not  recommended  as  primary
methods of surface disinfection and have several safety risks, unless the product label
says these methods can be used. See EPA's Guidance for Cleaning & Disinfecting Public
Spaces, Workplaces, Businesses, Schools and Homes. Develop policies to protect and
train workers before assigning cleaning and disinfecting tasks. To protect workers from
hazardous  chemicals,  training  should  include:  Employers  must  follow  applicable
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  standards,  including  the  hazard
communication standard (29 CFR 1910.1200), personal protective equipment standards
(29 CFR 1910 Subpart I), and other OSHA requirements, including those established by
state plans, whenever such requirements apply. Many diseases and conditions can be
prevented or controlled through appropriate personal hygiene and by regularly cleaning
and  disinfecting  high-touch  surfaces.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hygiene/about/when-and-how-to-clean-and-disinfect-a-facility.html
