A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Cleaning is an important first step to make
sure  you  remove  most  germs  from  surfaces  in  your  home.  Using  household  cleaners
that contain soap or detergent will remove germs and dirt on surfaces. Cleaning alone
removes  most  harmful  viruses  or  bacteria  from  surfaces.  Surfaces  should  be  cleaned
before they are sanitized or disinfected because impurities like dirt may make it harder
for  chemicals  to  get  to  and  kill  germs.  Sanitizing  reduces  the  remaining  germs  on
surfaces  after  cleaning.  Disinfecting  can  kill  viruses  and  bacteria  that  remain  on
surfaces  after  cleaning.  By  killing  germs  on  a  surface  after  cleaning,  disinfecting  can
further lower the risk of spreading germs that can cause illness. For everyday cleaning,
you probably do not need to sanitize or disinfect unless someone in your home is sick or
someone  sick  has  recently  visited.  Remember  to  clean  first,  and  then  sanitize  or
disinfect  if  needed.  In  most  situations,  cleaning  regularly  is  enough  to  prevent  the
spread of germs. Follow these tips to safely clean different surfaces in your home: For
hard  surfaces,  such  as  counters,  certain  toys,  light  switches,  and  floors:  For  soft
surfaces such as carpet, rugs, and drapes: For laundry items, such as clothing, towels,
cloth  toys,  and  linens:  For  electronics,  such  as  phones,  tablets,  touch  screens,
keyboards, and remote controls: Some surfaces and objects in your home may need to
be sanitized after they are cleaned. Daily sanitizing may not be necessary if surfaces
and  objects  are  cleaned  carefully  after  use.  To  sanitize  a  surface  or  object,  use  a
weaker bleach solution or an EPA-registered sanitizing product. For nonporous objects,
such  as  certain  toys  and  infant  feeding  items:  For  hard  surfaces,  such  as  kitchen
counters and food preparation areas: For more information on food safety, please visit
CDC's Food Safety page. In addition to cleaning, disinfect your home when someone is
sick or if someone is at a higher risk of getting sick due to a weakened immune system
(for  example,  people  being  treated  with  immune-suppressing  drugs  for  cancer,  organ
transplants, or other illnesses, or people with HIV or genetic conditions that affect the
immune system). To disinfect, use an EPA-registered disinfecting product or a stronger
bleach  solution.  Clean  the  surface  with  soap  and  water  first.   Follow  these  important
safety  guidelines  when  using  chemical  disinfectants:  If  ready-to-use  disinfectants  are
not available, you can use bleach solutions for many hard surfaces. Bleach solutions will
be  effective  against  bacteria,  viruses,  and  fungi  when  properly  diluted.  Learn  more
about  cleaning  and  disinfecting  surfaces  using  bleach  solutions.  Many  diseases  and
conditions can be prevented or controlled through appropriate personal hygiene and by
regularly  cleaning  and  disinfecting  high-touch  surfaces.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 
Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hygiene/about/when-and-how-to-clean-and-disinfect-your-home.html
