

IC – 301.1 Appendix A:
Preamble	The mode(s) and risk of transmission for each specific disease agent included in Appendix A were reviewed. Principle sources consulted for the development of disease-specific recommendations for Appendix A included infectious disease manuals and textbooks 833, 1043, 1044. The published literature was searched for evidence of person-to-person transmission in healthcare and non-healthcare settings with a focus on reported outbreaks that would assist in developing recommendations for all settings where healthcare is delivered. Criteria used to assign Transmission-Based Precautions
categories follow:
A Transmission-Based Precautions category was assigned if there was strong evidence for person-to-person transmission via droplet, contact, or airborne routes in healthcare or non-healthcare settings and/or if patient factors (e.g., diapered infants, diarrhea, draining wounds) increased the risk of transmission
Transmission-Based Precautions category assignments reflect the predominant mode(s) of transmission
If there was no evidence for person-to-person transmission by droplet, contact or airborne routes, Standard Precautions were assigned
If there was a low risk for person-to-person transmission and no evidence of healthcare-associated transmission, Standard Precautions were assigned
Standard Precautions were assigned for bloodborne pathogens (e.g., hepatitis B and C viruses, human immunodeficiency virus) as per CDC recommendations for Universal Precautions issued in 1988 780. Subsequent experience has confirmed the efficacy of Standard Precautions to prevent exposure to infected blood and body fluid 778, 779, 866.
Additional information relevant to use of precautions was added in the comments column to assist the caregiver in decision-making. Citations were added as needed to support a change in or provide additional evidence for recommendations for a specific disease and for new infectious agents (e.g., SARS-CoV, avian influenza) that have been added to Appendix A. The reader may refer to more detailed discussion concerning modes of transmission and emerging pathogens in the background text and for MDRO control in Appendix B.







1 Type of Precautions: A, Airborne Precautions; C, Contact; D, Droplet; S, Standard; when A, C, and D are specified, also use S.
† Duration of precautions: CN, until off antimicrobial treatment and culture-negative; DI, duration of illness (with wound lesions, DI means until wounds stop draining); DE, until environment completely decontaminated; U, until time specified in hours (hrs) after initiation of effective therapy; Unknown: criteria for establishing eradication of pathogen has not been determined



























































































TABLE 1. HISTORY OF GUIDELINES FOR ISOLATION PRECAUTIONS IN HOSPITALS*






* Derived from Garner ICHE 1996






















TABLE 3.
INFECTION CONTROL CONSIDERATIONS FOR HIGH-PRIORITY (CDC CATEGORY A) DISEASES THAT MAY RESULT FROM BIOTERRORIST ATTACKS OR ARE CONSIDERED TO BE BIOTERRORIST THREATS
(www.bt.cdc.gov) a
a Abbreviations used in this table: RT = respiratory tract; GIT = gastrointestinal tract; CXR = chest x-ray; CT = computerized axial tomography; CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; and LD50 – lethal dose for 50% of experimental animals; HCWs = healthcare worker; BSL = biosafety level; PAPR = powered air purifying respirator; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; IHC = immunohistochemistry



















2 Pneumonic plague is not as contagious as is often thought. Historical accounts and contemporary evidence indicate that persons with plague usually only transmit the infection when the disease is in the end stage. These persons cough copious amounts of bloody sputum that contains many plague bacteria. Patients  in the early stage of primary pneumonic plague (approximately the first 20–24 h) apparently pose little risk [1, 2]. Antibiotic medication rapidly clears the   sputum of plague bacilli, so that a patient generally is not infective within hours after initiation of effective antibiotic treatment [3]. This means that in modern times many patients will never reach a stage where they pose a significant risk to others. Even in the end stage of disease, transmission only occurs after close contact. Simple protective measures, such as wearing masks, good hygiene, and avoiding close contact, have been effective to interrupt transmission during many pneumonic plague outbreaks [2]. In the United States, the last known cases of person to person transmission of pneumonic plague occurred in 1925 [2].
Wu L-T. A treatise on pneumonic plague. Geneva: League of Nations, 1926. III. Health.
Kool JL. Risk of person to person transmission of pneumonic plague. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2005; 40 (8): 1166-1172
Butler TC. Plague and other Yersinia infections. In: Greenough WB, ed. Current topics in infectious disease. New York: Plenum Medical Book Company, 1983.





























b Transmission by the airborne route is a rare event; Airborne Precautions is recommended when possible, but in the event of mass exposures, barrier precautions and containment within a designated area are most important 204, 212.
c Vaccinia adverse events with lesions containing infectious virus include inadvertent autoinoculation, ocular lesions (blepharitis, conjunctivitis), generalized vaccinia, progressive vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum; bacterial superinfection also requires addition of contact precautions if exudates cannot be contained 216, 217.








TABLE 4.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPLICATION OF STANDARD PRECAUTIONS FOR THE CARE OF ALL PATIENTS IN ALL HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
(See Sections II.D.-II.J. and III.A.1)







* During aerosol-generating procedures on patients with suspected or proven infections transmitted by respiratory aerosols (e.g., SARS), wear a fit-tested N95 or higher respirator in addition to gloves, gown,and face/eye protection.



TABLE 5. COMPONENTS OF A PROTECTIVE ENVIRONMENT
(Adapted from MMWR 2003; 52 [RR-10])

Patients: allogeneic hematopoeitic stem cell transplant (HSCT) only
Maintain in PE room except for required diagnostic or therapeutic procedures that cannot be performed in the room, e.g. radiology, operating room
Respiratory protection e.g., N95 respirator, for the patient when leaving PE during periods of construction


Standard and Expanded Precautions
Hand hygiene observed before and after patient contact
Gown, gloves, mask NOT required for HCWs or visitors for routine entry into the room
Use of gown, gloves, mask by HCWs and visitors according to Standard Precautions and as indicated for suspected or proven infections for which Transmission-Based Precautions are recommended

Engineering
Central or point-of-use HEPA (99.97% efficiency) filters capable of removing particles 0.3 m in diameter for supply (incoming) air
Well-sealed rooms
Proper construction of windows, doors, and intake and exhaust ports
Ceilings: smooth, free of fissures, open joints, crevices
Walls sealed above and below the ceiling
If leakage detected, locate source and make necessary repairs
Ventilation to maintain >12 ACH
Directed air flow: air supply and exhaust grills located so that clean, filtered air enters from one side of the room, flows across the patient’s bed, exits on opposite side of the room
Positive room air pressure in relation to the corridor
Pressure differential of >2.5 Pa [0.01” water gauge]
Monitor and document results of air flow patterns daily using visual methods (e.g., flutter strips, smoke tubes) or a hand held pressure gauge
Self-closing door on all room exits
Maintain back-up ventilation equipment (e.g., portable units for fans or filters) for emergency provision of ventilation requirements for PE areas and take immediate steps to restore the fixed ventilation system
For patients who require both a PE and Airborne Infection Isolation, use an anteroom to ensure proper air balance relationships and provide independent exhaust of contaminated air to the outside or place a HEPA filter in the exhaust duct. If an anteroom is not available, place patient in an AIIR and use portable ventilation units, industrial-grade HEPA filters to enhance filtration of spores.

Surfaces
Daily wet-dusting of horizontal surfaces using cloths moistened with EPA- registered hospital disinfectant/detergent
Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust
No carpeting in patient rooms or hallways
No upholstered furniture and furnishings


Other
No flowers (fresh or dried) or potted plants in PE rooms or areas
Use vacuum cleaner equipped with HEPA filters when vacuum cleaning is necessary

Figure.
Example of Safe Donning and Removal of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
DONNING PPE
GOWN
Fully cover torso from neck to knees, arms to end of wrist, and wrap around the back
Fasten in back at neck and waist

MASK OR RESPIRATOR
Secure ties or elastic band at middle of head and neck
Fit flexible band to nose bridge
Fit snug to face and below chin
Fit-check respirator

GOGGLES/FACE SHIELD
Put on face and adjust to fit

GLOVES
Use non-sterile for isolation
Select according to hand size
Extend to cover wrist of isolation gown




SAFE WORK PRACTICES
Keep hands away from face
Work from clean to dirty
Limit surfaces touched
Change when torn or heavily contaminated
Perform hand hygiene

REMOVING PPE
Remove PPE at doorway before leaving patient room or in anteroom

GLOVES
Outside of gloves are contaminated!
Grasp outside of glove with opposite gloved hand; peel off
Hold removed glove in gloved hand
Slide fingers of ungloved hand under remaining glove at wrist

GOGGLES/FACE SHIELD
Outside of goggles or face shield are contaminated!
To remove, handle by “clean” head band or ear pieces
Place in designated receptacle for reprocessing or in waste container

GOWN
Gown front and sleeves are contaminated!
Unfasten neck, then waist ties
Remove gown using a peeling motion; pull gown from each shoulder toward the same hand
Gown will turn inside out
Hold removed gown away from body, roll into a bundle and discard into waste or linen receptacle

MASK OR RESPIRATOR
Front of mask/respirator is contaminated – DO NOT TOUCH!
Grasp ONLY bottom then top ties/elastics and remove
Discard in waste container


HAND HYGIENE
Perform hand hygiene immediately after removing all PPE!

