Standardized Pre-Operative Education for Patients, Families and Staff
Pre-Operative Bathing Protocol
Outpatient
Parents will be instructed to bath/shower their child the night before surgery using regular soap.
Parents will be instructed to wash their child’s hair the night before surgery using their child’s usual shampoo.
A reminder call, the night before surgery, includes instructions to complete the pre-operative bath as discussed above. Surgical admitting will wipe the patient’s skin the morning of surgery with CHG (Sage) wipes based on manufacture’s recommendations before the patient is transferred to the operating room. If patient is allergic to CHG, a soap and water bath will be performed based on amount of time before the surgical procedure. If there is no time for a soap and water bath to be performed, Ready Bath wipes will be used.
Inpatient
Night before surgery: Patient will be given a soap and water bath.
Day of surgery: Patient’s greater than/equal to 36 weeks: Will have their skin wiped with CHG (Sage) wipes based on manufacture’s recommendations before the patient is transferred to the operating room.
Patient’s less than 36 weeks and/or allergic to CHG: A soap and water bath will be performed based on the amount of time before the surgical procedure. If there is no time for a soap and water bath to be performed, Ready Bath wipes or sterile gauze/sterile water (<34 weeks) will be used.
Pre/Post-Operative Antimicrobial Protocol
Please refer to Ortho admission and postop plans
Intra-Operative Skin Preparation Protocol
Chloraprep (CHG) will be used to scrub/paint the surgical site unless a CHG allergy is identified.
Surgical wound is irrigated with Castile soap and NaCl irrigation.
Post-Operative Dressing Protocol
Dressings are assessed in the post-operative unit setting.
Idiopathic Spine Patients:
If dressings are soiled Ortho surgeon will be paged to quickly replace.
Dressing is removed prior to discharge.
Neuromuscular Spine patients:
If dressings are soiled Ortho surgeon will be paged to quickly replace the dressing.
Dressing will be changed by the Ortho surgeon prior to discharge.
Discharge Education
Idiopathic spinal fusion dressing is removed at discharge.
Neuromuscular spinal fusion patient’s will be given supplies for 2 dressing changes along with detailed instructions for home dressing changes. Dressings are discontinued at the 1 week post–op follow up visit.
