PURPOSE:

This policy covers cleaning and low-level disinfection of equipment and surfaces in the healthcare environment. Accumulation of dust, soil and microbial contaminants on environmental surfaces may create a potential reservoir for microorganisms. These microorganisms could be easily transmitted via hands when contacting contaminated surfaces and cause nosocomial infections. Effective and efficient cleaning methods and schedules are necessary to maintain clean and healthy environments in healthcare settings.

SCOPE:

This policy is applicable to environmental services and outpatient clinical areas.

DEFINITIONS:

Reusable patient care item/equipment: An item or piece of equipment that is intended by the manufacturer to be reused on different patients.

Single use item/ device: An item that is intended by the manufacturer for a single use, use during a single procedure, or use on a single patient. Refer to manufacturer instructions for cleaning of items that can be used on a single patient multiple times.

Non-critical item: A patient care item that comes into contact with intact skin only. These items require at minimum, low-level disinfection in between each patient use.

Cleaning: The removal of visible soil (e.g. organic and inorganic material) from objects and surfaces. It is normally accomplished by manual or mechanical means using water with detergents or enzymatic products

Low-Level Disinfection: A process that eliminates many or all pathogenic (disease causing) microorganisms on inanimate objects with the exception of bacterial spores. Sufficient for disinfecting non-critical items.

Dwell Time/ Contact Time: The amount of time a surface must remain visibly wet for the disinfectant to effectively kill pathogens


CLEANING PROCEDURES FOR REUSABLE PATIENT CARE EQUIPMENT BY FRONTLINE STAFF

Note: The following procedure applies to cleaning and low level disinfection of Non-critical Reusable patient care equipment ONLY. Reference IC 204.0 High Level Disinfection for Semi-Critical Items Outside of Sterile Processing Department for information on the cleaning and disinfection procedures for semi-critical and critical reusable patient care items and equipment

Non-Critical reusable patient care items and equipment must be cleaned and disinfected with a hospital approved disinfectant cleaner or wipe in between each patient use.
All items and equipment will be cleaned in accordance with manufacturer guidance.
Refer to Attachment IC – 716.1  Reusable Equipment and Schedule for cleaning schedule and responsibilities for patient care equipment. Refer to Attachment IC – 716.3 Sanitizing Agents  and Disinfectants for approved disinfectants for patient care equipment along with dwell times.


ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES CLEANING PROCEDURES

Routine Patient Care Area Cleaning Procedures: Cleaning procedures that can be ordered by the unit charge RN or requested at any time by Infection Prevention and Control (See Attachment IC – 716.2 Cleaning Procedures Table A.

Mopping procedures:
One single-use microfiber flat mop is used for each area mopped.
Soiled mops are not to be reused in another area nor re-dipped in solution and must be discarded into trash.
Single-use microfiber flat mops are used immediately after the removal of any bodily fluid secretions or excretions such as blood or urine, etc.
Heavily soiled rooms may  require  using multiple single-use microfibers.

Use of disinfectant wipes:
Disinfect surfaces working from clean to dirty and high to low areas.
Discard wipes when no longer saturated or wipes become soiled.
If a surface is visibly soiled– the area must be cleaned before it can be disinfected. In this case, use a wipe with disinfectant to physically remove soil from the surface. Discard wipes. Using a new wipe, disinfect the surface.
Disposal - Used wipes should always be discarded in trash cans and should not be flushed down toilets.

EVS 7-STEP Cleaning Procedure for Patient Care Areas:
The procedure shall begin with the environmental workforce member (E-WFM) obtaining all the necessary cleaning supplies, equipment, and personal protective equipment (PPE), at the beginning of each shift.
Use basic guidelines of cleaning high to low and least-soiled to most-soiled.
Step 1: Trash & Soiled Linen Removal
Trash and soiled linen removal is defined as safely containing, removing, and transporting trash or linen to the appropriate staging area, disposing area or respective chute. All trash is to be pulled from the area before starting the 7-Step Cleaning Procedure. Begin by ensuring that the appropriate cart and trash bin are in close proximity before removing the liner with trash from all the wastebaskets in the patient’s room and that proper PPE is available and donned.
Don appropriate PPE including outer gown, gloves, and other items deemed appropriate.
Wipe inside and outside of wastebaskets with hospital-approved disinfectant product. Follow the manufacturer’s recommended dwell time.
Place one clean, fresh, appropriately-sized liner in the clean wastebasket.
Remove soiled linen from the bathroom and place the soiled linen in the hamper bag with previously collected items. Do not overstuff hamper bag to avoid causing a safety hazard.
Safely load all hamper bags into soiled linen carts and safely transport to the nearest linen chute.
Replace linen where required.  E-WFM is required to replace linen only on discharged patient beds; clinical staff replaces linen on occupied beds.

Step 2: High Dust in Patient Area and Rest Room
High-Dusting is defined as dusting items located above shoulder height with hospital-approved cleaning tools, cloths, and techniques. High dusting should not be performed if patients or guest are present. High dusting should begin at the doorway and work in a standard circular direction around the room / area. BMT: High dusting should be done using HEPA vacuum as outline in IC 716.2 Cleaning Procedures Table.
Don appropriate PPE including safety goggles or glasses, gloves, and other items deemed appropriate.
Dust ceilings, vents, high ledges, upper walls, corners, curtain rails, televisions, and other hard-to-reach areas.
Install clean dusting or cleaning cloth on high dusting tool.
Change cloth to a high dusting tool as needed when over-saturated with dust and/or dirt.
When finished, secure high-dusting tool on to the cart and discard over-saturated cloth.

Step 3: Damp Wiping
Damp wiping is defined as cleaning a frequently touched surface using hospital-approved disinfectant wipes solution, PPE, and techniques. Begin at the doorway and proceed in a clockwise circular direction around the room/area, wiping down hand-reachable windowsills, blinds, lamps, ledges, and window frames with  hospital-approved disinfectant and cleaning cloth.
Don appropriate PPE including gloves, and other items deemed appropriate.
Damp wipe all furniture and fixtures in the patient units, offices and public areas.
Damp wipe all frames, boards, and pictures and dry thoroughly.
Damp wipe and spot clean walls and doors.
Using hospital-approved glass cleaner, clean and polish all glass and mirrors.

Occupied beds are not cleaned by the E-WFMs, only the environment not attached to the patient. Defer cleaning the overhead light fixture, call button, and light until after discharge. Never unplug any patient electrical cords.

Step 4: Clean Bathroom Fixtures
Cleaning bathroom fixtures is defined as cleaning items inside a bathroom using hospital-approved  disinfectant, tools, and techniques.
Don appropriate PPE including safety goggles or glasses, gloves, and other items deemed appropriate.
High Dusting is completed in Step 1. Use hospital-approved  disinfectant to clean all metal and porcelain surfaces of the sink.
Begin by cleaning the sink and proceed to the toilet.
Clean under the outer rim of the sink, removing any soap build-up.
Dry and polish all surfaces with a dry clean cloth.
Dust any exposed pipes under the sink.
Wash wall area around the sink with hospital-approved disinfectant.
Flush the toilet before cleaning.
Coat inside of the bowl with hospital-approved cleaning product.
Clean the outside of the commode with hospital-approved  disinfectant, including seat, hinges, pipes, and base.
Scrub inside of the toilet with a long-handled brush, including under the rim.
Flush commode to rinse bowl. Restock toiletries, paper, and hand hygiene products.

Step 5: Dust Mopping
Dust mopping is defined as using dry hospital-approved tools, cloths, and techniques, minimizing the suspension dispersion of the material. Begin the procedure at the furthest point from the entrance and safely work backwards using the “S-stroke”, under the bed, behind bedside tables, move the furniture, if necessary or possible, behind door(s), and ensure corners and edges are free from debris and dust.
Don appropriate PPE including safety goggles or glasses, gloves, and other items deemed appropriate.
Dust mop the room floor and the bathroom by using hospital-approved dusting tool and cloth.

Step 6: Damp Mopping
Damp mopping is defined as cleaning the floor using hospital-approved tools, single-use microfiber mop, solution, and techniques.  Begin the procedure at the furthest point from the entrance and safely work backwards using the “S-stroke”, under the bed, behind bedside tables, move the furniture, if necessary or possible, behind door(s), and touching all corners and edges.
Don appropriate PPE including safety goggles or glasses, gloves, and other items deemed appropriate.
Properly place wet floor signage.
Prepare and use a single-use microfiber mop.
Damp mop the room and bathroom floors with the hospital-approved solution located in the mop bucket.
When finished, ensure that the “wet floor” sign(s) are properly placed in the room at
the door to minimize safety hazards.
Single-use microfiber mops are replaced in every room or as needed.

g. Step 7: Inspection
Inspection is defined as the process to ensure that the area is free of debris and dust, disinfected, has clean linen/curtains, trash and linen containers are emptied, consumable products are replenished, and no EVS equipment or supplies remain. The E-WFM or supervisor must:
Visually inspect the area by monitoring Steps 1 through 6.
Immediately correct any missed critical details.
Ensure that the cubicle curtains and draperies do not have stains or soil marks.
Schedule for the changing of curtains and draperies are dependent on the ward or ICU policy.

Daily cleaning: Daily cleaning should take place at minimum once per calendar day in all inpatient rooms and in all outpatient clinics/ ambulatory settings. This includes: soiled  linen removal, high-dusting , damp wiping frequently touched surfaces, cleaning bathroom fixtures, dust mopping, and damp mopping with  hospital-approved  disinfectant, cleaning solutions, PPE and techniques. For any BMT patient or any other patient in Contact Plus (+) or Combined-Droplet Plus (+) isolation precautions,  hospital approved sodium hypochlorite (bleach) solution or wipes will be used instead of hospital-approved germicide.

Discharge Cleaning: Discharge cleaning is performed upon patient discharge from an inpatient room and upon request in other patient care areas. This includes: trash and soiled linen removal, high dusting, damp wiping frequently touched surfaces, cleaning of bathroom fixtures, dust mopping, damp mopping  with a hospital- approved  disinfectant, cleaning solutions, PPE and techniques. More extensive cleaning and disinfection is required after the patient is discharged/transferred. This includes changing privacy curtains in the room following hospital policy.

Terminal Cleaning: Terminal cleaning is performed upon patient discharge from an isolation inpatient room, OR/procedure rooms (end of day), and upon request in other patient care areas. This includes: Trash and soiled linen removal, high dusting, damp wiping frequently-touched frequently touched surfaces, Cleaning of bathroom fixtures, dust mopping, damp mopping, wall cleaning, with a hospital- approved cleaning wipe disinfectant, cleaning solutions, PPE and techniques. This  includes changing privacy curtains in the room following hospital policy. Hospital approved sodium hypochlorite (bleach) solution or wipes will be used.


1. Hospital-approved sodium hypochlorite (bleach) solution or wipes will be used for any patient in Contact Plus (+) or Combined-Droplet Plus (+) isolation precautions, and for all BMT patients regardless of isolation type.


Automated Disinfection Systems
UV disinfection system will be used on discharge rooms as outlined in IC 716.6 - UV Disinfecting Machines Standard Operating Procedures  The hydrogen peroxide vapor machine shall be used for room disinfection in the Bone Marrow Transplant inpatient unit.
Treatment with the UV disinfection systems  or hydrogen peroxide vapor units shall be conducted only after a discharge cleaning is performed by Environmental Services.
Special Patient Care Area Cleaning Request: Infection Prevention and Control may request UV  disinfection system or vaporized hydrogen peroxide treatment of any room or procedure area after consultation with  the Director of Environmental Services. Reference Attachment IC – 716.2 Cleaning Procedures Table.

Ambulatory/ Outpatient Setting: It is the responsibility of the unit or clinic’s clinical staff to disinfect high touch surfaces after each patient encounter. All equipment and surfaces are wiped down with hospital-approved disinfectant wipes after the patient and family leaves for the day.
Hospital High Risk Areas (Operating Room, ASC, Cath Lab and Interventional Radiology) will be maintained in a state of cleanliness that meets AORN Standards in order to protect patients and healthcare personnel from potentially infectious microorganisms. Terminal cleaning is completed at the end of each calendar day procedures are performed. Reference PER OR 025.0 for details.

Room Check Cleaning (Refer to Attachment IC – 716.2 Cleaning Procedures Table): Room check cleaning refers to the discharge cleaning process performed following annual comprehensive maintenance to patient rooms. All repairs are done prior to d room check cleaning.

Equipment Cleaning Frequency (Refer to Attachment IC – 716.1 Equipment Schedule for detailed list of equipment and schedule)
All patient areas and service areas are cleaned daily between patients, after use, post discharge and as needed.
All holding areas for trash and soiled linen will be routinely cleaned daily.  Chutes are decontaminated quarterly.

ATTACHMENTS:
IC – 716.1 Reusable Equipment Cleaning Schedule
IC – 716.2 Procedures Table
IC – 716.4 Sanitizing Agents and Disinfectants
IC – 716.5 Clean Surfaces Campaign Flier – Intensive Care Unit
IC – 716.6 UV Disinfecting Machines Standard Operating Procedures
IC – 716.7 Clean Surfaces Campaign Flier – Medical Surgical Unit

REFERENCES:
APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. 2014. Chapter 31: Cleaning, Disinfection, and Sterilization.
IC - 204.0 High Level Disinfection for Semi-Critical Items Outside of SPD
BMT 001.0 Surveillance, Testing and Precautions for BMT Patient Rooms, Unit Environment and Equipment Supplies

POLICY OWNER:
Manager, Infection Prevention and Control