FAQs
(frequently asked questions) 
“Clostridium Difficile” 
about 
What is Clostridium difficile infection? 
Clostridium difficile [pronounced Klo-STRID-ee-um dif-uh-SEEL], also 
known as “C. diff” [See-dif], is a germ that can cause diarrhea. Most 
cases of C. diff infection occur in patients taking antibiotics. The 
most common symptoms of a C. diff infection include: 
Watery diarrhea 
Fever 
Loss of appetite 
Nausea  
Belly pain and tenderness  
Who is most likely to get C. diff infection? 
The elderly and people with certain medical problems have the 
greatest chance of getting C. diff. C. diff spores can live outside the 
human body for a very long time and may be found on things in the 
environment such as bed linens, bed rails, bathroom fixtures, and 
medical equipment.  C. diff infection can spread from person-to­
person on contaminated equipment and on the hands of doctors, 
nurses, other healthcare providers and visitors. 
Can C. diff infection be treated? 
Yes, there are antibiotics that can be used to treat C. diff. In some 
severe cases, a person might have to have surgery to remove the 
infected part of the intestines. This surgery is needed in only 1 or 2 
out of every 100 persons with C. diff. 
What are some of the things that hospitals are doing to prevent C. 
diff infections? 
To prevent C. diff. infections, doctors, nurses, and other healthcare 
providers: 
•  Clean their hands with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand 
rub before and after caring for every patient. This can prevent 
C. diff and other germs from being passed from one patient to 
another on their hands. 
•  Carefully clean hospital rooms and medical equipment that have 
been used for patients with C. diff. 
•  Use Contact Precautions to prevent C. diff from spreading to 
other patients. Contact Precautions mean:  
o  Whenever possible, patients with C. diff will have a single room 
or share a room only with someone else who also has C. diff. 
o  Healthcare providers will put on gloves and wear a gown over 
their clothing while taking care of patients with C. diff. 
o  Visitors may also be asked to wear a gown and gloves. 
o  When leaving the room, hospital providers and visitors remove 
their gown and gloves and clean their hands. 
o  Patients on Contact Precautions are asked to stay in their 
hospital rooms as much as possible. They should not go to 
common areas, such as the gift shop or cafeteria. They can go 
to other areas of the hospital for treatments and tests. 
• Only give patients antibiotics when it is necessary. 
What can I do to help prevent C. diff infections? 
•  Make sure that all doctors, nurses, and other healthcare provid­
ers clean their hands with soap and water or an alcohol-based 
hand rub before and after caring for you. 
If you do not see your providers clean their hands, 
please ask them to do so. 
• Only take antibiotics as prescribed by your doctor. 
•  Be sure to clean your own hands often, especially after using the 
bathroom and before eating. 
Can my friends and family get C. diff when they visit me? 
C. diff infection usually does not occur in persons who are not tak­
ing antibiotics. Visitors are not likely to get C. diff. Still, to make it 
safer for visitors, they should: 
• Clean their hands before they enter your room and as they leave 
your room 
• Ask the nurse if they need to wear protective gowns and gloves 
when they visit you. 
What do I need to do when I go home from the hospital? 
Once you are back at home, you can return to your normal rou­
tine. Often, the diarrhea will be better or completely gone before 
you go home. This makes giving C. diff to other people much less 
likely. There are a few things you should do, however, to lower the 
chances of developing C. diff infection again or of spreading it to 
others. 
•  If you are given a prescription to treat C. diff, take the medicine 
exactly as prescribed by your doctor and pharmacist. Do not take 
half-doses or stop before you run out. 
•  Wash your hands often, especially after going to the bathroom 
and before preparing food. 
• People who live with you should wash their hands often as well. 
• If you develop more diarrhea after you get home, tell your doctor 
immediately. 
• Your doctor may give you additional instructions. 
If you have questions, please ask your doctor or nurse. 
Co-sponsored by: 
