Clostridioides difficile can be detected in stool specimens of many healthy children under the age of 1 year, and a few percent of adults.

Testing for C. difficile or its toxins should be performed only on diarrheal (unformed) stool unless ileus due to C. difficile is suspected.

Testing of stool from asymptomatic patients is not clinically useful, including use as a test of cure. It is not recommended, except for epidemiological studies.

Repeat testing during the same episode of diarrhea is of limited value and should be discouraged.

Healthcare workers must use gloves and gowns on entry to a room of a patient with Clostridium difficile infection.

Emphasize compliance with the practice of hand hygiene with soap and water.

Maintain contact precautions until 48 hours after diarrhea has resolved.

Routine identification of asymptomatic carriers (patients or healthcare workers) for infection control purposes is not recommended and treatment of such identified patients is not effective.

Use a sporicidal disinfectant such as  Dispatch (bleach) to address environmental contamination.

Routine environmental screening for C. difficile is not recommended.

Minimize the frequency and duration of antimicrobial therapy and the number of antimicrobial agents prescribed, to reduce CDI risk.

Discontinue therapy with the inciting antimicrobial agent(s) as soon as possible, as this may influence the risk of CDI recurrence.

When severe or complicated CDI is suspected, initiate empirical treatment as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.

If the stool test  result is negative, the decision to initiate, stop, or continue treatment must be individualized.

If possible, avoid use of antiperistaltic agents, as they may obscure symptoms and precipitate toxic megacolon.


Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults and Children: 2017 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA), Vol. 66, No. 7 (March 2018), pp. e1-e48


Journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics: Clostridium difficile Infection in Infants and Children, Pediatrics 2013;131;196; originally published online December 31, 2012; DOI: 10.1542/peds.2012-2992.


