A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  CDC's  2019  AR  Threats  Report  includes
national  death  and  infection  estimates  that  underscore  the  continued  threat  of  AR  in
the  United  States.   The  germs  are  listed  in  three  categories—urgent,  serious  and
concerning—based  on  level  of  concern  to  human  health.  The  report  also  includes  a
Watch List with three threats that have not spread widely in the U.S. but could become
common without continued aggressive action.  The 2019 AR Threats Report is intended
to:  The 2019 report also emphasizes progress in combating AR. However, CDC's 2022
special  report  highlighting  the  impact  of  COVID-19  on  antimicrobial  resistance  in  the
U.S. found that much of that progress was lost, in large part, due to the effects of the
pandemic.  The  pandemic  pushed  healthcare  facilities,  health  departments  and
communities  near  their  breaking  points  in  2020,  making  it  very  hard  to  maintain  the
progress
 in
 combating
 AR.
 Thankfully,
 the
 2022
 National
 and
 State
Healthcare-Associated Infections Progress Report shows that the U.S. is gaining ground
lost  during  the  first  years  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  with  decreases  in  standardized
infection  rates  for  some  HAIs,  including  a  16%  decrease  in  hospital-onset
methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  and  a  3%  decrease  in  hospital  onset
Clostridioides  difficile.  As  evident  from  the  pandemic,  without  continued  action  and
vigilance  these  gains  will  only  be  temporary.  In  2013,  CDC  published  the  first  AR
Threats  Report,  which  sounded  the  alarm  to  the  danger  of  AR.  The  2013  and  2019
reports do not include viruses (e.g., HIV, influenza) or parasites. The 2013 report stated
that  each  year  in  the  U.S.  at  least  2  million  people  got  an  antimicrobial-resistant
infection, and at least 23,000 people died. The 2013 AR Threats Report helped inform
the  first  National  Action  Plan  for  Combating  Antibiotic-Resistant  Bacteria.  Addressing
the  threat  of  AR  worldwide  requires:  CDC  is  working  with  partners  to  strengthen
prevention efforts and improve antibiotic and antifungal use so that the world benefits. 

We all have a role to play, from travelers, animal owners, and care givers to patients
and healthcare providers. Let's take action.  CDC leads the U.S. public health response
to combat AR. CDC's AR Solutions Initiative has heavily invested in domestic capacity to
detect, respond, contain, and prevent the spread of resistance across health care, food,
environment,  and  communities.  This  includes  sounding  the  alarm,  and  providing  the
data  for  action,  technical  expertise,  and  support  for  a  domestic  infrastructure  to
respond  to  AR.  To  accomplish  this  work,  CDC  successfully  collaborates  with  partners
across health care, industry, academia, and government.  The world needs heightened
vigilance  and  public  health  engagement  to  contain  resistance  threats  whenever  and
wherever  they  emerge.  Swift  public  health  action  is  fundamental  to  save  lives.  CDC.
Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States, 2019. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department
of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC;  2019   Antimicrobial  resistance  happens  when
germs  like  bacteria  and  fungi  can  defeat  the  drugs  designed  to  kill  them.  Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/antimicrobial-resistance/data-research/threats/index.html
