A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 LBRF epidemics occurred frequently in Europe during the early 20th century. Between
1919 and 1923, 13 million cases occurred in the social upheaval that overtook Russia
and Eastern Europe, resulting in 5 million deaths. During World War II, around a million
cases  occurred  in  North  Africa.  Risk  of  infection  in  the  United  States  is  extremely
unlikely if there was no travel to an endemic region. LBRF causes sporadic illness and
outbreaks  in  regions  of  Africa,  including  Ethiopia,  Eritrea,  and  Somalia,  and  in
congregate  living  settings  in  these  regions.  Illness  can  be  severe,  with  reported
mortality rates varying widely depending on social conditions, geography, and access to
treatment.  Infection  with  B.  recurrentis  may  result  in  a  wide  range  of  nonspecific
symptoms,  such  as:  Though  the  clinical  symptoms  of  LBRF  are  similar  to  Soft  Tick
Relapsing Fever (STRF), LBRF is usually associated with fewer relapses. People who are
pregnant are at high risk of pregnancy loss and may be at risk of more severe illness
from  LBRF.  LBRF  occurs  in  regions  of  Africa.  It  is  caused  by  B.  recurrentis,  a
spiral-shaped  bacteria  spread  from  person  to  person  by  the  human  body  louse
(Pediculus humanus humanus) and, rarely, the head louse (P. humanus capitis). Body
lice become infected by feeding on infected people.  Transmission from louse to people
typically occurs when an infected louse is crushed and the bacteria contaminate a bite
wound  or  scratch.   LBRF  outbreaks  most  commonly  occur  in  overcrowded  conditions
and areas experiencing social disruption, such as refugee camps. No other animal hosts
for B. recurrentis have been identified. Prevent infestations of body lice to prevent LBRF
and  other  louse-borne  infections:  Relapsing  fever  is  caused  by  several  species  of

Borrelia  bacteria  spread  by  ticks  and  body  lice.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/relapsing-fever/about/about-lbrf.html
