A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Working  with  or  exposure  to  certain
bacteria,  viruses,  or  other  infectious  agents  can  impact  reproductive  health.   Some
infections  have  been  associated  with  infertility.  Some  infections  can  pass  to  a  fetus
during  pregnancy  and  cause  a  miscarriage  or  birth  defects.  Infections  like  seasonal
influenza  (the  flu),  COVID-19,  and  pneumonia  can  cause  more  serious  illness  in
pregnant  people.  Workers  who  might  be  exposed  to  infectious  agents  include:  These
and  other  infections  can  pass  to  the  fetus  during  pregnancy,  or  cause  more  severe
illness  to  a  pregnant  person.  Vaccine-preventable  infections  that  can  cause  more
severe illness in a pregnant person and/or harm a fetus: Other infections that can cause
more severe illness in a pregnant person (many can also harm a fetus): Other infections
that can harm a fetus when infection occurs in pregnancy: *Please note that a vaccine
exists for Ebola virus disease but is not recommended for everyone. CDC recommends
speaking  to  your  physician  before  vaccinating  for  EBV  during  pregnancy.  Get  your
seasonal flu shot. Pregnant people should get the flu shot (inactivated vaccine), not the
nasal  vaccine  (LAIV,  live  attenuated  nasal  vaccine).  Do  not  get  the  MMR  (measles
mumps rubella) vaccine during pregnancy. If you are a pregnant healthcare worker who
is not vaccinated and not immune, do not work with rubella-infected patients.  People
who  are  pregnant  should  stay  up  to  date  with  their  COVID-19  vaccines.  Studies
including  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  around  the  world  show  that  COVID-19
vaccination before and during pregnancy is safe, effective, and beneficial to both the
pregnant person and the baby.  Wash your hands often if you are around someone who
is  sick.   Follow  recommended  infection  control  guidelines  carefully.  Following  these
standard  precautions  will  generally  mean  you  are  at  no  higher  risk  of  catching  a
harmful infection than other workers. However, there are exceptions for some pregnant
people  and  some  infectious  agents.   CDC  recommends  that  pregnant  healthcare

workers  should  not  provide  care  for  patients  with  Ebola.  Furthermore,  the
recommended  PPE  for  care  of  patients  with  Ebola  may  be  particularly  restrictive  and
uncomfortable for these workers. Follow safety guidelines for laboratory workers. These
guidelines will help you prevent laboratory-acquired infection when followed correctly.
However,  pregnant  lab  workers  should  handle  certain  pathogens  with  special
precaution. For laboratory work with concentrated cultures of pathogens, refer to the
Biosafety Manual for Biomedical Laboratories. Talk to your supervisor or occupational
safety officer about infection control procedures to keep you safe. It's safe for pregnant
workers  to  give  and  receive  flu  shots  at  work.  Talk  to  your  doctor  about  potential
hazards at work. Make sure to mention that your job exposes you to infectious agents.
Your  unique  medical  situation,  vaccination  history,  and  specific  work  environment
should  be  considered  when  assessing  ways  to  reduce  your  risk.   For  some  pregnant
workers,  standard  infection  control  procedures  are  enough  to  keep  their  risk  at  the
same level as other workers. For others, adjusting tasks to reduce exposure to certain
infectious agents, adjusting personal protective equipment, or other options might be
considered.   For  information  on  the  Pregnant  Workers  Fairness  Act,  please  see
resources  from  the  U.S.  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  (EEOC)  website.
Learn more about vaccines for pregnant people
 Learn more about getting COVID-19 vaccines while pregnant or breastfeeding
 Learn more about infection control in healthcare settings
 Learn about guidelines for human and animal medical diagnostic labs
 Use of biological safety cabinets and guidelines for medical diagnostic labs
 CDC has additional information on biosafety
 CDC guidance on working with Zika virus in laboratories and pregnancy and Ebola 
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 established NIOSH as a research
agency focused on the study of worker safety and health, and empowering employers
and  workers  to  create  safe  and  healthy  workplaces.  Languages  Language

Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/reproductive-health/prevention/infectious.html
