Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.       Deaths  from  infectious
diseases have declined markedly in the United States during the 20th century (Figure
1). This decline contributed to a sharp drop in infant and child mortality (1,2) and to the
29.2-year increase in life expectancy (2). In 1900, 30.4% of all deaths occurred among
children aged less than 5 years; in 1997, that percentage was only 1.4%. In 1900, the
three  leading  causes  of  death  were  pneumonia,  tuberculosis  (TB),  and  diarrhea  and
enteritis, which (together with diphtheria) caused one third of all deaths (Figure 2). Of
these  deaths,  40%  were  among  children  aged  less  than  5  years  (1).  In  1997,  heart
disease  and  cancers  accounted  for  54.7%  of  all  deaths,  with  4.5%  attributable  to
pneumonia, influenza, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection (2). Despite
this overall progress, one of the most devastating epidemics in human history occurred
during  the  20th  century:  the  1918  influenza  pandemic  that  resulted  in  20  million
deaths, including 500,000 in the United States, in less than 1 year--more than have died
in  as  short  a  time  during  any  war  or  famine  in  the  world  (3).  HIV  infection,  first
recognized in 1981, has caused a pandemic that is still in progress, affecting 33 million
people and causing an estimated 13.9 million deaths (4). These episodes illustrate the
volatility  of  infectious  disease  death  rates  and  the  unpredictability  of  disease
emergence.      Public health action to control infectious diseases in the 20th century is
based on the 19th century discovery of microorganisms as the cause of many serious
diseases  (e.g.,  cholera  and  TB).  Disease  control  resulted  from  improvements  in
sanitation  and  hygiene,  the  discovery  of  antibiotics,  and  the  implementation  of
universal childhood vaccination programs. Scientific and technologic advances played a
major  role  in  each  of  these  areas  and  are  the  foundation  for  today's  disease
surveillance  and  control  systems.  Scientific  findings  also  have  contributed  to  a  new
understanding of the evolving relation between humans and microbes (5). CONTROL OF

INFECTIOUS DISEASES Sanitation and Hygiene      The 19th century shift in population
from  country  to  city  that  accompanied  industrialization  and  immigration  led  to
overcrowding  in  poor  housing  served  by  inadequate  or  nonexistent  public  water
supplies and waste-disposal systems. These conditions resulted in repeated outbreaks
of  cholera,  dysentery,  TB,  typhoid  fever,  influenza,  yellow  fever,  and  malaria.       By
1900, however, the incidence of many of these diseases had begun to decline because
of  public  health  improvements,  implementation  of  which  continued  into  the  20th
century. Local, state, and federal efforts to improve sanitation and hygiene reinforced
the concept of collective "public health" action (e.g., to prevent infection by providing
clean drinking water). By 1900, 40 of the 45 states had established health departments.
The  first  county  health  departments  were  established  in  1908  (6).  From  the  1930s
through  the  1950s,  state  and  local  health  departments  made  substantial  progress  in
disease prevention activities, including sewage disposal, water treatment, food safety,
organized  solid  waste  disposal,  and  public  education  about  hygienic  practices  (e.g.,
foodhandling  and  handwashing).  Chlorination  and  other  treatments  of  drinking  water
began  in  the  early  1900s  and  became  widespread  public  health  practices,  further
decreasing the incidence of waterborne diseases. The incidence of TB also declined as
improvements in housing reduced crowding and TB-control programs were initiated. In
1900, 194 of every 100,000 U.S. residents died from TB; most were residents of urban
areas.  In  1940  (before  the  introduction  of  antibiotic  therapy),  TB  remained  a  leading
cause of death, but the crude death rate had decreased to 46 per 100,000 persons (7). 
    Animal and pest control also contributed to disease reduction. Nationally sponsored,
state-coordinated  vaccination  and  animal-control  programs  eliminated  dog-to-dog
transmission  of  rabies.  Malaria,  once  endemic  throughout  the  southeastern  United
States,  was  reduced  to  negligible  levels  by  the  late  1940s;  regional  mosquito-control
programs  played  an  important  role  in  these  efforts.  Plague  also  diminished;  the  U.S.
Marine Hospital Service (which later became the Public Health Service) led quarantine

and ship inspection activities and rodent and vector-control operations. The last major
rat-associated  outbreak  of  plague  in  the  United  States  occurred  during  1924-1925  in
Los  Angeles.  This  outbreak  included  the  last  identified  instance  of  human-to-human
transmission  of  plague  (through  inhalation  of  infectious  respiratory  droplets  from
coughing  patients)  in  this  country.  Vaccination       Strategic  vaccination  campaigns
have virtually eliminated diseases that previously were common in the United States,
including  diphtheria,  tetanus,  poliomyelitis,  smallpox,  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and
Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  meningitis  (8).  With  the  licensure  of  the  combined
diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and  pertussis  vaccine  in  1949,  state  and  local  health
departments instituted vaccination programs, aimed primarily at poor children. In 1955,
the introduction of the Salk poliovirus vaccine led to federal funding of state and local
childhood vaccination programs. In 1962, a federally coordinated vaccination program
was  established  through  the  passage  of  the  Vaccination  Assistance  Act--landmark
legislation  that  has  been  renewed  continuously  and  now  supports  the  purchase  and
administration  of  a  full  range  of  childhood  vaccines.       The  success  of  vaccination
programs in the United States and Europe inspired the 20th-century concept of "disease
eradication"--the  idea  that  a  selected  disease  could  be  eradicated  from  all  human
populations  through  global  cooperation.  In  1977,  after  a  decade-long  campaign
involving 33 nations, smallpox was eradicated worldwide--approximately a decade after
it had been eliminated from the United States and the rest of the Western Hemisphere.
Polio and dracunculiasis may be eradicated by 2000. Antibiotics and Other Antimicrobial
Medicines       Penicillin  was  developed  into  a  widely  available  medical  product  that
provided quick and complete treatment of previously incurable bacterial illnesses, with
a wider range of targets and fewer side effects than sulfa drugs. Discovered fortuitously
in  1928,  penicillin  was  not  developed  for  medical  use  until  the  1940s,  when  it  was
produced  in  substantial  quantities  and  used  by  the  U.S.  military  to  treat  sick  and
wounded soldiers.      Antibiotics have been in civilian use for 57 years (see box 1) and

have  saved  the  lives  of  persons  with  streptococcal  and  staphylococcal  infections,
gonorrhea, syphilis, and other infections. Drugs also have been developed to treat viral
diseases  (e.g.,  herpes  and  HIV  infection);  fungal  diseases  (e.g.,  candidiasis  and
histoplasmosis);  and  parasitic  diseases  (e.g.,  malaria).  The  microbiologist  Selman
Waksman  led  much  of  the  early  research  in  discovering  antibiotics  (see  box  2).
However, the emergence of drug resistance in many organisms is reversing some of the
therapeutic  miracles  of  the  last  50  years  and  underscores  the  importance  of  disease
prevention.  TECHNOLOGIC  ADVANCES  IN  DETECTING  AND  MONITORING  INFECTIOUS
DISEASES      Technologic changes that increased capacity for detecting, diagnosing,
and  monitoring  infectious  diseases  included  development  early  in  the  century  of
serologic  testing  and  more  recently  the  development  of  molecular  assays  based  on
nucleic  acid  and  antibody  probes.  The  use  of  computers  and  electronic  forms  of
communication  enhanced  the  ability  to  gather,  analyze,  and  disseminate  disease
surveillance data. Serologic Testing      Serologic testing came into use in the 1910s and
has become a basic tool to diagnose and control many infectious diseases. Syphilis and
gonorrhea,  for  example,  were  widespread  early  in  the  century  and  were  difficult  to
diagnose,  especially  during  the  latent  stages.  The  advent  of  serologic  testing  for
syphilis helped provide a more accurate description of this public health problem and
facilitated  diagnosis  of  infection.  For  example,  in  New  York  City,  serologic  testing  in
1901 indicated that 5%-19% of all men had syphilitic infections (9). Viral Isolation and
Tissue Culture      The first virus isolation techniques came into use at the turn of the
century. They involved straining infected material through successively smaller sieves
and  inoculating  test  animals  or  plants  to  show  the  purified  substance  retained
disease-causing  activity.  The  first  "filtered"  viruses  were  tobacco  mosaic  virus  (1882)
and  foot-and-mouth  disease  virus  of  cattle  (1898).  The  U.S.  Army  Command  under
Walter  Reed  filtered  yellow  fever  virus  in  1900.  The  subsequent  development  of  cell
culture in the 1930s paved the way for large-scale production of live or heat-killed viral

vaccines.  Negative  staining  techniques  for  visualizing  viruses  under  the  electron
microscope were available by the early 1960s. Molecular Techniques      During the last
quarter  of  the  20th  century,  molecular  biology  has  provided  powerful  new  tools  to
detect and characterize infectious pathogens. The use of nucleic acid hybridization and
sequencing  techniques  has  made  it  possible  to  characterize  the  causative  agents  of
previously  unknown  diseases  (e.g.,  hepatitis  C,  human  ehrlichiosis,  hantavirus
pulmonary  syndrome,  acquired  immunodeficiency  syndrome  [AIDS],  and  Nipah  virus
disease).      Molecular tools have enhanced capacity to track the transmission of new
threats  and  find  new  ways  to  prevent  and  treat  them.  Had  AIDS  emerged  100  years
ago,  when  laboratory-based  diagnostic  methods  were  in  their  infancy,  the  disease
might have remained a mysterious syndrome for many decades. Moreover, the drugs
used to treat HIV-infected persons and prevent perinatal transmission (e.g., replication
analogs and protease inhibitors) were developed based on a modern understanding of
retroviral replication at the molecular level. CHALLENGES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY     
Success  in  reducing  morbidity  and  mortality  from  infectious  diseases  during  the  first
three  quarters  of  the  20th  century  led  to  complacency  about  the  need  for  continued
research  into  treatment  and  control  of  infectious  microbes  (10).  However,  the
appearance of AIDS, the re-emergence of TB (including multidrug-resistant strains), and
an  overall  increase  in  infectious  disease  mortality  during  the  1980s  and  early  1990s
(Figure  1)  provide  additional  evidence  that  as  long  as  microbes  can  evolve,  new
diseases  will  appear.  The  emergence  of  new  diseases  underscores  the  importance  of
disease  prevention  through  continual  monitoring  of  underlying  factors  that  may
encourage  the  emergence  or  re-emergence  of  diseases.       Molecular  genetics  has
provided a new appreciation of the remarkable ability of microbes to evolve, adapt, and
develop  drug  resistance  in  an  unpredictable  and  dynamic  fashion  (see  box  3).
Resistance  genes  are  transmitted  from  one  bacterium  to  another  on  plasmids,  and
viruses  evolve  through  replication  errors  and  reassortment  of  gene  segments  and  by

jumping  species  barriers.  Recent  examples  of  microbial  evolution  include  the
emergence  of  a  virulent  strain  of  avian  influenza  in  Hong  Kong  (1997-98);  the
multidrug-resistant W strain of M. tuberculosis in the United States in 1991 (11); and
Staphylococcus aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin in Japan in 1996 (12)
and the United States in 1997 (13,14).      For continued success in controlling infectious
diseases,  the  U.S.  public  health  system  must  prepare  to  address  diverse  challenges,
including the emergence of new infectious diseases, the re-emergence of old diseases
(sometimes  in  drug-resistant  forms),  large  foodborne  outbreaks,  and  acts  of
bioterrorism. Ongoing research on the possible role of infectious agents in causing or
intensifying certain chronic diseases (including diabetes mellitus type 1, some cancers
[15-17],  and  heart  conditions  [18,19  ])  also  is  imperative.  Continued  protection  of
health  requires  improved  capacity  for  disease  surveillance  and  outbreak  response  at
the local, state, federal, and global levels; the development and dissemination of new
laboratory
 and
 epidemiologic
 methods;
 continued
 antimicrobial
 and
 vaccine
development;  and  ongoing  research  into  environmental  factors  that  facilitate  disease
emergence  (20).  Reported  by:  National  Center  for  Environmental  Health;  National
Center for Health Statistics; National Center for Infectious Diseases, CDC. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,

U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800.
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 7/29/99 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 

 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm4829a1.htm
