A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. These instructions are in accordance with
CDC regulations and are for the use of panel physicians evaluating persons applying for
immigrant  or  refugee  status,  as  well  as  certain  non-immigrants  who  are  required  to
have  an  overseas  medical  examination.    The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention (CDC) in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), has the
authority  to  promulgate  regulations  that  establish  requirements  for  the  medical
examination  of  aliens  before  they  may  be  admitted  into  the  United  States.  Under
section 212(a)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) (8 USC 1182(a)(1)), any
alien  determined  to  have  a  specified  health-related  condition  is  inadmissible  to  the
United  States.  Aliens  living  outside  the  United  States  who  have  a  specified
health-related condition (see Background) are ineligible to receive a visa and may not
be admitted into the United States. The overseas medical examination is a means of
evaluating  the  health  of  aliens  applying  for  entry  into  the  United  States  and
determining  if  they  have  a  communicable  disease  of  public  health  significance.  On
October 6, 2008, HHS/CDC published an Interim Final Rule (IFR) for 42 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) Part 34 – Medical Screening of Aliens that amended the definition of a
communicable disease of public health significance in 42 CFR 34.2(b), the scope of the
examination (42 CFR 34.3), and the evaluation criteria for tuberculosis in 42 CFR 34.3.
Updates to the evaluation criteria for tuberculosis will be addressed as appropriate in a
separate  Addendum  to  the  Technical  Instructions  for  tuberculosis.  The  definition  of
communicable diseases of public health significance continues to include the diseases
listed  in  the  Technical  Instructions  for  Medical  Examination  of  Aliens,  June  1991,  and
adds two new disease categories: (1) quarantinable diseases designated by Presidential
Executive Order, and (2) diseases that meet the criteria of a public health emergency of
international concern which require notification to the World Health Organization (WHO)

under  the  revised  International  Health  Regulations  (IHR)  of  2005.  HHS/CDC  also
amended the provisions that describe the scope of the medical examination for aliens
by  incorporating  a  more  flexible,  risk-based  approach  based  on  medical  and
epidemiologic factors. This approach will determine which diseases are included in the
medical  screening  and  testing  of  aliens  in  areas  of  the  world  that  are  experiencing
outbreaks  of  specific  diseases.  These  instructions  are  for  the  use  of  panel  physicians
and  consular  officers  who  are  evaluating  aliens  applying  for  immigrant  or  refugee
status,  as  well  as  non-immigrants  who  are  required  to  have  an  overseas  medical
examination,  hereafter  referred  to  as  applicants.  Applicants  are  inadmissible  into  the
United  States  if  they  are  determined  1)  to  have  a  communicable  disease  of  public
health significance; 2) to have a physical or mental disorder and behavior associated
with  the  disorder  that  may  pose,  or  has  posed,  a  threat  to  the  property,  safety,  or
welfare of the applicant or others; 3) to have a history of a physical or mental disorder
associated with behavior which posed a threat to the property, safety, or welfare of the
applicant or others and which is likely to recur or lead to other harmful behavior; or 4)
to be a drug abuser or addict. Medical examinations, including a physical and mental
evaluation,  to  determine  whether  an  applicant  may  have  such  a  health-related
condition  are  authorized  under  section  232  of  the  INA  (8  USC  1222).  Under  sections
212(a)(1) and 232 of the INA and section 325 of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act (42
USC 252), the HHS Secretary promulgates regulations to establish the requirements for
the medical examination and to list the health-related conditions that make applicants
ineligible  for  entry  into  the  United  States.  Previous  Part  34  regulations  defined  a
"communicable  disease  of  public  health  significance"  by  only  listing  eight  specific
diseases  –  active  tuberculosis  (TB),  human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  infection,
chancroid,  gonorrhea,  granuloma  inguinale,  lymphogranuloma  venereum,  infectious
syphilis,
 and
 infectious
 leprosy
 (Hansen's
 disease).
 Recent
 experience
 has
demonstrated  that  a  fixed  list  of  diseases  does  not  allow  the  flexibility  to  rapidly

respond to unanticipated emerging or re-emerging outbreaks of disease. The ability to
rapidly  respond  requires  an  approach  based  on  prospective  risks  and  consequences
instead of a static list that does not reflect the potential for future outbreaks of novel
diseases. Therefore, HHS/CDC is adding the following disease categories to the current
list  of  communicable  diseases  of  public  health  significance:  The  definition  of
communicable diseases of public health significance continues to include the diseases
listed  in  the  Technical  Instructions  of  Medical  Examination  of  Aliens,  June  1991,  and
adds  the  following  diseases:  Quarantinable,  communicable  diseases  specified  by  any
Presidential  Executive  Order  under  Section  361(b)  of  the  PHS  Act.  Executive  Order
13295  of  April  4,  2003,  as  amended  by  Executive  Order  13375  of  April  1,  2005  and
Executive Order 13674 of July 31, 2014, contains the most recent list of quarantinable,
communicable  diseases,  and  includes  the  following:  Any  communicable  disease  that
requires notification to WHO as an event that may constitute a public health emergency
of international concern under the 2005 IHR includes— Further information on the 2005
IHR  diseases  and  algorithm  is  available  at  the  following  website:  Further  information
and updates on the required notifiable diseases are available at the following websites:
The scope of the overseas examination has been revised to include additional medical
screening,  testing,  and  treatment,  in  specific  circumstances,  for  assessments
performed outside the United States for the following disease categories: The additional
medical  screening,  testing,  and  treatment  for  the  disease  categories  above  will  be
determined  by  HHS/CDC  using  a  risk-based  approach  based  on  medical  and
epidemiologic factors. This risk-based approach will apply only to medical examinations
outside  the  United  States  and  only  in  those  geographic  areas  where  the  risk  is  high.
Under  the  new  risk-based  approach,  HHS/CDC  may  require  aliens  outside  the  United
States  applying  for  U.S.  immigration  to  undergo  additional  screening,  testing,  and
treatment  for  specific  communicable  diseases  of  public  health  significance.  The
screening  will  take  into  account  the  following  medical  and  epidemiologic  factors:

HHS/CDC will consider diseases identified through the IHR algorithm as communicable
diseases  of  public  health  significance  when  they  meet  one  or  more  of  the  criteria
above, and for any of the following: Changes to the testing and treatment requirements
will depend on the severity of the communicable disease of public health significance
and  the  effect  on  a  specific  population  at  the  time  of  the  medical  examination.
HHS/CDC  may  require  additional  screening,  including  additional  medical  interviews,
physical examination, laboratory testing, radiological examination, or other diagnostic
procedures. Screening, testing, and treatment for newly identified diseases as a part of
the  list  of  communicable  diseases  of  public  health  significance  will  continue  until
HHS/CDC determines the particular situation does not warrant this designation, based
on  the  following  factors:  HHS/CDC  will  be  responsible  for  determining  if  additional
medical  screening,  testing,  and  treatment  are  needed  for  a  disease  in  a  specific
population in a specific geographic location and will directly provide this information to
panel  physicians.  Panel  physicians  should  NOT  initiate  additional  requirements  for
medical screening, testing, and treatment without notification from HHS/CDC. In most
instances, additional medical screening and testing may consist only of epidemiologic
questions  and  further  physical  examination  relating  to  the  disease.  Updates  of  the
Technical Instructions on a specific disease and additional medical screening, testing,
and treatment protocol for the disease will be made available at CDC/DGMH's website.
The  overseas  examination  will  continue  to  consist  of  a  medical  history,  physical
examination,  and  screening/diagnostic  testing  and  should  include:  HHS/CDC  will  alert
panel physicians when new or additional screening, testing, and treatment protocols for
communicable diseases of public health significance are issued. Technical Instructions
for screening, testing, and treatment of the additional disease(s) under the risk-based
approach will be provided to the panel physicians. Updates of new Addendums to the
Technical  Instructions  with  information  on  a  specific  disease  and  additional  medical
screening,  testing,  and  treatment  protocol  for  the  disease  will  be  made  available  at

CDC/DGMH's website. The applicant diagnosed with a communicable disease of public
health significance must be treated by using a standard treatment regimen, as noted in
the  Techncial  Instructions  for  panel  physicians,  before  the  medical  report  forms  or
eMedical  documentation  is  completed.  Acronym  Full  Phrase  CDC  Centers  for  Disease
Control and Prevention, United States CF Code of Federal Regulations DGMH Division of
Global Migration Health DS Department of State HHS Department of Health and Human
Services  IHV  Human  immunodeficiency  virus  IFR  Interim  Final  Rule  IHR  International
Health  Regulations  INA  Immigration  Nationality  Act  PHS  Public  Health  Service  SARS
Severe acute respiratory syndrome TB Tuberculosis USC United States Code WHO World
Health  Organization  CDC  works  to  promote  and  improve  the  health  of  immigrants,
refugees, and migrants globally. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language
Assistance 

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/immigrant-refugee-health/hcp/panel-physicians/communicable-diseases-addendum.
html
