Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Four  major  sources  of  regulations  are  may  apply  to
emergencies involving a chemical spill. A brief overview of the major requirements of
these regulations follows. This OSHA regulation gives the requirements of plans for the
effective  evacuation  and  accounting  for  employees  in  case  of  an  emergency,  e.g.,
chemical spill. The written evacuation plan must address, at a minimum, the following:
All employees who assist in the evacuation must be trained on how to implement their
function.  Post  emergency  telephone  numbers  near  telephones,  on  employee  notice
boards, and in other conspicuous locations (see OSHA 29 CFR 1910.165). All employees
who  are  affected  by  the  evacuation  plan  must  be  trained  in  its  contents  and
implementation. Update the plan and training as procedures and or evacuation routes
change. The EPA regulations (40 CFR 265.30 to 265.56) establish procedures to ensure
that  emergencies  are  planned  for  and  minimized  in  order  to  successfully  protect  the
environment  and  surrounding  community  (See  the  Hazardous  Waste  checklist).  To
minimize hazards from releases of hazardous materials to air, soil, or surface water, the
written  plan  must  include  the  following:  This  plan  must  be  kept  up-to-date  and
submitted  to  local  police,  fire,  and  rescue  departments  and  to  the  local  emergency
planning committee and any emergency response teams who may respond to such an
event.  Required  steps  for  handling  emergencies  include  the  following:  The  OSHA
Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response standard covers procedures for
handling a chemical spill by designated responders and employees who respond from
outside  the  immediate  release  area.  Responses  to  incidental  releases  of  hazardous
substances where the substance can be absorbed, neutralized, or otherwise controlled
at the time of release by employees in the immediate release area or by maintenance
personnel  are  not  considered  to  be  emergency  responses  within  the  scope  of  the

standard. Students or teachers should not respond to significant spills because of the
extensive  training  requirements  and  equipment  needed.  Trained  State,  county,  or
municipal  hazardous  materials  response  teams  should  be  brought  in  if  such  a  spill
occurs.  These  teams  will  follow  the  requirements  of  the  hazardous  waste  operations
and emergency response standard that ensures that emergency responders work safely
during spill cleanup activities. They will have a written plan that covers the following:
This regulation also requires that an emergency coordinator be designated and that an
incident  command  system  be  followed.  Positive  pressure  supplied-air  respirators  are
required until air monitoring indicates that less protection is safe for the area. Training
requirements for responders vary depending on the level of activity in the emergency
response. Personnel responsible for stopping leaks and cleaning spills must be trained
to  the  hazardous  materials  technician  level  (minimum  24  hours  training  annually).
Medical surveillance is also required for these responders. If teachers or maintenance
employees respond to minor spills, they must have had training covering the hazards of
the  spilled  material  and  the  correct  response  actions.  They  also  must  have  the
appropriate  personal  protective  equipment  along  with  training  on  how  to  use  it.  In
addition,  they  must  know  how  to  dispose  of  the  spilled  material  following  all  Federal
and  State  regulations.  The  regulations  listed  below  may  apply  to  staff  with  these
responsibilities:  A  sample  emergency  response  procedure  consistent  with  the  above
regulations  is  presented  here  to  help  schools  formulate  their  compliance  plans.  Each
chemical spill incident is a unique occurrence, and procedures for handling such spill
may vary among emergency response teams. In this section, NIOSH describes the usual
steps  taken  during  an  emergency  response  incident  and  suggests  practical  ways  to
prepare for a chemical spill to cooperate with the emergency responders and incident
commander.  However,  NIOSH  does  not  imply  that  these  written  suggestions  are  the
only ways to prepare for and assist in a chemical spill incident. Review all classrooms to
identify  spill  hazards.  All  teachers  and  students  should  be  trained  to  recognize

hazardous material spills and what procedures to follow. This instruction should include
information about the effects of hazardous materials on humans and the environment.
If  a  spill  is  beyond  the  cleanup  capability  of  the  person  who  created  the  spill  or
custodial  staff,  follow  these  procedures:  The  fire  department  may  dispatch  their
hazardous  materials  emergency  response  team  (HAZMAT)  to  handle  the  spill.  The
HAZMAT  incident  commander  is  usually  the  fire  department  chief  and  is  the  senior
person  responsible  for  directing  all  activities  during  the  cleanup  effort.  The  incident
commander  may  take  the  following  steps:  The  incident  commander  will  determine
when  it  is  safe  to  reoccupy  the  classroom  or  building  by  considering  air  monitoring
results  and  checking  all  potentially  affected  classroom  equipment  for  evidence  of
pressure  buildup  or  leaks,  etc.  After  the  completion  of  the  emergency  response,  the
incident  commander  may  convene  all  responders,  the  classroom  teacher,  and  the
appropriate school administrators to critique the handling of the response, to determine
the  cause  of  the  incident,  and  to  identify  future  preventive  measures.  Hazardous
chemical waste is regulated by EPA. See Hazardous Waste Self-Inspection Checklist the
checklist on Hazardous Waste. Compliance with all of these regulations is essential to
ensure  the  safe  and  effective  resolution  of  hazardous  materials  spills.  The  planning
regulations  can  be  met  by  preparing  separate  plans  or  by  developing  a  separate
evacuation  plan  and  integrating  the  requirements  of  all  regulations  into  a  single
coordinated  plan.  Schools  should  also  establish  communication  with  the  nearest
hazardous materials response team to facilitate prompt action if the need arises.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2004-101/append.html
