A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Research methods for the Infection Control
in  Healthcare  Personnel  (2023),  from  the  Infection  Control  in  Healthcare  Personnel:
Infrastructure and Routine Practices for Occupational Infection Prevention and Control
Services  guideline (2019). This document is an update of four sections of Part I of the
Guideline for infection control in health care personnel, 1998, and their corresponding
recommendations  in  Part  II:  The  sections  were  updated  by  experts  in  occupational
health,  infectious  diseases,  and  infection  prevention  and  control  (IPC).  Updates  were
informed by a systematic review of recent articles published in peer-reviewed journals
and  databases  of  systematic  reviews,  guidelines,  and  regulations.  All  updates  were
vetted  at  public  meetings  of  the  Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory
Committee (HICPAC) (See Appendix 1. Contributors).  The questions developed to guide
the  literature  search  were:  The  infrastructure  and  delivery  of  healthcare  to  patients,
and  hence  the  provision  of  occupational  IPC  services  to  healthcare  personnel  (HCP),
have changed since the publication of the Guideline for infection control in health care
personnel,  1998.  CDC  conducted  a  targeted  literature  search  for  recent  articles
consistent with current approaches in occupational IPC service delivery to HCP. Search
strategies  were  formulated  using  a  combination  of  Medical  Subject  Headings  (MeSH)
terms and key words to identify literature that focused on at least one of the eight OHS
IPC elements. Four searches were performed in MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CINAHL, or the
Cochrane Database of Systematic reviews. Searches sought: In addition to the results of
the systematic review, CDC (KI, DK) searched relevant websites and systematic review
repositories of government agencies and nongovernmental organizations (Table A3.5)
for  additional  guidelines,  regulations,  program  evaluations,  quality  improvement
initiatives,  and  systematic  reviews.  CDC  (MD,  KI,  DK,  AO,  KR,  DT)  conducted  the  title
and abstract screening and the full text review using the below inclusion and exclusion

criteria.  Inclusion  Criteria:  Articles  were  retrieved  if  they  were:  Exclusion  Criteria:
Articles were excluded if they were: Figure A3.1 depicts the process of screening and
selecting  articles.  Very  few  relevant  intervention  studies  were  found  in  indexed
databases,  and  many  lacked  well-defined  interventions,  a  comparison  group,  large
study  size,  or  longitudinal  follow-up.  The  authors  formulated  recommendations  based
on  current  federal  regulations,  standards,  and  recommendations,  or  informed  by:
Authors  recused  themselves  from  decisions  pertaining  to  the  development  of
recommendations  when  there  was  a  perceived  or  actual  conflict  of  interest.  HICPAC
classified  all  recommendations  as  good  practice  statements  based  on  professional
experience  and  scientific  evidence  that  indicated  a  high  probability  that  the
recommended action would do more good than harm1. Drafts of the updated sections
and recommendations were presented at public HICPAC meetings in March 2016, July
2016,  and  December  2016.  Input  from  HICPAC  and  the  public  were  incorporated  into
subsequent  drafts.  The  draft  recommendations  and  narrative  were  provisionally
approved by HICPAC at the December 2016 meeting2. Following further revisions, CDC
then  submitted  the  guideline  to  CDC  clearance  and  subsequent  posting  to
Regulations.gov for public comment. The comments were compiled and reviewed with a
revised draft document at the May 2019 HICPAC meeting. The document was approved
by HICPAC on May 17, 2019. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical
safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and
visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/healthcare-personnel-infrastructure-routine-practices/methods.
html
