 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Electronic medical record (EMR)
systems have the 
potential to improve reporting of notifiable diseases beyond 
either traditional clinician-initiated or automated 
laboratory-based reporting systems. Traditional clinician-initiated 
passive surveillance is burdensome to clinicians and often incomplete and delayed 
(1,2). Electronic laboratory reporting addresses these limitations 
(3,4) but often lacks information needed for public health purposes (e.g., patient signs 
and symptoms, prescribed treatments, and pregnancy status). Laboratory systems also
do not integrate multiple 
laboratory  tests  to  satisfy  a  case  definition.  Many  EMRs,  however,  contain  this
information and store it in a form that is 
amenable to electronic analysis and reporting. Consequently, EMR-based reporting has
the potential to provide active 
notifiable  disease  surveillance  that  is  more  timely,  complete,  and  clinically  detailed.
This report summarizes findings from a 
pilot  EMR-based  electronic  surveillance  system  in  Massachusetts,  which  documented
increases of 39% in reported 
chlamydia  and  53%  in  reported  gonorrhea  for  the  period  June  2006--July  2007,
compared with the existing passive 
surveillance  system.  Eighty-one  instances  of  pregnancy  not  identified  by  passive
surveillance were reported by the electronic 
system  in  patients  with  chlamydia  or  gonorrhea.  In  addition,  the  electronic  system
identified 20 cases of pelvic 

inflammatory disease and four cases of acute hepatitis A, compared with none and one,
respectively, reported via the passive 
system. Improved reporting can help public health departments better allocate limited
resources for targeted investigations 
and interventions.
 The Massachusetts Department of Public Health, the Department of Ambulatory Care
and Prevention at 
Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and Atrius Health collaborated
under the auspices of the 
CDC  Center  of  Excellence  in  Public  Health  Informatics  at  Harvard  Pilgrim  Health  Care
and Children's Hospital in Boston 
to create a system called Electronic Support for Public Health (ESP) 
(5). Atrius Health is a multispecialty group 
practice that provides primary care and outpatient specialty services to approximately
600,000 children and adults at 35 
clinical facilities in eastern Massachusetts. ESP is designed to be compatible with most
commercial EMR systems. Data 
on patient visits are exported from the EMR system to an independent ESP server every
24 hours. Transfer of data is 
an important aspect of ESP's compatibility with most EMR systems. Export of data also
enables analysis without 
burdening  the  medical  practice  EMR  system.  The  ESP  server  is  secured  behind  the
practice's electronic firewall to ensure the 
security of sensitive clinical information.
 ESP was activated in January 2007 and populated with data beginning in June 2006.
Data transferred from the 
EMR system to ESP include patient demographics, vital signs, test orders, test results,

prescriptions, diagnostic codes, 
and  health-care  provider  details.  These  data  were  regularly  analyzed  by  ESP  for
evidence of four notifiable 
diseases:  chlamydia,  gonorrhea,  pelvic  inflammatory  disease,  and  acute  hepatitis  A.
Cases were defined on the basis 
of combinations of test orders, test results, medication prescriptions, and 
International Statistical Classification of 
Diseases and Related Health Problems, Ninth Revision 
(ICD-9) diagnostic codes. ESP case definitions were modeled after 
CDC surveillance definitions but limited to the coded data captured by EMRs 
(Table).  When  one  of  the  four  notifiable  diseases  was  detected,  ESP  generated  an
electronic report and transmitted it to the state health department via 
the Internet. The report included the patient's name and contact information, clinician's
name and contact 
information, disease diagnosed, laboratory test results, prescriptions, pregnancy status,
and any patient symptoms that 
were inferred from ICD-9 codes in the electronic record. During the study period, the
practice's conventional 
reporting  continued  routinely,  independent  of  ESP,  under  the  auspices  of  an
infection-control practitioner in some facilities 
and through spontaneous clinician initiative in others. The practice's personnel were not
informed of cases identified by ESP.
 For the period June 2006--July 2007, ESP reported 758 cases of chlamydia, 95 cases of
gonorrhea, 20 cases of 
pelvic inflammatory disease, and four cases of acute hepatitis A. The charts of all cases
identified by ESP were 
manually reviewed and matched with conventional, passive surveillance case reports in

health department records. Compared 
with passive, paper-based reporting, ESP increased the number of chlamydia reports by
39% (758 cases versus 545) 
and  gonorrhea  by  53%  (95  cases  versus  62).  In  addition,  ESP  identified  20  cases  of
pelvic inflammatory disease 
cases, compared with none identified by passive surveillance, and four cases of acute
hepatitis A, compared with one.
 A total of six cases of chlamydia in health department records were not detected by
ESP. Chart reviews revealed five 
of these to be false positives. The one true case missed by ESP had been miscoded in
the EMR system that fed data to 
ESP.  All  cases  of  gonorrhea,  pelvic  inflammatory  disease,  and  acute  hepatitis  A
detected by passive surveillance also 
were identified by ESP.
 All ESP case reports included patient treatment information and pregnancy status. In
contrast, passive 
surveillance  reports  included  pregnancy  status  for  5%  of  cases  and  treatment
information for 88% of cases. ESP reported 81 cases 
of pregnancy in females with chlamydia or gonorrhea that were not noted on passive
surveillance reports. Spellings 
of patient names on passive surveillance reports were compared with spellings in ESP
data. Passive surveillance 
reports had a 5% rate of transcription errors, compared with no 
errors in ESP reports.
 Reported by: M Klompas, MD, R Lazarus, MBBS, MPH, R Platt, MD, Dept of Ambulatory
Care and Prevention, Harvard Medical School 
and  Harvard  Pilgrim  Health  Care;  X  Hou,  MSc,  Channing  Laboratory,  Brigham  and

Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School; FX Campion, 
MD, B Kruskal, MD, PhD, Atrius Health and Harvard Medical School, Boston; G Haney,
MPH, W Dumas, J Daniel, MPH, A DeMaria, 
MD,  Massachusetts  Dept  of  Public  Health.  SJN  McNabb,  PhD,  Div  of  Integrated
Surveillance Systems and Services, National Center for Public 
Health Informatics, CDC.
Editorial Note:
  This comparison of EMR-based detection and reporting of four notifiable diseases with 
traditional methods illustrates that automated, active surveillance 
using EMR data has the potential to improve public 
health monitoring by ensuring that cases are reported and by 
enhancing the timeliness, accuracy, and clinical detail of 
reports. Improved reporting can help public health departments better allocate limited
resources for targeted investigations 
and interventions. For example, ESP has the potential to reliably identify high-priority
cases for intervention, such 
as  untreated  chlamydia  or  gonorrhea  in  women  who  are  pregnant.  EMR-based
surveillance and reporting also 
might  support  additional  public  health  practices,  such  as  populating  immunization
information systems or 
enabling statistical analyses for outbreak detection and 
investigation.
 Currently,  EMR-based  surveillance  cannot  obviate  the  need  for  additional  data
collection by public 
health  department  personnel  for  certain  cases.  EMRs  typically  do  not  contain  certain
pieces of key epidemiologic data in 
a coded form that can be identified readily by electronic 

algorithms. Examples include case contacts, risky 
behaviors,  foreign  travel,  and  relevant  occupations  (e.g.,  food  handler  or  day  care
worker).
 ESP  complements  the  existing  National  Electronic  Diseases  Surveillance  System
(NEDSS), established by CDC in 
2001 to enable local and state health departments to send electronic data to CDC for
public health monitoring 
of notifiable conditions nationwide (6). NEDSS-compatible 
systems currently operate in 38 states and the District 
of Columbia (7). ESP can facilitate electronic collection and transmission of case reports
from health-care providers to 
local 
and state public health departments, which in turn can use NEDSS-compatible systems
to deliver summary data 
to CDC.
 Different  strategies  for  implementing  EMR-based  case  detection  and  reporting  will
need to be developed for 
different kinds of medical organizations. The stand-alone, server-based implementation
of ESP described in this 
report  is  designed  for  large  practices  or  health  information  exchanges.  Incorporating
ESP logic into commercial EMR software 
or  developing  stand-alone  ESP  modules  that  can  operate  side  by  side  with  EMRs  on
clinicians' office-based computers 
also should be feasible. Source code for ESP is freely available (at 
http://esphealth.org) under an open source 
license compatible with commercial development.

 Widespread  implementation  of  electronic  case  detection  and  reporting  is  currently
limited by the slow pace 
of  adoption  of  EMRs  by  clinical  practices,  variation  in  coding  practices  among
proprietary EMR systems, and an 
absence of standards for identifying cases using electronic data alone. As of 2006, only
29% of ambulatory medical 
practices were using EMR systems (8). In addition, the breadth of information collected
by EMR systems varies 
substantially.  EMRs  that  do  not  include  prescription  data,  for  example,  limit  the
sensitivity and specificity of some electronic 
disease-detection  algorithms  (9).  Further,  different  EMR  systems  use  different
proprietary coding systems. ESP does 
include tools to translate proprietary codes into standard nomenclatures; however, use
of this translation requires 
customization for each system. Finally, existing case definitions for notifiable diseases 
(10) incorporate clinical descriptors such as 
"acute  onset  of  symptoms"  or  "undue  fatigue"  or  "jaundice"  that  are  inconsistently
noted on EMRs.
 Development of ESP continues. The system has added reporting of acute hepatitis B,
acute hepatitis C, and 
active tuberculosis. In addition, ESP's portability is being assessed by installing it in a
regional health information 
exchange populated by a different EMR system. Meanwhile, development of electronic
case definitions and widespread 
adoption of standard laboratory test nomenclatures, consensus lists of treatments, and
standard reporting elements will 
facilitate  more  meaningful,  comparable,  and  widespread  electronic  reporting  of

notifiable diseases.
 Acknowledgment
 This report is based, in part, on the contributions of J Dunn, MPH, Dept of Ambulatory
Care and Prevention, Harvard Medical School 
and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, Boston, Massachusetts.
References
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 

mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. Disclaimer  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Date last reviewed: 4/9/2008
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  

    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5714a4.htm
