A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 A  model  for  a  basic  infection  control  and  prevention  plan  for  outpatient  oncology
facilities.  Download  the  complete  Basic  Infection  Control  and  Prevention  Plan  for
Outpatient  Oncology  Settings.   A  pocket-sized  quick  reference  guide  to  the  Basic
Infection Control and Prevention Plan for Outpatient Oncology Settings is also available
to  order  free  of  charge  from  CDC-INFO  on  Demand  –  Publications  (select  “Preventing
Infections in Cancer Patients” from the drop-down programs button). An estimated 1.5
million  new  cases  of  cancer  were  diagnosed  in  the  United  States  in  2010  [1].  With
improvements in survivorship and the growth and aging of the U.S. population, the total
number of persons living with cancer will continue to increase [2]. Despite advances in
oncology  care,  infections  remain  a  major  cause  of  morbidity  and  mortality  among
cancer  patients  [3-5].  Increased  risks  for  infection  are  attributed,  in  part,  to
immunosuppression  caused  by  the  underlying  malignancy  and  chemotherapy.  In
addition patients with cancer come into frequent contact with healthcare settings and
can  be  exposed  to  other  patients  in  these  settings  with  transmissible  infections.
Likewise, patients with cancer often require the placement of indwelling intravascular
access  devices  or  undergo  surgical  procedures  that  increase  their  risk  for  infectious
complications. Given their vulnerable condition, great attention to infection prevention
is  warranted  in  the  care  of  these  patients.  In  recent  decades,  the  vast  majority  of
oncology  services  have  shifted  to  outpatient  settings,  such  as  physician  offices,
hospital-based  outpatient  clinics,  and  nonhospital-based  cancer  centers.  Currently,
more  than  one  million  cancer  patients  receive  outpatient  chemotherapy  or  radiation

therapy each year [6]. Acute care hospitals continue to specialize in the treatment of
many patients with cancer who are at increased risk for infection (e.g., hematopoietic
stem  cell  transplant  recipients,  patients  with  febrile  neutropenia),  with  programs  and
policies that promote adherence to infection control standards. In contrast, outpatient
oncology  facilities  vary  greatly  in  their  attention  to  and  oversight  of  infection  control
and  prevention.  This  is  reflected  in  a  number  of  outbreaks  of  viral  hepatitis  and
bacterial  bloodstream  infections  that  resulted  from  breaches  in  basic  infection
prevention  practices  (e.g.,  syringe  reuse,  mishandling  of  intravenous  administration
sets)  [7-10].  In  some  of  these  incidents,  the  implicated  facility  did  not  have  written
infection  control  policies  and  procedures  for  patient  protection  or  regular  access  to
infection  prevention  expertise.  This  document  has  been  developed  for  outpatient
oncology facilities to serve as a model for a basic infection control and prevention plan.
It  contains  policies  and  procedures  tailored  to  these  settings  to  meet  minimal
expectations  of  patient  protections  as  described  in  the  CDC  Guide  to  Infection
Prevention in Outpatient Settings. The elements in this document are based on CDC's
evidence-based  guidelines  and  guidelines  from  professional  societies  (e.g.,  Oncology
Nursing Society). This plan is intended to be used by all outpatient oncology facilities.
Those facilities that do not have an existing plan should use this plan as a starting point
to  develop  a  facility-specific  plan  that  will  be  updated  and  further  supplemented  as
needed  based  on  the  types  of  services  provided.  Facilities  that  have  a  plan  should
ensure  that  their  current  infection  prevention  policies  and  procedures  include  the
elements outlined in this document. While this plan may essentially be used exactly "as
is," facilities are encouraged to personalize the plan to make it more relevant to their
setting  (e.g.,  adding  facility  name  and  names  of  specific  rooms/locations;  inserting
titles/positions  of  designated  personnel;  and  providing  detailed  instructions  where
applicable). This plan does not replace the need for an outpatient oncology facility to
have regular access to an individual with training in infection prevention and for that

individual to perform on-site evaluation and to directly observe and interact regularly
with staff. Facilities may wish to consult with an individual with training and expertise in
infection prevention early on to assist with their infection control plan development and
implementation and to ensure that facility design and work flow is conducive to optimal
infection  prevention  practices.  This  model  plan  focuses  on  the  core  measures  to
prevent  the  spread  of  infectious  diseases  in  outpatient  oncology  settings.  It  is  not
intended to address facility-specific issues or other aspects of patient care such as: For
more information on these topics, refer to the list of resources provided in Appendix D
of  the  plan.  ANC  Absolute  neutrophil  count  APIC  Association  for  Professionals  in
Infection  Control  and  Epidemiology,  Inc.  CDC  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention DEA Drug Enforcement Administration EPA Environmental Protection Agency
FDA Food and Drug Administration HAI Healthcare-associated infection HBV Hepatitis B
virus HCV Hepatitis C virus HIV Human immunodeficiency virus IDSA Infectious Diseases
Society  of  America  INS  Infusion  Nursing  Society  ONS  Oncology  Nursing  Society  OSHA
Occupational
 Safety
 and
 Health
 Administration
 NIOSH
 National
 Institute
 for
Occupational  Safety  PPE  Personal  protective  equipment  SHEA  Society  for  Healthcare
Epidemiology  of  America  USP  United  States  Pharmacopeia  WHO  World  Health
Organization  Standard  Precautions  represent  the  minimum  infection  prevention
measures that apply to all patient care, regardless of suspected or confirmed infection
status  of  the  patient,  in  any  setting  where  healthcare  is  delivered.  These
evidence-based  practices  are  designed  to  both  protect  healthcare  personnel  and
prevent the spread of infections among patients. Standard Precautions replaces earlier
guidance  relating  to  Universal  Precautions  and  Body  Substance  Isolation.  Standard
Precautions  include:  1)  hand  hygiene,  2)  use  of  personal  protective  equipment  (e.g.,
gloves,  gowns,  facemasks),  depending  on  the  anticipated  exposure,  3)  respiratory
hygiene  and  cough  etiquette,  4)  safe  injection  practices,  and  5)  safe  handling  of
potentially  contaminated  equipment  or  surfaces  in  the  patient  environment.

Transmission-Based  Precautions  are  intended  to  supplement  Standard  Precautions  in
patients  with  known  or  suspected  colonization  or  infection  of  highly  transmissible  or
epidemiologically  important  pathogens.  These  additional  precautions  are  used  when
the route of transmission is not completely interrupted using Standard Precautions. The
three categories of Transmission-Based Precautions include: 1) Contact Precautions, 2)
Droplet  Precautions,  and  3)  Airborne  Precautions.  For  diseases  that  have  multiple
routes of transmission, a combination of Transmission-Based Precautions may be used.
Whether used singly or in combination, they are always used in addition to Standard
Precautions. The risk of infection transmission and the ability to implement elements of
Transmission-Based  Precautions  may  differ  between  outpatient  and  inpatient  settings
(e.g.,  facility  design  characteristics).  However,  because  patients  with  infections  are
routinely encountered in outpatient settings, ambulatory care facilities need to develop
specific  strategies  to  control  the  spread  of  transmissible  diseases  pertinent  to  their
setting.  This  includes  developing  and  implementing  systems  for  early  detection  and
management of potentially infectious patients at initial points of entry to the facility. For
detailed  information  on  Standard  and  Transmission-Based  Precautions,  and  summary
guidance for outpatient settings, refer to the following documents: Ongoing education
and  training  of  facility  staff  are  required  to  maintain  competency  and  ensure  that
infection  prevention  policies  and  procedures  are  understood  and  followed.  A  list  of
names  of  designated  personnel  and  their  specific  roles  and  tasks  and  contact
information is provided in Appendix A. Routine performance of surveillance activities is
important  to  case-finding,  outbreak  detection,  and  improvement  of  healthcare
practices. This includes the surveillance of infections associated with the care provided
by  the  facility  (defined  as  healthcare-associated  infections)  and  process  measures
related  to  infection  prevention  practices  (e.g.,  hand  hygiene).  Hand  hygiene  policies
promote  preferential  use  of  alcohol-based  hand  rub  (ABHR)  over  soap  and  water  in
most  clinical  situations.  Alcohol-based  hand  rub  is  the  preferred  method  for

decontaminating  hands,  except  when  hands  are  visibly  soiled  (e.g.,  dirt,  blood,  body
fluids),  or  after  caring  for  patients  with  known  or  suspected  C.  difficile  or  norovirus
during  an  outbreak,  in  which  case  soap  and  water  should  be  used.  Hand  hygiene
stations  should  be  strategically  placed  to  ensure  easy  access.  Using  Alcohol-based
Hand  Rub  (follow  manufacturer's  directions):  Handwashing  with  Soap  and  Water:
Always perform hand hygiene in the following situations: Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE) use involves specialized clothing or equipment worn by facility staff for protection
against infectious materials. The selection of PPE is based on the nature of the patient
interaction  and  potential  for  exposure  to  blood,  body  fluids  or  infectious  agents.  A
review  of  available  PPE  should  be  performed  periodically  (e.g.,  annually)  due  to  new
product  developments  and  improvements.  Please  note  that  this  section  does  not
address  issues  related  to  PPE  for  the  preparation  and  handling  of  antineoplastic  and
hazardous drugs. The recommended PPE for those procedures should be determined in
accordance with OSHA and NIOSH. Gloves Wear gloves when there is potential contact
with blood (e.g., during phlebotomy), body fluids, mucous membranes, nonintact skin or
contaminated  equipment.  Gowns  Wear  a  gown  to  protect  skin  and  clothing  during
procedures  or  activities  where  contact  with  blood  or  body  fluids  is  anticipated.
Facemasks  (Procedure  or  Surgical  Masks)  Wear  a  facemask:  Goggles,  Face  Shields
Wear  eye  protection  for  potential  splash  or  spray  of  blood,  respiratory  secretions,  or
other body fluids. Respirators If available, wear N95-or higher respirators for potential
exposure to infectious agents transmitted via the airborne route (e.g., tuberculosis). 2.
Recommendations  for  Donning  PPE  To  prevent  the  transmission  of  respiratory
infections in the facility, the following infection prevention measures are implemented
for all potentially infected persons at the point of entry and continuing throughout the
duration of the visit. This applies to any person (e.g., patients and accompanying family
members,  caregivers,  and  visitors)  with  signs  and  symptoms  of  respiratory  illness,
including  cough,  congestion,  rhinorrhea,  or  increased  production  of  respiratory

secretions. Additional precautions (e.g., Transmission-Based Precautions) can be found
in  Section  V.  The  following  supplies  are  provided  in  the  reception  area  and  other
common waiting areas: All persons with signs and symptoms of a respiratory infection
(including  facility  staff)  are  instructed  to:  In  addition  to  the  aforementioned  infection
prevention  measures,  the  following  enhanced  screening  measures  are  implemented:
Injection  safety  refers  to  the  proper  use  and  handling  of  supplies  for  administering
injections and infusions (e.g., syringes, needles, fingerstick devices, intravenous tubing,
medication  vials,  and  parenteral  solutions).  These  practices  are  intended  to  prevent
transmission  of  infectious  diseases  between  one  patient  and  another,  or  between  a
patient  and  healthcare  personnel  during  preparation  and  administration  of  parenteral
medications.  To  the  extent  possible,  medication  preparation  should  take  place  in
pharmacy  settings  and  dedicated  medication  rooms.  All  staff  personnel  who  use  or
handle  parenteral  medications  and  related  supplies  should  be  aware  of  labeling  and
storage  requirements  and  pharmacy  standards.  Additional  recommendations  for  safe
injection  practices,  including  the  appropriate  use  of  single-dose  (or  single-use)  and
multi-dose vials and the proper technique for accessing intravascular devices, can be
found in Section IV.E. (Medication Storage and Handling), in Section VI (Central Venous
Catheters), respectively, as well as in Appendix D. CDC Injection Safety The measures
outlined  in  this  section  pertain  to  the  general  storage  and  handling  of  parenteral
medications  outside  of  the  pharmacy  setting.  The  appropriate  storage  and  handling
(e.g., reconstituting, mixing, diluting, compounding) of antineoplastic drugs and other
sterile  medications  that  typically  require  preparation  in  pharmacy  settings  should  be
determined in accordance with established official and enforceable standards for these
activities  (e.g.,  ensuring  appropriate  environmental  and  engineering  controls  such  as
biological  safety  cabinets  and  laminar  airflow  hoods,  and  proper  use  of  aseptic
technique), including those of the United States Pharmacopeia and the Food and Drug
Administration. These functions are performed by personnel who have the appropriate

qualifications and training as determined in accordance with the state pharmacy board.
Consultation  with  the  state  pharmacy  board  and  oncology  pharmacy  specialists  is
recommended. In general, parenteral medication storage, handling, and administration
should  adhere  to  injection  safety  measures  as  outlined  in  Section  IV.D.  (Injection
Safety).  Parenteral  medications  include  single-dose  and  multi-dose  vials,  ampoules,
bags or bottles of intravenous fluids. Single-dose vials (or single-use vials) are intended
for  use  in  a  single  patient  for  a  single  case/procedure/injection.  Single-dose  or
single-use  vials  are  labeled  as  such  by  the  manufacturer  and  typically  lack  an
antimicrobial preservative. Multi-dose vials contain more than one dose of medication.
They  are  labeled  as  such  by  the  manufacturer  and  typically  contain  an  antimicrobial
preservative to help prevent the growth of bacteria. However, this preservative has no
effect on viruses and does not fully protect against contamination when safe injection
practices are not followed. CDC 2007 Guideline for Isolation Precautions CDC Injection
Safety  CDC  Vaccine  Storage  and  Handling  Toolkit  The  procedures  outlined  in  this
section pertain to the cleaning and disinfection of noncritical patient-care devices (e.g.,
blood  pressure  cuff)  and  environmental  surfaces  in  patient-care  areas  (e.g.,  exam
rooms)  and  certain  common-use  areas  (e.g.,  bathrooms).  Standard  procedures  and
recommended  practices  for  cleaning  and  disinfecting  compounding  areas  (e.g.,
pharmacy  settings)  and  the  handling,  transporting,  and  disposing  of  antineoplastic
agents  should  be  determined  in  accordance  with  local,  state,  and  federal  authorities,
including state board of pharmacy, USP, FDA, and DEA. Patient-care areas, medication
preparation areas (outside pharmacy/compounding areas), and bathrooms are cleaned
at  least  daily,  with  the  following  exceptions:  General  cleaning  and  disinfection
measures that apply to any patient-care area: Cleaning and disinfection measures for
specific patient-care areas: Exam Rooms Chemotherapy Suites Triage Stations and/or
Locations for Performing Vital Signs (if not done in exam rooms) Phlebotomy Stations
CDC  Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  CDC

Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008 CDC Guideline
for  the  Prevention  and  Control  of  Norovirus  Gastroenteritis  Outbreaks  in  Healthcare
Settings  CDC  Infection  Prevention  during  Blood  Glucose  Monitoring  and  Insulin
Administration APIC Infection Prevention Manual for Ambulatory Care, 2009 In addition
to consistent use of Standard Precautions, additional precautions may be warranted in
certain  situations  as  described  below.  *Francis  J.  Curry  National  Tuberculosis  Center,
FAQ: "How long does it take to clear the air in an isolation or high-risk procedure room?"
CDC  2007  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions  CDC  Guidelines  for  Preventing  the
Transmission  of  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  in  Health-Care  Settings,  2005  The
procedures outlined below pertain to the access and maintenance of long-term central
venous  catheters  (e.g.,  vascular  access  devices).  These  include  peripherally  inserted
central  catheters  (PICCs),  tunneled  catheters  (e.g.,  Broviac®,  Hickman®,  and
Groshong®  catheters),  including  tunneled  apheresis  catheters,  and  implanted  ports.
For other types of access devices, such as intraperitoneal ports, refer to guidelines from
relevant
 professional
 societies
 (e.g.,
 Oncology
 Nursing
 Society).
 Several
recommendations in this section have been adapted directly from the Oncology Nursing
Society  Access  Devices  Guidelines  and  the  Infusion  Nursing  Society  Standards  of
Practice.  There  is  not  a  consensus  over  the  use  of  clean  versus  sterile  gloves  when
accessing  certain  vascular  access  devices,  such  as  implanted  ports;  where  indicated,
recommendations
 by
 specific
 professional
 societies
 are
 provided.
 While
 the
recommendations  below  apply  generally,  healthcare  personnel  are  to  follow
manufacturers'  instructions  and  labeled  use  for  specific  care  and  maintenance.  Only
healthcare  personnel  who  have  attained  and  maintained  competency  should  perform
these  procedures.  This  procedure  applies  only  to  PICCs  and  tunneled  catheters,
including apheresis catheters. Refer to Part D.1. below for accessing implanted ports. In
general,  closed  catheter  access  systems  should  be  used  preferentially  over  open
systems.  Refer  to  the  manufacturer's  instructions  of  the  catheter  and  the  needleless

connector for the appropriate technique to use; unless otherwise specified, perform the
following:  This  procedure  applies  only  to  PICCs  and  tunneled  catheters,  including
apheresis  catheters.  This  procedure  applies  only  to  PICCs  and  tunneled  catheters,
including apheresis catheters. Refer to manufacturer's instructions for how frequently
to  change  the  injection  cap;  if  information  is  not  available,  in  general,  change  every
week or when there are signs of blood, precipitate, cracks, leaks, or other defects, or
when the septum is no longer intact. Refer to steps 1-5 in Section VI.A. above for PICC
access and common maintenance procedures. Additional recommendations for routine
maintenance  and  care:  Tunneled  catheters  include  Broviac®,  Hickman®,  and
Groshong® catheters, as well as apheresis catheters. Refer to steps 1-5 in Section VI.A.
above  for  catheter  access  and  common  maintenance  procedures.  Additional
recommendations  for  routine  maintenance  and  care:  Adapted  with  permission  from
Access  Device  Guidelines:  Recommendations  for  Nursing  Practice  and  Education  (3rd
Ed.),  by  D.  Camp-Sorrell  (Ed.),  2011,  Pittsburgh,  PA:  Oncology  Nursing  Society.
Copyright  2011  by  ONS.  INS  2011  Infusion  Nursing  Standards  of  Practice  CDC
Guidelines  for  the  Prevention  of  Intravascular  Catheter-Related  Infections,  2011  [a]
Several  roles/tasks  may  be  performed  by  the  same  person,  e.g.,  Infection  Prevention
personnel,  or  by  more  than  one  person.  [b]  Cleaning/disinfection  of  spills  of  blood  or
other potentially infectious materials should be assigned to personnel trained to handle
such  situation;  this  may  include  facility  staff  other  than  ES/housekeeping  staff.  [c]
Ensure  this  task  is  assigned  to  personnel  who  are  available  to  respond  in  a  timely
manner; in some facilities, ES/housekeeping staff may be better equipped to handle this
type  of  cleaning/disinfection.  [Insert  a  list  of  reportable  disease/conditions  specific  to
your  state  and  the  appropriate  contact  information  for  your  local  and  state  health
authorities. This information may be found at your state department of health website
and/or  at  the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists  State  Reportable
Conditions  Websites  The  Infection  Prevention  Checklist  for  Outpatient  Settings  is  a

companion to the CDC Guide to Infection Prevention for Outpatient Settings: Minimum
Expectations  for  Safe  Care.  There  are  two  sections  to  the  checklist:  I)  Administration
Policies and Facility Practices, and II) Personnel and Patient-Care Observations. For the
purpose of evaluating personnel competency and adherence to recommended infection
prevention  practices,  oncology  facilities  should  use  Section  II  of  the  checklist  (i.e,
Personnel  and  Patient-Care  Observations)  and  modify  and/or  further  supplement,  as
needed,  to  include  specific  practices  and  procedures  relevant  to  their  setting.  These
may  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  assessing  personnel  adherence  to  donning
appropriate  PPE  and  using  aseptic  technique  (e.g.,  performing  hand  hygiene)  when
accessing  central  venous  catheters.  Detailed  information  about  each  of  the  topics
below can be found in the accompanying resources. HAIs are associated with medical
devices, complications following surgery, transmission between patients and healthcare
workers,  antibiotic  overuse,  and  more.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/healthcare-associated-infections/hcp/prevention-healthcare/infection-control-outpati
ent-oncology.html
