A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 C.  diff  is  a  spore-forming,  Gram-positive  anaerobic  bacillus  that  produces  two
exotoxins: toxin A and toxin B.  C. diff sheds in feces. Any surface, device or material
that becomes contaminated with feces could serve as a reservoir for the C. diff spores.
Examples  include:  C.  diff  spores  can  transfer  to  patients  by  the  hands  of  healthcare
personnel who have touched a contaminated surface or item. Patients with CDI exhibit
clinical symptoms and test positive for the C. diff organism or its toxin.  Colonization
with  C.  diff  is  more  common  than  infection.  Colonized  patients  do  not  have  disease
caused by C. diff and often exhibit NO clinical symptoms (asymptomatic) like diarrhea.
Colonized patients do test positive for the C. diff organism or its toxin. If a patient has
had three or more stools in 24 hours: If CDI is confirmed:  In about 20% of patients, CDI
will resolve within two to three days of discontinuing the antibiotic to which the patient
was  previously  exposed.  However,  CDI  should  usually  be  treated  with  an  appropriate
course  (about  10  days)  of  treatment,  including  oral  vancomycin  or  fidaxomicin.  After
treatment,  repeat  C.  diff  testing  is  not  recommended  if  the  patient's  symptoms  have
resolved,  as  patients  often  remain  colonized.  Surfaces  should  be  clean  and  body
substance spills should be managed promptly, per CDC's Guidelines for Environmental
Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities. Routine cleaning should be performed before
disinfection. EPA-registered disinfectants with a sporicidal claim have been successful in
environmental  surface  disinfection  of  patient-care  areas  where  surveillance  and
epidemiology
 indicate
 ongoing
 transmission
 of
 C.
 diff.
 Note:
 EPA-registered
disinfectants  (List  K)  are  recommended  for  patient-care  areas.  When  choosing  a

disinfectant,  check  product  labels  for  inactivation  claims,  indications  for  use  and
instructions.  CDC  works  with  federal  and  public  health  partners  to  reduce  C.  diff
infections. CDC also discovers, implements and evaluates innovative ways to improve
healthcare  quality  and  patient  safety.  Improving  Diagnosis  and  Management:  Clinical
Practice  Guidelines  for  Clostridium  difficile  Infection  in  Adults  and  Children:  2017
Federal Initiatives to Reduce C. diff: C. diff is a germ that causes diarrhea and colitis
(inflammation of the colon). It can be life-threatening. Languages Language Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/c-diff/hcp/clinical-overview/index.html
