Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Recommendations  and  Reports  /  November  4,  2022  /
71(3);1–95  Deborah  Dowell,  MD1;  Kathleen  R.  Ragan,  MSPH1;  Christopher  M.  Jones,
PharmD,  DrPH2;  Grant  T.  Baldwin,  PhD1;  Roger  Chou,  MD3  (View  author  affiliations)
Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads  Box  1  Box  2  Box  3  Box  4  Box  5  This
guideline provides recommendations for clinicians providing pain care, including those
prescribing opioids, for outpatients aged ≥18 years. It updates the CDC Guideline for
Prescribing  Opioids  for  Chronic  Pain  —  United  States,  2016  (MMWR  Recomm  Rep
2016;65[No. RR-1]:1–49) and includes recommendations for managing acute (duration
of <1 month), subacute (duration of 1–3 months), and chronic (duration of >3 months)
pain. The recommendations do not apply to pain related to sickle cell disease or cancer
or  to  patients  receiving  palliative  or  end-of-life  care.  The  guideline  addresses  the
following  four  areas:  1)  determining  whether  or  not  to  initiate  opioids  for  pain,  2)
selecting opioids and determining opioid dosages, 3) deciding duration of initial opioid
prescription  and  conducting  follow-up,  and  4)  assessing  risk  and  addressing  potential
harms  of  opioid  use.  CDC  developed  the  guideline  using  the  Grading  of
Recommendations  Assessment,  Development,  and  Evaluation  (GRADE)  framework.
Recommendations  are  based  on  systematic  reviews  of  the  scientific  evidence  and
reflect  considerations  of  benefits  and  harms,  patient  and  clinician  values  and
preferences, and resource allocation. CDC obtained input from the Board of Scientific
Counselors  of  the  National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control  (a  federally
chartered advisory committee), the public, and peer reviewers. CDC recommends that
persons with pain receive appropriate pain treatment, with careful consideration of the
benefits and risks of all treatment options in the context of the patient’s circumstances.
Recommendations should not be applied as inflexible standards of care across patient

populations.  This  clinical  practice  guideline  is  intended  to  improve  communication
between  clinicians  and  patients  about  the  benefits  and  risks  of  pain  treatments,
including  opioid  therapy;  improve  the  effectiveness  and  safety  of  pain  treatment;
mitigate  pain;  improve  function  and  quality  of  life  for  patients  with  pain;  and  reduce
risks associated with opioid pain therapy, including opioid use disorder, overdose, and
death.  Top  Pain  is  one  of  the  most  common  reasons  adults  seek  medical  care  in  the
United States (1). Acute pain, a nearly universal experience, is a physiologic response
to noxious stimuli that can become pathologic. Acute pain is usually sudden in onset
and time limited (defined in this clinical practice guideline as having a duration of <1
month) and often is caused by injury, trauma, or medical treatments such as surgery
(2,3). Unresolved acute pain or subacute pain (defined in this clinical practice guideline
as pain that has been present for 1–3 months) can evolve into chronic pain (4). Chronic
pain  typically  lasts  >3  months  (4)  and  can  be  the  result  of  an  underlying  medical
disease  or  condition,  injury,  medical  treatment,  inflammation,  or  unknown  cause  (2).
Approximately one in five U.S. adults had chronic pain in 2019 and approximately one
in 14 adults experienced “high-impact” chronic pain, defined as having pain on most
days or every day during the past 3 months that limited life or work activities (5). Pain,
especially  chronic  pain,  can  affect  almost  every  aspect  of  a  person’s  life,  leading  to
impaired  physical  functioning,  poor  mental  health,  and  reduced  quality  of  life,  and
contributes  to  substantial  morbidity  each  year  (6).  In  2011,  the  economic  costs  of
chronic pain were estimated to range from $560 to $635 billion in annual direct medical
costs, lost productivity, and disability (2). Pain is a complex phenomenon influenced by
multiple factors, including biologic, psychological, and social factors (7). This complexity
means substantial heterogeneity exists in the effectiveness of various pain treatments,
depending  on  the  type  of  underlying  pain  or  condition  being  treated  (7–11).  Patients
might  experience  persistent  pain  that  is  not  well  controlled  (6).  Chronic  pain  often
co-occurs  with  behavioral  health  conditions,  including  mental  and  substance  use

disorders  (12,13).  Patients  with  chronic  pain  also  are  at  increased  risk  for  suicidal
ideation  and  behaviors  (14,15).  Data  from  death  investigations  in  18  states  during
2003–2014 indicate that approximately 9% of suicide decedents had evidence of having
chronic pain at the time of death; however, this is likely an underestimate because of
the limitations of the underlying data sources used in the study (16). These factors and
potentially harmful outcomes associated with chronic pain for some persons add to the
clinical complexity and underscore the importance of adequately treating and providing
care  to  persons  with  pain.  Thus,  prevention,  assessment,  and  treatment  of  pain  is  a
persistent challenge for clinicians. Pain might go unrecognized, and some persons (e.g.,
members of marginalized racial and ethnic groups; women; older persons; persons with
cognitive  impairment;  persons  with  mental  and  substance  use  disorders,  sickle  cell
disease,  or  cancer-related  pain;  and  persons  at  the  end  of  life)  can  be  at  risk  for
inadequate  pain  treatment  (2,6,17–23).  Although  substantial  opportunity  exists  for
improved  pain  management  broadly  across  the  United  States,  data  underscore
opportunities  for  addressing  specific,  long-standing  health  disparities  (24–26)  in  the
treatment  of  pain.  For  example,  patients  who  identify  as  Black  or  African  American
(Black),  Hispanic  or  Latino  (Hispanic),  and  Asian  receive  fewer  postpartum  pain
assessments  relative  to  White  patients  (27).  Black  (28,29)  and  Hispanic  (29)  patients
are less likely than White patients to receive analgesia for acute pain. Among Black and
White patients receiving opioids for pain, Black patients are less likely to be referred to
a pain specialist, and Black patients receive prescription opioids at lower dosages than
White  patients  (24,30).  Racial  and  ethnic  differences  remain  even  after  adjusting  for
access-related factors, the needs and preferences of patients, and the appropriateness
of the intervention (25). These disparities appear to be further magnified for Black and
Hispanic  patients  who  live  in  socioeconomically  disadvantaged  neighborhoods  (26).
Women might be at higher risk for inadequate pain management (31), although they
have  higher  opioid  prescription  fill  rates  (32)  than  men  at  a  population  level.

Geographic  disparities  contribute  to  increased  use  of  opioids  for  conditions  for  which
nonopioid  treatment  options  might  be  preferred  but  are  less  available.  For  example,
adults  living  in  rural  areas  are  more  likely  to  be  prescribed  opioids  for  chronic
nonmalignant pain than adults living in nonrural areas (33). Although not Hispanic or
Latino  (non-Hispanic)  American  Indian  or  Alaska  Native  and  non-Hispanic  White
populations  have  experienced  much  higher  rates  of  prescription  opioid–related
overdose  deaths  than  non-Hispanic  Black,  Hispanic,  or  non-Hispanic  Asian  or  Pacific
Islander  populations  (34),  application  of  safeguards  in  opioid  prescribing  are
disproportionately  applied  to  Black  patients.  In  one  study,  Black  patients  were  more
likely than White patients to receive regular office visits and have restricted early refills
(35). In another study, clinicians were substantially more likely to discontinue opioids if
there  was  evidence  of  misuse  for  Black  patients  compared  with  White  patients  (36).
Differentially untreated or undertreated pain as a result of clinician biases persists and
demands  immediate  and  sustained  attention  and  action  (37–40).  Because  of  the
clinical,  psychological,  and  social  consequences  associated  with  pain,  including
limitations  in  activities,  lost  work  productivity,  reduced  quality  of  life,  and  pervasive
stigma,  it  is  essential  that  clinicians  have  the  training,  education,  guidance,  and
resources  to  provide  appropriate,  holistic,  and  compassionate  care  for  patients  with
pain (2,6). An important aim of pain management is the provision of person-centered
care  built  on  trust  between  patients  and  clinicians.  Such  care  includes  appropriate
evaluation to identify potentially reversible causes of pain and establish a diagnosis and
measurable  treatment  outcomes  that  focus  on  optimizing  function  and  quality  of  life
(6).  To  achieve  this  aim,  it  is  important  that  clinicians  consider  the  full  range  of
pharmacologic  and  nonpharmacologic  treatments  for  pain  care,  and  that  health
systems,  payers,  and  governmental  programs  and  entities  make  the  full  spectrum  of
evidence-based treatments accessible to patients with pain and their treating clinicians.
The  range  of  therapeutic  options  has  historically  been  inaccessible  to  many  patients

because  of  factors  such  as  inadequate  clinician  education,  training,  and  guidance;
unconscious  bias;  a  shortage  of  pain  management  specialists;  insufficient  access  to
treatment  modalities  such  as  behavioral  therapy;  siloed  health  systems;  insurance
coverage and reimbursement policies; and lack of clarity about the evidence supporting
different pain treatments (6,17,41–46). Partly because of these factors affecting access
to  a  wide  range  of  treatment  modalities,  for  many  years  medications  such  as
prescription opioids have been the mainstay to treat pain, despite very limited evidence
to support their long-term (>1 year) benefits; most placebo-controlled trials have been
<6  weeks  in  duration  (2,6,47,48).  Opioids  can  be  essential  medications  for  the
management  of  pain;  however,  they  carry  considerable  potential  risk.  A  systematic
review published in 2014 by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
found  insufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  long-term  benefits  of  prescription  opioid
treatment  for  chronic  pain,  and  long-term  prescription  opioid  use  was  found  to  be
associated with increased risk for overdose and opioid misuse, among other risks (47).
Some  risks,  such  as  overdose,  were  dose  dependent  (47).  In  2014,  on  the  basis  of
accumulating evidence of potential risks to patients, the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)  required  new  safety  labeling  changes  for  extended-release  and  long-acting
opioids.  Changes  included  a  boxed  warning  on  the  “risks  of  addiction,  abuse,  and
misuse,  which  can  lead  to  overdose  and  death”  and,  for  patients  receiving  opioids
during  pregnancy,  the  risk  for  neonatal  abstinence  syndrome  (a  group  of  conditions
that  can  occur  when  newborns  withdraw  from  certain  substances  including  opioids;
withdrawal  caused  by  in  utero  exposure  to  opioids  also  is  called  neonatal  opioid
withdrawal  syndrome)  (49).  In  2016,  these  warnings  were  added  to  the  labels  for
immediate-release opioids (50). In addition to the potential risks to patients, prescribed
opioids have the potential for diversion and nonmedical use among persons to whom
they  were  not  prescribed  (51).  In  the  United  States,  opioid  prescribing  increased
fourfold  during  1999–2010;  this  increase  was  paralleled  by  an  approximately  fourfold

increase in overdose deaths involving prescription opioids during the same period (52)
and  increases  in  prescription  opioid  use  disorder  (53).  In  addition  to  the  increased
overall volume of opioid prescriptions during this period, how opioids were prescribed
also  changed;  opioids  increasingly  were  prescribed  at  higher  dosages  and  for  longer
durations,  prescribing  behaviors  associated  with  opioid  use  disorder  and  overdose
(54,55).  The  limited  evidence  of  long-term  effectiveness  of  opioids  for  chronic  pain,
coupled with risks to patients and to persons using prescription opioids that were not
prescribed  to  them,  underscored  the  importance  of  reducing  inappropriate  opioid
prescribing while advancing evidence-based pain care to improve the lives of persons
living with pain. CDC recognized the need for a national guideline on pain management
that could improve appropriate opioid prescribing while minimizing opioid-related risks
and  released  the  CDC  Guideline  for  Prescribing  Opioids  for  Chronic  Pain  —  United
States, 2016 (referred to as the 2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline hereafter). The
2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline  included  12  recommendations  for  the
prescribing of opioids for chronic pain by primary care clinicians in outpatient settings,
excluding  active  cancer  treatment,  palliative  care,  and  end-of-life  care  (56).  The
recommendations  in  the  2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline  were  based  on  a
systematic  review  of  the  best-available  evidence  at  the  time,  along  with  input  from
experts  and  the  public  and  review  and  deliberation  by  the  Board  of  Scientific
Counselors  (BSC)  of  the  National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control  (NCIPC)  (a
federally chartered advisory committee). The goals of the guideline were to 1) ensure
that  clinicians  and  patients  considered  safer  and  more  effective  pain  treatment;  2)
improve patient outcomes, such as reduced pain and improved function; and 3) reduce
the  number  of  persons  who  developed  opioid  use  disorder,  experienced  overdose,  or
experienced other prescription opioid–related adverse events (56). To facilitate uptake
and implementation of the 2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline in clinical practice,
CDC  used  a  broad-reaching  strategy  that  included  clinician  education  and  training,

partnerships with health systems and payers, and multiple clinical tools and fact sheets
(57).  The  number  of  overall  opioid  prescriptions  in  the  United  States  declined  after
2012,  and  further  declines  have  been  observed  after  the  release  of  the  2016  CDC
Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline  (58).  The  timing  of  this  release  was  associated  with
accelerated decreases in overall opioid prescribing and declines in potentially high-risk
prescribing  (e.g.,  high-dosage  opioid  prescribing  and  concurrent  prescribing  of  opioid
pain  medication  and  benzodiazepines)  (58,59).  The  release  of  the  2016  CDC  Opioid
Prescribing  Guideline  also  was  temporally  associated  with  modest  increases  in  the
prescribing of nonopioid pain medication (60). Although not the intent of the 2016 CDC
Opioid Prescribing Guideline, design and implementation of new laws, regulations, and
policies  also  appeared  to  reflect  its  recommendations.  For  example,  since  2016,
consistent  with  SUPPORT  Act  requirements  (61),  some  state  Medicaid  programs  have
used the guideline and other resources to promote nonopioid options for chronic pain
management  (62).  Approximately  half  of  all  states  have  passed  legislation  limiting
initial opioid prescriptions for acute pain to a ≤7-day supply (63), and many insurers,
pharmacy  benefit  managers,  and  pharmacies  have  enacted  similar  policies  (64).  At
least  17  states  have  passed  laws  requiring  or  recommending  the  coprescription  of
naloxone in the presence of overdose risk factors, such as high dosages of opioids or
concomitant  opioid  pain  medications  and  benzodiazepines  (65).  Although  some  laws,
regulations,  and  policies  that  appear  to  support  recommendations  in  the  2016  CDC
Opioid Prescribing Guideline might have had positive results for some patients, they are
inconsistent  with  a  central  tenet  of  the  guideline:  that  the  recommendations  are
voluntary  and  intended  to  be  flexible  to  support,  not  supplant,  individualized,
patient-centered care. Of particular concern, some policies purportedly drawn from the
2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline have been notably inconsistent with it and have
gone well beyond its clinical recommendations (6,66,67). Such misapplication includes
extension  to  patient  populations  not  covered  in  the  2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing

Guideline  (e.g.,  cancer  and  palliative  care  patients),  rapid  opioid  tapers  and  abrupt
discontinuation  without  collaboration  with  patients,  rigid  application  of  opioid  dosage
thresholds,  application  of  the  guideline’s  recommendations  for  opioid  use  for  pain  to
medications  for  opioid  use  disorder  treatment  (previously  referred  to  as  medication
assisted treatment), duration limits by insurers and pharmacies, and patient dismissal
and abandonment (66–68). These actions are not consistent with the 2016 CDC Opioid
Prescribing  Guideline  and  have  contributed  to  patient  harm,  including  untreated  and
undertreated
 pain,
 serious
 withdrawal
 symptoms,
 worsening
 pain
 outcomes,
psychological  distress,  overdose,  and  suicidal  ideation  and  behavior  (66–71).  Since
release of the 2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline, new evidence has emerged on
the  benefits  and  risks  of  prescription  opioids  for  both  acute  and  chronic  pain,
comparisons with nonopioid pain treatments, dosing strategies, opioid dose-dependent
effects, risk mitigation strategies, and opioid tapering and discontinuation (7–11). This
evidence  includes  studies  on  misapplication  of  the  2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing
Guideline  (66),  benefits  and  risks  of  different  tapering  strategies  and  rapid  tapering
associated  with  patient  harm  (68,71–73),  challenges  in  patient  access  to  opioids  (6),
patient abandonment and abrupt discontinuation of opioids (71), a seminal randomized
clinical trial comparing prescription opioids to nonopioid medications on long-term pain
outcomes  (74),  the  association  of  characteristics  of  initial  opioid  prescriptions  with
subsequent  likelihood  for  long-term  opioid  use  (75,76),  and  the  small  proportion  of
opioids  used  by  patients  compared  with  the  amount  prescribed  to  them  for
postoperative  pain  (77–79).  Opioid  medications  remain  a  common  treatment  for  pain
despite  declines  in  the  number  of  opioid  prescriptions  after  2012  (58).  During
2015–2018, approximately 6% of U.S. adults reported use of one or more prescription
opioids  during  the  past  30  days  (80),  and  in  2020,  approximately  143  million  opioid
prescriptions were dispensed from pharmacies in the United States (81). Rates of opioid
prescribing continue to vary across states, medical specialties, patient demographics,

and pain conditions in ways that cannot be explained by the underlying health status of
the  population,  and  often  are  discordant  with  the  2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing
Guideline  recommendations  (25,77,82–84).  The  prevalence  of  prescription  opioid
misuse and prescription opioid use disorder also has declined in recent years. In 2019,
among  persons  aged  ≥12  years  in  the  United  States,  9.7  million  reported  misuse  of
prescription opioids during the past year (a decrease from 12.5 million in 2015), and 1.4
million met criteria for a past-year prescription opioid use disorder (a decrease from 2.0
million  in  2015)  (85).  However,  in  2020,  prescription  opioids  remained  the  most
commonly  misused  prescription  drug  in  the  United  States  (51).  Also  in  2020,  among
those reporting misuse during the past year, 64.6% reported the main reason for their
most recent misuse was to “relieve physical pain” compared with 11.3% to “feel good
or get high” and 2.3% “because I am hooked or have to have it” (51). Taken together,
these  factors  underscore  the  need  for  an  updated  clinical  practice  guideline  on
appropriate  opioid  prescribing  for  pain  and  pain  management.  This  clinical  practice
guideline expands and updates the 2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline to provide
evidence-based  recommendations  for  prescribing  opioid  pain  medication  for  acute,
subacute,  and  chronic  pain  for  outpatients  aged  ≥18  years,  excluding  pain
management  related  to  sickle  cell  disease,  cancer-related  pain  treatment,  palliative
care, and end-of-life care (Boxes 1 and 2). Lessons learned from the development of the
2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline  informed  the  process  used  to  generate  this
update. This update leverages new data to expand content on prescription opioids for
acute  and  subacute  pain  throughout  the  recommendations.  Importantly,  the  update
also aims to clearly delineate recommendations that apply to patients who are being
considered for initial treatment with prescription opioids and patients who have been
receiving  opioids  as  part  of  their  ongoing  pain  management.  CDC  developed  a  draft
clinical practice guideline on the basis of five systematic reviews of the best-available
evidence  on  the  benefits  and  risks  of  prescription  opioids,  nonopioid  pharmacologic

treatments, and nonpharmacologic treatments. The draft clinical practice guideline was
reviewed  by  an  independent  federal  advisory  committee  (the  Board  of  Scientific
Counselors  of  the  National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control),  peer  reviewers,
and the public and was revised after feedback from these reviews. Additional insights
from  patients,  caregivers,  and  clinicians  shared  during  virtual  conversations  held  in
2020 were incorporated in the update. Importantly, to discourage the misapplication of
opioid
 pain
 medication
 dosage
 thresholds
 as
 inflexible
 standards,
 revised
recommendation  statement  language  emphasizes  principles  such  as  avoiding
increasing dosage above levels likely to yield diminishing returns in benefits relative to
risks  to  patients.  More-specific  considerations  related  to  dosage  have  been  moved  to
implementation  considerations  that  follow  each  recommendation  statement,  where
more  nuance  is  offered  to  inform  clinical  decision-making  and  individualized  patient
care.  This  clinical  practice  guideline  provides  recommendations  but  does  not  replace
clinical
 judgment
 and
 individualized,
 patient-centered
 decision-making.
 The
recommendations are based on emerging evidence, including observational studies or
randomized  clinical  trials  with  notable  limitations;  thus,  they  should  be  considered  in
the  context  of  the  clinician-patient  relationship  built  on  shared  understanding  and  a
whole-person  approach  that  considers  such  factors  as  the  patient’s  physical  and
psychological  functioning,  support  needs,  expected  health  outcomes  and  well-being,
home  environment,  and  home  and  work  responsibilities.  Flexibility  for  clinicians  and
patients is paramount when making patient-centered clinical treatment decisions. The
recommendations  aim  to  improve  communication  between  clinicians  and  patients
about the benefits and risks of prescription opioids and other pain treatment strategies;
improve  the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  pain  treatment;  improve  pain,  function,  and
quality  of  life  for  persons  with  pain;  and  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  opioid  pain
treatment  (including  opioid  use  disorder,  overdose,  and  death)  and  with  other  pain
treatment.  This  clinical  practice  guideline  provides  voluntary  clinical  practice

recommendations for clinicians that should not be used as inflexible standards of care.
The recommendations are not intended to be implemented as absolute limits for policy
or  practice  across  populations  by  organizations,  health  care  systems,  or  government
entities.  This  clinical  practice  guideline  is  intended  for  clinicians  who  are  treating
outpatients aged ≥18 years with acute (duration of <1 month), subacute (duration of
1–3 months), or chronic (duration of >3 months) pain, and excludes pain management
related  to  sickle  cell  disease,  cancer-related  pain  treatment,  palliative  care,  and
end-of-life care. The recommendations are most relevant to clinicians whose scope of
practice  includes  prescribing  opioids  (e.g.,  physicians,  nurse  practitioners  and  other
advanced-practice
 registered
 nurses,
 physician
 assistants,
 and
 oral
 health
practitioners).  Because  clinicians  might  work  within  team-based  care,  this  clinical
practice  guideline  also  refers  to  and  promotes  integrated  pain  management  and
collaborative working relationships among clinicians (e.g., behavioral health specialists
such  as  social  workers  or  psychologists,  pharmacists,  and  registered  nurses).  This
guideline update includes recommendations for primary care clinicians (e.g., internists
and family physicians) and other clinicians managing pain in outpatient settings (e.g.,
surgeons,  emergency  medicine  clinicians,  occupational  medicine  clinicians,  physical
medicine  and  rehabilitation  clinicians,  and  neurologists).  Applicable  settings  include
clinician offices, clinics, and urgent care centers. The recommendations do not apply to
care provided to patients who are hospitalized or in an emergency department or other
observational  setting  from  which  they  might  be  admitted  to  inpatient  care.  These
recommendations do apply to prescribing for pain management for patients when they
are discharged from hospitals, emergency departments, or other facilities. In addition to
updating  recommendations  on  the  basis  of  new  evidence  regarding  management  of
chronic pain, this clinical practice guideline is intended to assist clinicians in weighing
benefits  and  risks  of  prescribing  opioid  pain  medication  for  painful  acute  conditions
(e.g.,  low  back  pain,  neck  pain,  other  musculoskeletal  pain,  neuropathic  pain,  dental

pain, kidney stone pain, and acute episodic migraine) and pain related to procedures
(e.g.,  postoperative  pain  and  pain  from  oral  surgery).  In  2020,  several  of  these
indications  were  prioritized  by  an  ad  hoc  committee  of  the  National  Academies  of
Sciences,  Engineering,  and  Medicine  (86)  as  those  for  which  evidence-based  clinical
practice guidelines would help inform prescribing practices, with the greatest potential
effect  on  public  health.  This  update  includes  content  on  management  of  subacute
painful conditions, when duration falls between that typically considered acute (defined
as lasting <1 month) and chronic (defined as lasting >3 months). The durations used to
define acute, subacute, and chronic pain might imply more specificity than is found in
real-life patient experience, when pain often gradually transitions from acute to chronic.
These  time-bound  definitions  are  not  meant  to  be  absolute  but  rather  to  be
approximate  guides  to  facilitate  the  consideration  and  practical  use  of  the
recommendations  by  clinicians  and  patients.  The  2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing
Guideline  focused  on  recommendations  for  primary  care  physicians.  This  clinical
practice  guideline  expands  the  scope  to  additional  clinicians.  Although  primary  care
physicians  prescribe  approximately  37%  of  all  opioid  prescriptions,  other  clinicians,
including pain medicine clinicians (8.9%) and dentists (8.6%), account for considerable
proportions  of  prescriptions.  Pain  medicine  and  physical  medicine  and  rehabilitation
clinicians  prescribe  opioids  at  the  highest  rates,  followed  by  orthopedic  and  family
medicine clinicians (83). Thus, expanding the scope to outpatient opioid prescribing can
provide  evidence-based  advice  for  many  additional  clinicians,  including  dentists  and
other oral health providers, clinicians managing postoperative pain in outpatients, and
clinicians  providing  pain  management  for  patients  being  discharged  from  emergency
departments.  Many  principles  of  pain  management  are  similar  whether  or  not  the
treating clinician is a pain management specialist, and many of the recommendations
might be relevant for pain management specialists. Many pain management specialists
already follow principles outlined in this clinical practice guideline; however, use by pain

management  specialists  is  not  the  focus  of  this  clinical  practice  guideline.  Pain
management  specialists  often  have  extensive  training  and  expertise  in  pain
management modalities that other clinicians do not, and they might treat patients with
clinical situations that are more complex, less prevalent, and not well addressed by the
available evidence; therefore, the balance of benefits and risks to patients might differ
when  the  treating  clinician  is  a  pain  management  specialist.  The  recommendations
address  the  use  of  opioid  pain  medication  in  certain  special  populations  (e.g.,  older
adults  and  pregnant  persons)  and  in  populations  with  conditions  posing  special  risks
(e.g., a history of a substance use disorder). The recommendations do not address the
use of opioid pain medication in children or adolescents aged <18 years. The available
evidence concerning the benefits and risks of long-term opioid therapy in children and
adolescents  remains  limited,  and  few  opioid  medications  provide  information  in  their
labeling  regarding  safety  and  effectiveness  in  pediatric  patients.  Guidelines  and
recommendations are available for pain management in children with sickle cell disease
(87),  for  children  undergoing  surgical  procedures  (88),  and  for  palliative  care  in
adolescent and young adult patients with cancer (89). Although some principles in this
clinical practice guideline might be helpful in the management of pain related to sickle
cell disease, cancer-related pain treatment, palliative care, and end-of-life care, some
recommendations might not be relevant for pain management in these contexts. Other
guidelines more specifically address pain management in these situations (87,89–93);
therefore, this clinical practice guideline does not apply to patients experiencing pain
associated with these conditions or types of care. This does not imply that any other
types  of  pain  are  more  or  less  worthy  of  effective  treatment,  only  that  clinicians  are
referred  to  existing  clinical  guidelines  that  more  specifically  address  unique
considerations  for  management  of  pain  related  to  sickle  cell  disease,  cancer-related
pain  treatment,  palliative  care,  and  end-of-life  care.  This  clinical  practice  guideline
follows the Institute of Medicine’s definition of palliative care as care that provides relief

from pain and other symptoms, supports quality of life, and is focused on patients with
serious advanced illness (94). Palliative care can begin early in the course of treatment
for any serious illness that requires advanced management of pain or other distressing
symptoms (94). In this guideline, end-of-life care refers to care for persons in hospice
care  and  others  with  a  terminal  illness  or  at  high  risk  for  dying  in  the  near  future  in
hospitals,  receiving  long-term  services  and  supports  (including  institutional  care  and
home- and community-based services), or at home. This clinical practice guideline does
not  apply  to  patients  undergoing  cancer-related  pain  treatment,  palliative  care,  or
end-of-life  care  because  of  the  unique  therapeutic  goals,  ethical  considerations,
opportunities  for  medical  supervision,  and  balance  of  benefits  and  risks  with  opioid
therapy in such care. For example, for many persons at the end of life, serious potential
long-term  opioid-related  harms  such  as  opioid  use  disorder  might  not  be  relevant.
Recommendations on pain management for patients with cancer and patients who have
survived  cancer  are available in  the National  Comprehensive Cancer  Network  (NCCN)
Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Adult Cancer Pain (90), NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology: Survivorship (91), and Management of Chronic Pain in Survivors
of  Adult  Cancers:  American  Society  of  Clinical  Oncology  (ASCO)  Clinical  Practice
Guideline  (92).  Because  of  unique  considerations  in  management  of  pain  related  to
sickle  cell  disease,  which  can  change  the  balance  of  benefits  and  risks  of  the  use  of
opioids,  clinicians  should  refer  to  the  American  Society  of  Hematology  (ASH)  2020
Guidelines for Sickle Cell Disease: Management of Acute and Chronic Pain (87). In 2018,
NCCN and ASCO convened and led a meeting including representatives and guideline
authors  from  NCNN,  ASCO,  ASH,  and  CDC  to  review  existing  pain  management
guidelines and guidelines then in development from these organizations (56,87,90–92).
Meeting participants noted that these guidelines applied to different patient populations
and  target  audiences  but  found  no  disagreement  among  recommendations  when
applied  to  the  appropriate  patient  and  clinical  situation  (95).  Although  this  update

includes  content  on  pain  management  for  patients  with  opioid  use  disorder  and  one
recommendation  on  management  of  opioid  use  disorder  as  a  complication  of  opioid
use,  recommendations  on  opioids  used  specifically  as  medications  for  opioid  use
disorder  are  not  the  focus  of  this  clinical  practice  guideline.  More  detailed
recommendations on management of patients with opioid use disorder are available in
the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) National Practice Guideline for the
Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder: 2020 Focused Update (96). Top The 2016 CDC Opioid
Prescribing Guideline was based on a systematic clinical evidence review sponsored by
AHRQ  on  the  effectiveness  and  risks  of  long-term  opioid  therapy  for  chronic  pain
(47,97),  a  CDC  update  to  the  AHRQ-sponsored  review,  and  additional  contextual
questions  (56,98).  The  systematic  review  addressed  the  effectiveness  of  long-term
opioid  therapy  for  outcomes  related  to  pain,  function,  and  quality  of  life;  the
comparative effectiveness of different methods for initiating and titrating opioids; the
harms and adverse events associated with opioids; and the accuracy of risk prediction
instruments  and  effectiveness  of  risk  mitigation  strategies  on  outcomes  related  to
overdose, opioid use disorder, illicit drug use, and prescription opioid misuse. The CDC
update  to  the  AHRQ-sponsored  review  included  literature  published  during  or  after
2015 and an additional question on the association between opioid therapy for acute
pain  and  long-term  use.  The  contextual  evidence  review  addressed  effectiveness  of
nonpharmacologic  and  nonopioid  pharmacologic  treatments,  clinician  and  patient
values and preferences, and information about resource allocation. For this update to
the  2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline,  CDC  funded  AHRQ  in  2018  and  2019  to
conduct  five  systematic  reviews  (7–11).  AHRQ’s  Evidence-based  Practice  Centers
completed  these  reviews,  which  included  new  evidence  related  to  the  treatment  of
chronic  and  acute  pain.  The  AHRQ  review  of  opioids  for  chronic  pain  updated  and
expanded the evidence for the 2016 CDC review; studies were included on short-term
(1 to <6 months), intermediate-term (6 to <12 months) and long-term (≥12 months)

outcomes  of  therapy  involving  opioids,  effects  of  opioid  plus  nonopioid  combination
therapy,  effects  of  tramadol,  effects  of  naloxone  coprescription,  risks  of  coprescribed
benzodiazepines, risks of coprescribed gabapentinoids, and effects of concurrent use of
cannabis  (7).  The  systematic  clinical  evidence  review  on  opioids  for  chronic  pain  (7)
also  included  contextual  questions  on  clinician  and  patient  values  and  preferences,
costs  and  cost-effectiveness  of  opioid  therapy,  and  risk  mitigation  strategies.  CDC
considered  four  new  complementary  AHRQ  reviews  on  the  benefits  and  harms  of
nonpharmacologic treatments for chronic pain (9), nonopioid pharmacologic treatments
for  chronic  pain  (8),  treatments  for  acute  episodic  migraine  (11),  and  treatments  for
acute  (nonmigraine)  pain  (10).  A  question  on  management  of  acute  pain  in  the
systematic clinical evidence review for the 2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline was
included  in  the  new  review  on  therapies  for  acute  pain  (10).  CDC  also  reviewed
AHRQ-sponsored  surveillance  reports  conducted  in  follow-up  to  the  five  systematic
reviews  for  any  new  evidence  that  could  potentially  change  systematic  review
conclusions. To supplement the clinical evidence reviews, CDC sponsored a contextual
evidence review on clinician and patient values and preferences and resource allocation
(costs) for the areas addressed in the four new reviews (8–11). The reviews used the
AHRQ  approach  to  synthesize  and  grade  the  strength  of  evidence  (99).  The  AHRQ
approach  is  based  on  a  systematic  review  of  the  evidence  and  provides  an  overall
strength  of  evidence  indicating  the  level  of  certainty  (high,  moderate,  low,  or
insufficient); similar factors are considered in the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices  (ACIP)  adapted  (100,101)  Grading  of  Recommendations  Assessment,
Development,  and  Evaluation  (GRADE)  (102)  method.  These  factors  include  study
limitations  and  risk  for  bias,  consistency,  directness,  precision,  and  reporting  bias.
Large strength of association, dose response, and plausible confounders can strengthen
observed  findings.  The  primary  clinical  questions,  detailed  methods,  and  findings  for
the systematic and contextual evidence reviews are presented (Appendix). The GRADE

method  is  predicated  on  a  systematic  review  of  scientific  evidence  and  provides  a
transparent  framework  for  grading  the  quality  of  evidence  and  strength  of
recommendations. GRADE has been adapted by ACIP (100,101), and CDC used the ACIP
adaptation  in  this  clinical  practice  guideline.  Under  the  ACIP  GRADE  framework,  each
body  of  evidence  is  initially  categorized  using  a  hierarchy  that  reflects  the  degree  of
confidence in the effect of a clinical action on health outcomes. The categories in the
hierarchy  are  type  1  evidence  (randomized  clinical  trials  or  overwhelming  evidence
from observational studies), type 2 evidence (randomized clinical trials with important
limitations,  or  exceptionally  strong  evidence  from  observational  studies),  type  3
evidence  (observational  studies  or  randomized  clinical  trials  with  notable  limitations),
and type 4 evidence (clinical experience and observations, observational studies with
important limitations, or randomized clinical trials with several major limitations) (Box
3).  The  evidence  is  downgraded  if  issues  are  identified  with  regard  to  risk  for  bias,
inconsistency,  indirectness,  imprecision,  or  publication  bias.  Observational  studies
might be upgraded in certain situations (large strength of association, presence of dose
response,  or  plausible  effects  of  confounding  would  strengthen  findings;  that  is,  if
confounding  would  likely  provide  results  opposite  to  the  observed  findings,  it
strengthens the confidence that the observed association is present). A final evidence
type  is  assigned  based  on  these  considerations.  Type  1  evidence  indicates  high
confidence that the true effect is close to the estimate of the effect; type 2 evidence
means that the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is
some  uncertainty;  type  3  evidence  means  that  confidence  in  the  effect  estimate  is
limited (moderate uncertainty), and the true effect could differ substantially from the
estimate of the effect; and type 4 evidence indicates very little confidence in the effect
estimate (high uncertainty), and the likelihood is high that the true effect differs from
the estimate of the effect (100,103). When no studies are available or the evidence is
too limited to estimate effects, evidence is considered insufficient. The AHRQ approach

uses a different method and terminology (high, moderate, low, or insufficient) to grade
the strength of evidence from the ACIP adapted GRADE method (evidence types 1, 2, 3,
or  4)  (99).  However,  the  underlying  principles  are  similar,  enabling  translation  from
AHRQ to CDC grades. A methodologist translated the AHRQ strength of evidence grades
to  CDC  evidence  types  according  to  the  information  provided  in  the  summary  of
evidence  tables  in  the  AHRQ  reviews.  Tables  with  GRADE  clinical  evidence  review
ratings
 of
 the
 evidence
 for
 the
 key
 clinical
 questions
 are
 available
(https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/121663).  Evidence  was  categorized  into  the  following
types: type 1 (randomized clinical trials or overwhelming evidence from observational
studies;  equivalent  to  AHRQ  high  strength  of  evidence),  type  2  (randomized  clinical
trials  with  important  limitations,  or  exceptionally  strong  evidence  from  observational
studies;  equivalent  to  AHRQ  moderate  strength  of  evidence),  type  3  (observational
studies, or randomized clinical trials with notable limitations; equivalent to most AHRQ
low  strength  of  evidence  ratings),  or  type  4  (clinical  experience  and  observations,
observational  studies  with  important  limitations,  or  randomized  clinical  trials  with
several  major  limitations;  equivalent  to  AHRQ  low  strength  of  evidence  with  serious
limitations). When no studies were available or the evidence was too limited to estimate
effects, evidence was assessed as insufficient. Results from meta-analyses conducted
for  the  AHRQ  reviews  were  reported  when  available;  otherwise,  the  evidence  was
synthesized  qualitatively.  CDC  developed  this  clinical  practice  guideline  using  the
method developed by the GRADE working group (https://www.gradeworkinggroup.org).
Recommendations  are  based  on  the  reviewed  evidence.  In  the  ACIP  adapted  GRADE
framework,  recommendations  are  assigned  one  of  two  categories  (category  A  or  B).
Four  major  factors  determine  the  category  of  the  recommendation:  1)  the  quality  of
evidence,  2)  the  balance  between  desirable  and  undesirable  effects,  3)  values  and
preferences, and 4) resource allocation (e.g., costs to patients or health systems) (104).
Other  considerations  include  feasibility  and  acceptability  and  effect  on  equity  (105).

Recommendations are more likely to be category A when the evidence is higher quality,
a balance of desirable relative to undesirable effects is greater, resources and costs are
lower,  and  recommendations  are  less  sensitive  to  differences  in  values  and
preferences.  Category  A  recommendations  typically  apply  to  all  persons  in  the  group
addressed in the recommendation and indicate a course of action that can be followed
in most circumstances. Category B recommendations indicate that the recommendation
might  not  apply  to  all  persons  in  the  group  addressed  in  the  recommendation;
therefore,  different  choices  will  be  appropriate  for  different  patients,  and  decisions
should
 be
 made
 based
 on
 the
 patient’s
 circumstances.
 For
 category
 B
recommendations,  clinicians  must  help  patients  arrive  at  a  decision  consistent  with
patient values and preferences and specific clinical situations (shared decision-making)
(106). In the GRADE method, a particular quality of evidence does not necessarily result
in  a  particular  strength  of  recommendation  (102–104).  Although  it  is  desirable  for
category  A  recommendations  to  be  based  on  type  1  or  type  2  evidence,  category  A
recommendations can be based on type 3 or type 4 evidence when the advantages of a
clinical  action  clearly  outweigh  the  disadvantages  in  terms  of  benefits  and  harms,
values  and  preferences,  and  costs,  despite  uncertainty  in  effect  estimates  (104).  The
GRADE  working  group  has  presented  several  paradigmatic  situations  in  which  strong
(category  A)  recommendations  might  be  justified  despite  low-quality  evidence  (e.g.,
when  high-quality  evidence  suggests  equivalence  of  two  alternatives  and  low-quality
evidence  suggests  harm  in  one  alternative,  or  when  high-quality  evidence  suggests
modest  benefits  and  low-  or  very  low–quality  evidence  suggests  possibility  of
catastrophic  harm)  (104).  Category  B  recommendations  are  made  when  the
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  a  clinical  action  are  more  balanced  or  when  more
uncertainty  exists  with  regard  to  whether  benefits  clearly  outweigh  harms.  In
accordance  with  the  ACIP  adapted  GRADE  method,  CDC  drafted  evidence-based
recommendations  focused  on  determining  whether  or  not  to  initiate  opioids  for  pain,

selecting  opioids  and  determining  opioid  dosages,  deciding  duration  of  initial  opioid
prescription  and  conducting  follow-up,  and  assessing  risk  and  addressing  potential
harms of opioid use. To help assure the draft guideline’s integrity and credibility, CDC
then  began  a  multistep  review  process.  CDC  sought  recommendations  on  the  draft
clinical  practice  guideline  from  one  of  its  federal  advisory  committees,  the  Board  of
Scientific  Counselors  of  the  National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control
(BSC/NCIPC).  BSC/NCIPC  advises  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services
(HHS)
 Secretary,
 the
 CDC
 Director,
 and
 the
 NCIPC
 Director
 and
 makes
recommendations regarding scientific, programmatic, and research policies, strategies,
objectives, projects, and priorities. BSC/NCIPC also reviews progress toward injury and
violence prevention. BSC/NCIPC members are special government employees appointed
by the HHS Secretary or their designee as CDC advisory committee members. Members
are required to complete the Office of Government Ethics Form 450 annually to disclose
relevant  interests  and  report  on  their  disclosures  during  meetings.  Disclosures  for
BSC/NCIPC  are  reported  in  this  clinical  practice  guideline.  Meeting  minutes  and
documents  for  public  BSC/NCIPC  meetings  are  available  on  the  BSC/NCIPC  website
(https://www.cdc.gov/injury/bsc/meetings.html).  On  December  4–5,  2019,  CDC  held  a
public  meeting  of  BSC/NCIPC  (announced  via  Federal  Register  84  FR  57021;  84  FR
65159)  and  provided  a  presentation  on  the  background  for  updating  the  clinical
practice guideline. CDC then requested the formation of an Opioid Workgroup (OWG),
under  the  parent  BSC,  whose  primary  purpose  would  be  to  review  a  draft  clinical
practice  guideline  and  to  develop  a  report  of  their  observations  for  BSC/NCIPC  (107).
After  considering  CDC’s  presentations,  the  proposed  OWG  Terms  of  Reference,  and
public  comments,  BSC/NCIPC  voted  unanimously  to  establish  an  OWG  that  reports  to
BSC/NCIPC. CDC then held a public nomination process for prospective OWG members
(107). To provide background to BSC/NCIPC for informing the creation of OWG with a
balance of perspectives, CDC identified audiences that would be 1) directly affected by

the  clinical  practice  guideline,  2)  directly  involved  with  implementing  or  integrating
recommendations  into  current  practice,  and  3)  qualified  to  represent  a  specific
discipline or expertise in alignment with the tasks of the workgroup for consideration by
BSC/NCIPC.  Identified  groups  with  perspectives  that  would  support  the  workgroup’s
capacity  included,  but  were  not  limited  to,  patients  with  pain,  family  members  and
caregivers,  clinicians,  public  health  practitioners,  and  research  scientists.  CDC
announced  the  call  for  nominations  at  the  December  4–5,  2019,  public  meeting  and
heard  recommendations  from  the  public  during  the  public  comment  opportunities,  as
well  as  from  BSC/NCIPC  members,  regarding  recommendations  for  nominations.
Persons interested in being considered for the workgroup were encouraged to submit
self-nominations from December 4, 2019, through February 4, 2020. CDC’s BSC/NCIPC
received  255  nominations  for  OWG.  After  reviewing  clinical  expertise,  professional
credentials, and diversity in perspectives of all nominees (including diversity of gender,
race  and  ethnicity,  geographic  region,  institutional  affiliations,  and  personal
experiences  relevant  to  pain  management  and  providing  care  to  patients  with  pain),
OWG’s  Designated  Federal  Officer  (DFO)  created  a  list  of  prospective  workgroup
members  and  sent  them  invitations  to  participate,  along  with  conflict  of  interest
disclosure  forms.  OWG’s  DFO  and  BSC/NCIPC’s  DFO  reviewed  conflict  of  interest
disclosure  forms.  CDC’s  Strategic  Business  Initiatives  Unit  (SBIU),  which  oversees  the
Federal Advisory Committee Act program, also reviewed the OWG Terms of Reference,
prospective  OWG  roster,  curricula  vitae,  and  conflict  of  interest  disclosure  forms  and
determined  all  reported  financial  or  other  conflicts  of  interest  were  not  present  or
nonsignificant  before  finalizing  selection.*  OWG  members  disclosed  any  potential
topical conflicts of interest related to OWG meeting agenda items before each meeting.
Disclosures  of  OWG  are  reported  in  the  clinical  practice  guideline.  OWG  had  23
members (108) including four ex officio members representing federal partner agencies
(see Federal Partner Engagement). In accordance with CDC guidance (109,110) that at

least two BSC/NCIPC members must serve on OWG and one of the two members must
serve as the workgroup chair, OWG included a total of three BSC/NCIPC members, with
one  BSC/NCIPC  member  serving  as  the  OWG  chair.  An  NCIPC  subject  matter  expert
served  as  OWG’s  DFO.  OWG  members  included  patients  with  pain,  caregivers,  and
family  members  of  patients  with  pain.  OWG  also  comprised  clinicians  and  subject
matter  experts,  with  the  following  perspectives  represented:  primary  care,  pain
medicine,  public  health,  behavioral  health,  pharmacy,  emergency  medicine,  medical
toxicology,  obstetrics/gynecology,  bioethics,  orthopedic  surgery,  plastic  surgery,
dentistry,  sickle  cell  disease,  substance  use  disorder  treatment,  and  research.  OWG
members  were  diverse  in  regard  to  gender,  race  and  ethnicity,  geographic  region,
institutional  affiliation,  subject  matter  expertise,  and  personal  experiences.  The  CDC
NCIPC OWG DFO presented the OWG roster and reviewed the Terms of Reference at the
publicly held BSC/NCIPC meeting on July 22, 2020 (Federal Register 85 FR 30709; 85 FR
40290). OWG had 11 meetings from October 2020 through June 2021. Before receiving
the draft clinical practice guideline, OWG held meetings to review and discuss the 2016
CDC  Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline;  CDC’s  community  engagement  activities  with
patients, caregivers, and clinicians; and GRADE methodology. CDC NCIPC staff provided
OWG  with  evidence  reviews,  public  comments  from  BSC/NCIPC  meetings,  and
summaries of community engagements for review before providing OWG with the draft
clinical  practice  guideline  in  March  2021.  OWG  held  seven  meetings  to  review  and
discuss  the  draft  clinical  practice  guideline  and  develop  a  report  summarizing  their
expert  observations  and  findings  for  BSC/NCIPC.  The  OWG  report  provided  overall
observations
 on
 overarching
 themes
 and
 draft
 clinical
 practice
 guideline
recommendations  (111).  In  addition,  many  members  of  OWG  developed  a  document
entitled OWG Guiding Principles that was included as an appendix in the OWG report;
this document outlines the “general process and principles by which OWG approached
their  assigned  tasks.”  These  Guiding  Principles  included  minimizing  bias,  ensuring

scientific  integrity,  enhancing  inclusivity,  being  patient  and  clinician  centered,  and
considering  historical  context.  The  OWG  chair  presented  the  OWG  report  at  a  public
BSC/NCIPC  meeting  on  July  16,  2021  (Federal  Register  86  FR  30048).  After  hearing
additional CDC presentations on the process and progress of the draft clinical practice
guideline,  discussion  of  the  OWG  report,  and  a  2-hour  public  comment  period,
BSC/NCIPC voted unanimously that CDC adopt the OWG report, while considering ideas
and  suggestions  raised  by  BSC/NCIPC  and  the  public  during  the  meeting,  and  that
OWG’s work be considered complete and that OWG be sunsetted. BSC/NCIPC provided
their  recommendations  to  HHS  and  CDC  on  July  20,  2021.  CDC  considered  OWG’s
observations,  BSC/NCIPC  recommendations,  and  public  comments  during  BSC/NCIPC
meetings  when  revising  the  draft  clinical  practice  guideline  (112,113).  A  list  of
BSC/NCIPC  and  of  OWG  members  appears  at  the  end  of  this  report.  The
recommendations and all statements included in this guideline are those of CDC and do
not necessarily represent the official position of any persons or organizations providing
comments on this guideline. BSC/NCIPC invited federal partners to serve as ex officio
members of OWG, including representatives from the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA)  at  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH),  the  Substance  Abuse  and  Mental
Health  Services  Administration  (SAMHSA),  FDA,  and  the  Indian  Health  Service  (IHS).
BSC/NCIPC  included  ex  officio  members  from  the  Administration  for  Children  and
Families; the Administration on Aging in the Administration for Community Living; the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and the National Center for Health
Statistics at CDC; the Health Resources and Services Administration; IHS; SAMHSA; and
the  National  Institute  on  Aging,  the  National  Institute  of  Child  Health  and  Human
Development,  NIDA,  and  the  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health  at  NIH.  Additional
federal  partners  were  engaged  throughout  the  clinical  practice  guideline  update
process.  Federal  partners  reviewed  the  full  draft  clinical  practice  guideline  as  part  of
CDC’s agency clearance process. CDC sought input through Federal Register notices to

better understand community members’ experiences and perspectives related to pain
and  pain  management  options  before  drafting  the  clinical  practice  guideline  (113).
Through the Federal Register notice (85 FR 21441) posted from April 17, 2020, through
June 16, 2020, CDC invited input specifically on topics focused on using or prescribing
opioid pain medications, nonopioid medications, or nonpharmacologic treatments and
received  5,392  public  comments.  Public  comments  were  synthesized  into  common
themes, using a CDC-funded analysis contract, and reviewed by CDC. In addition, the
Lab  at  the  U.S.  Office  of  Personnel  Management  (OPM)  (https://lab.opm.gov)  worked
with  CDC  to  design  and  implement  community  engagement  opportunities.  These
opportunities were designed to gain additional insight into the values and preferences
of  groups  including  patients  with  acute  or  chronic  pain,  patients’  family  members  or
caregivers,  and  clinicians  who  care  for  patients  with  pain  or  conditions  that  can
complicate pain management (e.g., opioid use disorder or overdose). CDC planned to
have  in-person  individual  conversations  with  patients,  caregivers,  and  clinicians  but
pivoted  to  holding  conversations  with  persons  in  a  virtual  format  because  of  the
COVID-19 pandemic. CDC posted a companion Federal Register notice (85 FR 44303)
from July 22, 2020, through August 21, 2020, to solicit input from patients, caregivers,
and clinicians interested in participating in individual conversations. After the Federal
Register notice closed, CDC and OPM randomly selected participants within each group
(i.e.,  patients,  caregivers,  and  clinicians)  from  973  respondents.  CDC  and  OPM  also
developed  a  randomly  selected  waiting  list  of  participants  to  fill  conversation
appointments  that  were  missed  or  canceled  by  participants.  The  community
engagement  was  authorized  under  the  Generic  Clearance  for  the  Collection  of
Qualitative  Feedback  on  Agency  Service  Delivery  (OMB  Control  Number  0920–1050)
approval  for  the  Paperwork  Reduction  Act.  CDC  and  OPM  conducted  telephone  and
video conversations throughout September 2020 and spoke with 106 persons, including
42 patients, 21 caregivers, and 43 clinicians. Participants lived and worked all over the

United  States  and  had  diverse  experiences  with  opioids.  Participants  provided  verbal
consent  for  their  conversations  to  be  recorded.  A  transcription  service  reviewed  the
conversation recordings to develop anonymized transcripts. CDC and OPM reviewed the
anonymized  transcripts  to  develop  thematic  summaries.  CDC  and  OPM  also  held  two
human-centered codesign workshops with staff from CDC and the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services. Workshop topics included framing priority needs for public input;
objectives for individual conversations; and synthesizing engagement strategies on the
basis of insights from public comments and conversations with patients, caregivers, and
clinicians.  Workshop  participants  included  HHS  staff  who  were  themselves  patients,
caregivers,  clinicians,  clinical  practice  guideline  authors,  and  other  subject  matter
experts.  CDC  also  gathered  input  through  oral  and  written  public  comment
opportunities  at  and  in  conjunction  with  public  BSC/NCIPC  meetings.  These  public
comment  opportunities  were  announced  through  Federal  Register  notices  (Federal
Register  84  FR  57021;  84  FR  65159;  85  FR  30709;  85  FR  40290;  86  FR  1502;  86  FR
30048) and NCIPC newsletters. CDC reviewed thematic summaries of public comments,
individual conversations, and workshops to learn more about values and preferences of
patients,  caregivers,  clinicians,  and  experts  before  drafting  the  clinical  practice
guideline  (113).  After  incorporating  observations  and  comments  on  the  draft  clinical
practice guideline from BSC/NCIPC and the agency clearance process, CDC posted the
revised  full  draft  clinical  practice  guideline  and  supporting  materials  in  the  Federal
Register for public comment (Federal Register 87 FR 7838). The public comment period
was  open  for  60  days  (February  10–April  11,  2022).  The  Federal  Docket  received
approximately 5,500 unique comments (including one comment submitted with 28,322
additional signatories) from the public, including patients with acute and chronic pain,
caregivers,  and  clinicians,  and  organizational  perspectives  from  medical  associations,
professional  organizations,  academic  institutions,  state  and  local  governments,  and
advocacy and industry groups. CDC reviewed and considered all public comments when

revising  the  clinical  practice  guideline.  This  clinical  practice  guideline  provides
influential scientific information that could have a clear and substantial effect on public-
and  private-sector  decisions.  Therefore,  peer  review  of  the  draft  clinical  practice
guideline  was  required  per  the  final  information  quality  bulletin  for  peer  review
(https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/M-19-15.pdf).  CDC  identified
peer reviewers on the basis of multiple factors, including scientific and subject matter
expertise,  racial  and  ethnic  diversity,  gender  diversity,  diversity  of  experiences  and
perspectives, independence from the clinical practice guideline development process,
and  consideration  of  conflicts  of  interest.  Specific  effort  was  made  to  identify  subject
matter experts with knowledge and experience in topics such as chronic and acute pain
management, clinical practice, health equity, mental health and well-being, opioids and
opioid  therapies,  opioid  tapering,  opioid  use  disorder  treatment,  pharmacologic  and
nonpharmacologic  pain  management,  and  surgical  pain  management.  CDC  assessed
potential  conflicts  of  interest  before  finalizing  selection  of  peer  reviewers.  The  NCIPC
Associate  Director  for  Science  reviewed  conflict  of  interest  disclosure  forms  and
determined  no  conflicts  of  interest  were  present.  After  the  peer  reviews  were
completed, CDC posted the names of peer reviewers on the NCIPC and CDC/ATSDR Peer
Review Agenda websites, which provide information about the peer review of influential
government  scientific  documents  (114,115).  Peer  reviewers  independently  reviewed
the  draft  clinical  practice  guideline  and  evaluated  its  scientific  merit  and  practical
implementation  considerations,  with  the  goal  of  maintaining  high-quality  science  and
providing
 evidence-based
 recommendations
 to
 guide
 clinical
 practice
 and
decision-making  to  help  prevent  opioid-related  harms.  CDC  reviewed  and  considered
peer  review  comments  when  revising  the  clinical  practice  guideline.  Top  This  clinical
practice  guideline  includes  12  recommendations  for  clinicians  who  are  prescribing
opioids  for  outpatients  aged  ≥18  years  with  acute  (duration  of  <1  month),  subacute
(duration  of  1–3  months),  or  chronic  (duration  of  >3  months)  pain,  excluding  pain

management  related  to  sickle  cell  disease,  cancer-related  pain  treatment,  palliative
care,  and  end-of-life  care  (Box  3).  The  recommendations  are  not  intended  to  be
implemented  as  absolute  limits  of  policy  or  practice  across  populations  by
organizations, health care systems, or government entities. In accordance with the ACIP
adapted GRADE method, CDC based the recommendations on consideration of clinical
evidence, contextual evidence (e.g., benefits and harms, values and preferences, and
resource  allocation),  and  expert  opinion.  Expert  input  is  reflected  within  the
recommendation  rationales.  For  each  recommendation  statement,  CDC  notes  the
recommendation category (A or B) and the type of evidence (1, 2, 3, or 4) supporting
the statement (Box 3). Category A recommendations indicate that most patients should
receive the recommended course of action; category B recommendations indicate that
different  choices  will  be  appropriate  for  different  patients,  requiring  clinicians  to  help
patients arrive at a decision consistent with patient values and preferences and specific
clinical  situations.  Consistent  with  the  ACIP  (106,116)  and  GRADE  method  (103),
category A recommendations were made, even with type 3 and 4 evidence, when there
was broad agreement that the advantages of a clinical action greatly outweighed the
disadvantages.  Category  B  recommendations  were  made  when  there  was  broad
agreement  that  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  a  clinical  action  were  more
balanced,  but  advantages  were  significant  enough  to  warrant  a  recommendation.
Recommendations were associated with a range of evidence types, from type 1 to type
4.  In  summary,  the  categorization  of  recommendations  was  based  on  the  following
assessment: Each of the 12 recommendation statements is followed by considerations
for  implementation  and  a  rationale  for  the  recommendation.  The  implementation
considerations offer practical insights, context, and specific examples meant to further
inform clinician-patient decision-making for the respective recommendation and are not
meant to be rigidly or inflexibly followed. The recommendations are grouped into four
areas: In addition, these five guiding principles should broadly inform implementation

across recommendations (Box 4): All patients with pain should receive treatment that
provides the greatest benefits relative to risks. (See Recommendation 1 for determining
whether  or  not  to  initiate  opioids  for  acute  pain  [i.e.,  pain  lasting  <1  month]  and
Recommendation 2 for determining whether or not to initiate opioids for subacute pain
[i.e., pain lasting 1–3 months] or chronic pain [i.e., pain lasting >3 months].) Nonopioid
therapies  are  at  least  as  effective  as  opioids  for  many  common  types  of  acute  pain.
Clinicians  should  maximize  use  of  nonpharmacologic  and  nonopioid  pharmacologic
therapies as appropriate for the specific condition and patient and only consider opioid
therapy for acute pain if benefits are anticipated to outweigh risks to the patient. Before
prescribing  opioid  therapy  for  acute  pain,  clinicians  should  discuss  with  patients  the
realistic  benefits  and  known  risks  of  opioid  therapy  (recommendation  category:  B;
evidence  type:  3).  Evaluation  of  the  patient  is  critical  to  appropriate  management.
Evaluation  can  identify  reversible  causes  of  pain  and  underlying  etiologies  with
potentially  serious  sequelae  that  require  urgent  action.  To  guide  patient-specific
selection  of  therapy,  clinicians  should  evaluate  patients  and  establish  or  confirm  the
diagnosis. Diagnosis can help identify interventions to reverse, ameliorate, or prevent
worsening of pain and improve function (e.g., surgical intervention to repair structure
and  function  after  certain  traumatic  injuries,  bracing  to  prevent  recurrence  of  acute
ankle  sprain,  fracture  immobilization,  ice  or  elevation  to  reduce  swelling,  and  early
mobilization to maintain function) (118). Noninvasive nonpharmacologic approaches to
acute  pain  have  the  potential  to  improve  pain  and  function  without  risk  for  serious
harms  (10).  Clinical  evidence  reviews  found  that  some  nonpharmacologic  treatments
were  likely  effective  for  acute  pain,  such  as  heat  therapy  for  acute  low  back  pain;
several  others  might  be  effective  for  specific  acute  pain  conditions,  such  as  spinal
manipulation  for  acute  back  pain  with  radiculopathy,  a  cervical  collar  or  exercise  for
acute  neck  pain  with  radiculopathy,  acupressure  for  acute  musculoskeletal  pain,
massage for postoperative pain (10), and remote electrical neuromodulation for acute

pain  related  to  episodic  migraine  (11).  The  American  College  of  Physicians  (ACP)
recommends nonpharmacologic treatment with superficial heat, massage, acupuncture,
or spinal manipulation as a cornerstone of treatment for acute low back pain (119). ACP
and  the  American  Academy  of  Family  Physicians  (AAFP)  suggest  acupressure  to
improve  pain  and  function  and  transcutaneous  electrical  nerve  stimulation  to  reduce
pain in patients with acute musculoskeletal injuries (120). Despite evidence supporting
their use, noninvasive nonpharmacologic therapies are not always or fully covered by
insurance (43), and access and cost can be barriers, particularly for persons who are
uninsured, have limited income, have transportation challenges, or live in rural areas
where treatments are not available (121). Experts from OWG expressed concern about
limited  access  to  nonopioid  pain  management  modalities,  in  part  because  of  lack  of
availability  or  lack  of  coverage  by  payers,  and  emphasized  improving  access  to
nonopioid  pain  management  modalities  as  a  priority.  Health  insurers  and  health
systems can contribute to improved pain management and reduced medication use by
increasing  access  to  noninvasive  nonpharmacologic  therapies  with  evidence  of
effectiveness  (9,43).  Noninvasive  nonpharmacologic  approaches  should  be  used  as
appropriate to alleviate acute pain, including ice and elevation to reduce swelling and
discomfort  from  musculoskeletal  injuries,  heat  to  alleviate  low  back  pain,  and  other
modalities depending on the cause of the acute pain. Many acute pain conditions often
can  be  managed  most  effectively  with  nonopioid  medications  (10,122).  A  systematic
review  found  that  for  musculoskeletal  injuries  such  as  sprains,  whiplash,  and  muscle
strains,  topical  NSAIDs  provided  the  greatest  benefit-harm  ratio,  followed  by  oral
NSAIDs or acetaminophen with or without diclofenac (122). NSAIDs have been found to
be  more  effective  than  opioids  for  surgical  dental  pain  and  kidney  stone  pain  and
similarly effective to opioids for low back pain (10). Evidence is limited on comparative
effectiveness of therapies for acute neuropathic pain, neck pain, and postoperative pain
(10).  For  episodic  migraine,  triptans,  NSAIDs,  antiemetics,  dihydroergotamine,

calcitonin  gene-related  peptide  antagonists  (gepants),  and  lasmiditan  are  associated
with improved pain and function with usually mild and transient adverse events (11).
ACP  recommends  NSAIDs  or  skeletal  muscle  relaxants  if  pharmacologic  treatment  is
desired to treat low back pain (119). For acute musculoskeletal injuries other than low
back  pain,  ACP  and  AAFP  recommend  topical  NSAIDs  with  or  without  menthol  gel  as
first-line  therapy  and  suggest  oral  NSAIDs  to  relieve  pain  or  improve  function  or  oral
acetaminophen  to  reduce  pain  (120).  The  American  Dental  Association  (ADA)
recommends  NSAIDs  as  first-line  treatment  for  acute  dental  pain  management  (123).
For acute kidney stone pain, NSAIDs are at least as effective as opioids (124–127), can
decrease  the  ureteral  smooth  muscle  tone  and  ureteral  spasm  (128)  causing  kidney
stone  pain,  and  are  preferred  for  kidney  stone  pain  if  not  contraindicated.  Triptans,
NSAIDs,  combined  triptans  with  NSAIDs,  antiemetics,  dihydroergotamine,  and
acetaminophen  are  established  acute  treatments  for  migraine  (11).  Lasmiditan,  an
5-HT1F receptor agonist, and ubrogepant, a gepant, were approved by FDA in 2019 for
the treatment of migraine (129); another gepant, rimegepant, was approved in 2020.
Lasmiditan and the gepants were more effective than placebo in providing pain relief at
2 hours, 1 day, and 1 week (11). Adverse events related to these newer medications
require  further  study;  however,  their  mechanisms  of  action  are  believed  to  be
nonvasoconstrictive (130) and potentially carry lower risks than vasoactive medications
in  patients  with  cardiovascular  risk  factors  (11).  When  not  contraindicated,  NSAIDs
should be used for low back pain, painful musculoskeletal injuries (including minor pain
related to fractures), dental pain, postoperative pain, and kidney stone pain; triptans,
NSAIDs,  or  their  combinations  should  be  used  along  with  antiemetics  as  needed  for
acute  pain  related  to  episodic  migraine.  NSAID  use  has  been  associated  with  serious
gastrointestinal  events  and  major  coronary  events  (8),  particularly  in  patients  with
cardiovascular or gastrointestinal comorbidities, and clinicians should weigh risks and
benefits  of  use,  dose,  and  duration  of  NSAIDs  when  treating  older  adults  as  well  as

patients with hypertension, renal insufficiency, heart failure, or those with risk for peptic
ulcer  disease  or  cardiovascular  disease.  Vasoactive  effects  of  triptans  and  ergot
alkaloids  might  preclude  their  use  in  patients  with  migraine  who  also  have
cardiovascular  risk  factors  (11,131,132).  Clinicians  should  review  FDA-approved
labeling, including boxed warnings, before initiating treatment with any pharmacologic
therapy.  For  pain  management  in  the  postpartum  period,  the  American  College  of
Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists  (ACOG)  recommends  stepwise,  multimodal,  shared
decision-making,  incorporating  pharmacologic  treatments  that  might  include  opioids.
After  vaginal  delivery,  ACOG  recommends  acetaminophen  or  NSAIDs,  and  if  needed,
adding  an  opioid.  After  cesarean  delivery,  ACOG  recommends  standard  oral  and
parenteral  medications  such  as  acetaminophen,  NSAIDs,  or  low-dose,  low-potency,
short-acting  opioids  with  duration  of  opioid  use  limited  to  the  shortest  reasonable
course expected for treating acute pain (133). ACOG recommends counseling persons
who are prescribed opioids about the risk for central nervous system depression in the
postpartum person and in the breastfed infant (133), noting that if a codeine-containing
medication  is  selected,  duration  of  therapy  and  neonatal  signs  of  toxicity  should  be
reviewed  with  patients  and  their  families  (133).  A  systematic  review  found  that  for
musculoskeletal  injuries  such  as  sprains,  whiplash,  and  muscle  strains,  no  opioid
provided better benefit than NSAIDs, and opioid use caused the most harms (122). The
evidence  review  (10)  found  that  opioids  might  not  be  more  effective  than  nonopioid
therapies  for  some  acute  pain  conditions  (134–138),  and  use  of  opioids  might
negatively affect recovery and function (139,140). The review found that opioids were
probably less effective than NSAIDs for surgical dental pain and kidney stone pain, less
effective than acetaminophen for kidney stone pain, and similarly effective as NSAIDs
for low back pain (10). For postoperative pain, effects of opioids on pain intensity were
inconsistent, and opioids were associated with increased likelihood of repeat or rescue
analgesic  use  (10).  Evidence  was  insufficient  for  opioids  in  treatment  of  episodic

migraine (11). Compared with NSAIDs or acetaminophen, opioids were associated with
increased  risk  for  short-term  adverse  events,  including  any  adverse  event,  nausea,
dizziness, and somnolence (10). Observational studies found that opioid use for acute
low  back  pain  or  postoperative  pain  was  associated  with  increased  likelihood  of
long-term  opioid  use  (10).  Proportions  of  adults  with  new  long-term  opioid  use  at
follow-up  after  initiation  for  short-term  use  for  postoperative  pain  have  ranged  from
<1%  to  13%  (141–146).  Odds  of  long-term  opioid  use  at  follow-up  after  initiation  for
short-term  use  for  acute  pain  might  be  greater  with  higher  dosage  and  longer  initial
duration of exposure. For example, one study found that, compared with no early opioid
use for acute low back pain, the adjusted odds ratio was 2.08 (95% CI: 1.55–2.78) for an
early prescription totaling 1–140 MME and increased to 6.14 (95% CI: 4.92–7.66) for an
early  prescription  totaling  ≥450  MME  (140).  In  episodic  migraine,  opioids  as  well  as
butalbital-containing  medications  were  associated  with  a  twofold  higher  risk  for
development  of  medication  overuse  headache  compared  with  simple  analgesics  and
triptans  (11,147).  Serious  adverse  events  were  uncommon  for  opioids  and  other
medications; however, studies were not designed to assess risk for overdose, opioid use
disorder,  or  long-term  harms  (10).  For  acute  low  back  pain,  ACP  found  insufficient
evidence  for  effectiveness  of  opioids  and  recommends  nonopioid  medications  (see
Nonopioid Medications for Acute Pain) if choosing pharmacologic treatment (119). ACP
and  AAFP  suggest  against  treating  patients  with  acute  pain  from  musculoskeletal
injuries  with  opioids,  including  tramadol  (120).  ADA  recommends  NSAIDs  as  the
first-line  therapy  for  acute  pain  management  (see  Nonopioid  Medications  for  Acute
Pain) (123). Multiple guidelines that address prescribing for postoperative pain include
both  nonopioid  and  opioid  treatment  options  and  have  emphasized  multimodal
analgesia, incorporating around-the-clock nonopioid analgesics and nonpharmacologic
therapies and noting that systemic opioids often are needed postoperatively but are not
required  in  all  patients  (148–151).  The  American  Headache  Society  recommends

against prescribing opioid or butalbital-containing medications as first-line treatment for
recurrent  headache  disorders  (152),  and  the  American  Academy  of  Neurology  also
recommends  against  use  of  both  of  these  classes  of  medications  for  treatment  of
migraine, except as a last resort (153). Because of equivalent or lesser effectiveness for
pain relief compared with NSAIDs and risks for long-term opioid use after using opioids
for  acute  pain,  opioids  are  not  recommended  as  first-line  therapy  for  many  common
acute  pain  conditions,  including  low  back  pain,  neck  pain,  pain  related  to  other
musculoskeletal injuries (e.g., sprains, strains, tendonitis, and bursitis), pain related to
minor  surgeries  typically  associated  with  minimal  tissue  injury  and  only  mild
postoperative pain (e.g., simple dental extraction), dental pain, kidney stone pain, and
headaches including episodic migraine. Opioid therapy has an important role for acute
pain related to severe traumatic injuries (including crush injuries and burns), invasive
surgeries  typically  associated  with  moderate  to  severe  postoperative  pain,  and  other
severe acute pain when NSAIDs and other therapies are contraindicated or likely to be
ineffective.  When  diagnosis  and  severity  of  acute  pain  warrant  the  use  of  opioids,
clinicians should prescribe immediate-release opioids (see Recommendation 3) at the
lowest  effective  dose  (see  Recommendation  4)  and  for  no  longer  than  the  expected
duration of pain severe enough to require opioids (see Recommendation 6) to minimize
unintentional  initiation  of  long-term  opioid  use.  Clinicians  should  maximize  use  of
nonopioid pharmacologic (e.g., NSAIDs, acetaminophen, or both) and nonpharmacologic
(e.g., ice, heat, elevation, rest, immobilization, or exercise) therapies as appropriate for
the  specific  condition  and  continue  these  therapies  as  needed  after  opioids  are
discontinued.  Clinicians  should  work  with  patients  to  prevent  prolonged  opioid  use,
prescribe
 and
 advise
 opioid
 use
 only
 as
 needed
 (e.g.,
 hydrocodone
 5
mg/acetaminophen  325  mg,  one  tablet  not  more  frequently  than  every  4  hours  as
needed for moderate to severe pain) rather than on a scheduled basis (e.g., one tablet
every  4  hours),  and  encourage  and  include  an  opioid  taper  if  opioids  will  be  taken

around the clock for more than a few days (see Recommendation 6). Clinicians should
consider  concurrent  medical  conditions,  including  sleep  apnea,  pregnancy,  renal  or
hepatic  insufficiency,  mental  health  conditions,  and  substance  use  disorders,  in
assessing risks of opioid therapy (see Recommendation 8); offer naloxone, particularly
if  the  patient  or  a  household  member  has  risk  factors  for  opioid  overdose  (see
Recommendation 8); use particular caution when prescribing benzodiazepines or other
sedating medications with opioid pain medication (see Recommendation 11); and check
the  prescription  drug  monitoring  program  (PDMP)  database  to  ensure  a  new  opioid
prescription  will  not  contribute  to  cumulative  opioid  dosages  or  medication
combinations that put the patient at risk for overdose (see Recommendation 9). If signs
of opioid use disorder are present, clinicians should address concerns with the patient,
offer  or  arrange  medication  treatment  for  patients  who  meet  criteria  for  opioid  use
disorder,  and  use  nonpharmacologic  and  pharmacologic  treatments  as  appropriate  to
manage  the  patient’s  pain  (see  Recommendation  12  and  the  ASAM  National  Practice
Guideline  for  the  Treatment  of  Opioid  Use  Disorder:  2020  Focused  Update)  (96).
Although findings regarding risks for new long-term opioid use after use for acute pain
(10) relate specifically to patients who were previously opioid naïve, risks also might be
associated with dosage escalation (see Recommendation 4) if patients already treated
with long-term opioids are prescribed additional opioid medication for new acute pain
superimposed on chronic pain. Therefore, strategies that minimize opioid use should be
implemented  for  both  opioid-naïve  and  opioid-tolerant  patients  with  acute  pain  when
possible. If patients receiving long-term opioid therapy require additional medication for
acute pain, nonopioid medications should be used when possible. If additional opioids
are required (e.g., for superimposed severe acute pain), they should be continued only
for  the  duration  of  pain  severe  enough  to  require  additional  opioids,  returning  to  the
patient’s baseline opioid dosage as soon as possible, including an appropriate taper to
baseline dosage if additional opioids were used around the clock for more than a few

days  (see  Recommendation  6).  Patient  education  and  discussion  before  starting
outpatient  opioid  therapy  are  critical  so  that  patient  preferences  and  values  can  be
understood and used to inform clinical decisions. Clinicians should ensure that patients
are aware of expected benefits of, common risks of, serious risks of, and alternatives to
opioids  before  starting  or  continuing  opioid  therapy  and  should  involve  patients  in
decisions about whether to start opioid therapy. Essential elements for communication
and discussion with patients before prescribing outpatient opioid therapy for acute pain
include the following: Nonopioid therapies are preferred for subacute and chronic pain.
Clinicians  should  maximize  use  of  nonpharmacologic  and  nonopioid  pharmacologic
therapies  as  appropriate  for  the  specific  condition  and  patient  and  only  consider
initiating  opioid  therapy  if  expected  benefits  for  pain  and  function  are  anticipated  to
outweigh  risks  to  the  patient.  Before  starting  opioid  therapy  for  subacute  or  chronic
pain,  clinicians  should  discuss  with  patients  the  realistic  benefits  and  known  risks  of
opioid  therapy,  should  work  with  patients  to  establish  treatment  goals  for  pain  and
function, and should consider how opioid therapy will be discontinued if benefits do not
outweigh
 risks
 (recommendation
 category:
 A;
 evidence
 type:
 2).
 To
 guide
patient-specific selection of therapy, clinicians should evaluate patients and establish or
confirm  the  diagnosis  (155).  Detailed  recommendations  on  diagnosis  are  provided  in
other  guidelines  (156–159).  Evaluation  should  include  a  focused  history,  including
history  and  characteristics  of  pain  and  potential  contributing  factors  (e.g.,  function,
work  history  and  current  work  demands,  psychosocial  stressors,  and  sleep),  and
physical examination, with imaging or other diagnostic testing only if indicated (e.g., if
severe or progressive neurologic deficits are present or if serious underlying conditions
are  suspected)  (158,159).  For  complex  pain  syndromes,  consultation  with  a  pain
specialist can be considered to assist with diagnosis and management. Diagnosis can
help identify disease-specific interventions to reverse, ameliorate, or prevent worsening
of pain and improve function (e.g., improving glucose control to prevent progression of

diabetic  neuropathy;  immune-modulating  agents  for  rheumatoid  arthritis;  physical  or
occupational therapy to address posture, muscle weakness, or repetitive occupational
motions  that  contribute  to  musculoskeletal  pain;  or  surgical  intervention  to  relieve
severe  mechanical  or  compressive  pain)  (159).  The  underlying  mechanism  for  most
pain  syndromes  has  traditionally  been  categorized  as  neuropathic  (e.g.,  diabetic
neuropathy  and  postherpetic  neuralgia)  or  nociceptive  (e.g.,  osteoarthritis  and
muscular  back  pain).  More  recently,  nociplastic  pain  has  been  suggested  as  a  third,
distinct  category  of  pain  with  augmented  central  nervous  system  pain  and  sensory
processing  and  altered  pain  modulation  as  experienced  in  conditions  such  as
fibromyalgia  (160).  The  diagnosis  and  pathophysiologic  mechanism  of  pain  have
implications for symptomatic pain treatment with medication. For example, evidence is
limited  for  improved  pain  or  function,  or  evidence  exists  of  worse  outcomes,  with
long-term  use  of  opioids  for  several  chronic  pain  conditions  for  which  opioids  are
commonly prescribed, such as osteoarthritis (161), nonspecific low back pain (119,162),
headache (152), and fibromyalgia (163,164). For moderate to severe chronic back pain
or hip or knee osteoarthritis pain, a nonopioid strategy starting with acetaminophen or
NSAIDs  results  in  improved  pain  intensity  with  fewer  side  effects  compared  with  a
strategy  starting  with  opioids  (74).  Tricyclic  antidepressants,  SNRI  antidepressants,
selected  anticonvulsants,  or  transdermal  lidocaine  are  recommended  for  neuropathic
pain syndromes (e.g., diabetic neuropathy or postherpetic neuralgia) (156). Review of
the  patient’s  history  and  context  beyond  the  presenting  pain  syndrome  is  helpful  in
selection  of  pain  treatments.  In  particular,  medications  should  be  used  only  after
assessment  and  determination  that  expected  benefits  outweigh  risks,  considering
patient-specific factors. For example, clinicians should consider fall risk when selecting
and
 dosing
 potentially
 sedating
 medications
 (e.g.,
 tricyclic
 antidepressants,
anticonvulsants, and opioids) and should weigh benefits and risks of use, dosage, and
duration  of  NSAIDs  when  treating  older  adults  and  patients  with  hypertension,  renal

insufficiency, heart failure, or those with risk for peptic ulcer disease or cardiovascular
disease. NSAIDs are potentially inappropriate for use in older adults with chronic pain
because of higher risk for adverse effects with prolonged use (165). Some guidelines
recommend  topical  NSAIDs  for  localized  osteoarthritis  (e.g.,  knee  osteoarthritis)  over
oral  NSAIDs  in  patients  aged  ≥75  years  to  minimize  systemic  effects  (166).  (See
Recommendation 8 for additional considerations for assessing risks of opioid therapy.)
Many  noninvasive  nonpharmacologic  approaches,  including  physical  therapy,  weight
loss for knee osteoarthritis, and behavioral therapies (e.g., cognitive behavioral therapy
and mindfulness-based stress reduction), can improve pain and function without risk for
serious  harms  (9).  High-quality  evidence  exists  that  exercise  therapy  (a  prominent
modality in physical therapy) for back pain, fibromyalgia, and hip or knee osteoarthritis
reduces  pain  and  improves  function  immediately  after  treatment  and  that  the
improvements are sustained for at least 2–6 months (9,167–170). Previous guidelines
have recommended aerobic, aquatic, or resistance exercises for persons with chronic
pain,  including  osteoarthritis  of  the  knee  or  hip,  back  pain,  and  fibromyalgia
(119,156,166,171). Other noninvasive nonpharmacologic therapies that improve pain,
function,  or  both  for  at  least  1  month  after  delivery  without  apparent  risk  for  serious
harm include cognitive behavioral therapy for knee osteoarthritis; manual therapies for
hip  osteoarthritis;  psychological  therapy,  spinal  manipulation,  low-level  laser  therapy,
massage, mindfulness-based stress reduction, yoga, acupuncture, and multidisciplinary
rehabilitation for low back pain; mind-body practices (e.g., yoga, tai chi, and qigong),
massage,  and  acupuncture  for  neck  pain;  cognitive  behavioral  therapy,  myofascial
release
 massage,
 mindfulness
 practices,
 tai
 chi,
 qigong,
 acupuncture,
 and
multidisciplinary  rehabilitation  for  fibromyalgia;  and  spinal  manipulation  for  tension
headache  (9).  For  temporomandibular  disorder  pain,  patient  education  and  self-care
can be effective, as can occlusal splints for some patients and biobehavioral therapy for
prevention  of  disabling  symptoms  (172,173).  Exercise,  mind-body  interventions,  and

behavioral  treatments  (including  cognitive  behavioral  therapy  and  mindfulness
practices) can encourage active patient participation in the care plan and help address
the  effects  of  pain  in  the  patient’s  life;  these  active  therapies  have  somewhat  more
robust  evidence  for  sustained  improvements  in  pain  and  function  than  more  passive
treatments  (e.g.,  massage),  particularly  at  longer-term  follow-up  (9).  In  addition,
physical activity can provide additional health benefits, such as preventing or reducing
symptoms  of  depression  (174).  Active  approaches  that  engage  the  patient  should  be
used when possible, with a supplementary role for more passive approaches, to reduce
pain  and  improve  function.  Despite  their  favorable  benefit-to-risk  profile,  noninvasive
nonpharmacologic therapies are not always covered or fully covered by insurance (43).
Access  and  cost  can  be  barriers  for  patients,  particularly  persons  who  have  low
incomes,  do  not  have  health  insurance  or  have  inadequate  insurance,  have
transportation challenges, or live in rural areas where services might not be available
(121). Health insurers and health systems can improve pain management and reduce
medication  use  and  associated  risks  by  increasing  reimbursement  for  and  access  to
noninvasive  nonpharmacologic  therapies  with  evidence  for  effectiveness  (9,43).  In
addition,  for  many  patients,  aspects  of  these  approaches  can  be  used  even  when
access  to  specialty  care  is  limited.  For  example,  previous  guidelines  have  strongly
recommended aerobic, aquatic, or resistance exercises for patients with osteoarthritis
of  the  knee  or  hip  (166)  and  maintenance  of  physical  activity,  including  normal  daily
activities, for patients with low back pain (158). A randomized trial found no difference
in  reduced  chronic  low  back  pain  intensity,  frequency,  or  disability  between  patients
assigned  to  relatively  low-cost  group  aerobics  and  those  assigned  to  individual
physiotherapy  or  muscle  reconditioning  sessions  (175).  Low-cost  options  to  integrate
exercise include walking in public spaces or use of public recreation facilities for group
exercise.  Physical  therapy  can  be  helpful,  particularly  for  patients  who  have  limited
access  to  safe  public  spaces  or  public  recreation  facilities  for  exercise  or  whose  pain

has  not  improved  with  low-intensity  physical  exercise.  A  randomized  trial  found  a
stepped  exercise  program,  in  which  patients  were  initially  offered  an  Internet-based
exercise program and progressively advanced to biweekly coaching calls and then to
in-person  physical  therapy  if  not  improved  at  previous  steps,  successfully  improved
symptomatic  knee  osteoarthritis,  with  35%  of  patients  ultimately  requiring  in-person
physical  therapy  (176).  In  addition,  primary  care  clinicians  can  integrate  elements  of
psychosocial  therapies  such  as  cognitive  behavioral  therapy,  which  addresses
psychosocial contributors to pain and improves function (177), by encouraging patients
to take an active role in the care plan, supporting patients in engaging in activities such
as exercise that are typically beneficial but that might initially be associated with fear
of exacerbating pain (159), or providing education in relaxation techniques and coping
strategies.  In  many  locations,  free  or  low-cost  patient  support,  self-help,  and
educational community-based or employer-sponsored programs are available that can
provide  stress  reduction  and  other  mental  health  benefits.  Clinicians  should  become
familiar  with  such  options  within  their  communities  so  they  can  refer  patients  to
low-cost services. Patients with higher levels of anxiety or fear related to pain or other
clinically significant psychological distress can be referred for treatment with a mental
health  specialist  (e.g.,  psychologist,  psychiatrist,  or  clinical  social  worker).  Several
nonopioid  pharmacologic  therapies  (including  acetaminophen,  NSAIDs,  and  selected
antidepressants  and  anticonvulsants)  are  used  for  painful  symptoms  in  chronic  pain
conditions. Nonopioid pharmacologic therapies are associated with risks, particularly in
older  adults,  pregnant  patients,  and  patients  with  certain  comorbidities  such  as
cardiovascular,  renal,  gastrointestinal,  and  liver  disease.  For  example,  NSAID  use  has
been  associated  with  serious  gastrointestinal  events  and  major  coronary  events  (8).
Increases  in  nonserious  adverse  events  have  been  found  with  anticonvulsants
pregabalin  (blurred  vision,  cognitive  effects,  sedation,  weight  gain,  dizziness,  and
peripheral  edema)  and  gabapentin  (blurred  vision,  cognitive  effects,  sedation,  and

weight  gain),  cannabis  (nausea  and  dizziness),  and  SNRI  antidepressants  duloxetine
(nausea  and  sedation)  and  milnacipran  (nausea);  dosage  reductions  reduced  the  risk
for  some  adverse  events  with  SNRI  antidepressants  (8).  Clinicians  should  review
FDA-approved labeling, including boxed warnings, before initiating treatment with any
pharmacologic  therapy.  For  osteoarthritis,  NSAIDs  including  topical  NSAIDs  and  SNRI
antidepressant  duloxetine  have  small  to  moderate  benefits  for  pain  and  function  at
short-term assessment (3–6 months), with intermediate-term (6–12 months) evidence
for certain medications (celecoxib and duloxetine) and evidence that duloxetine is more
effective  in  older  (>65  years)  than  younger  patients  and  in  patients  with  knee
osteoarthritis (8). Acetaminophen has limited evidence for effectiveness (8) and is no
longer considered a first-line treatment for osteoarthritis (161). When patients have an
insufficient  response  to  nonpharmacologic  interventions  (e.g.,  exercise  for  arthritis
pain), and if a single or a few joints near the surface of the skin (e.g., knee) are affected
by  osteoarthritis,  use  of  topical  NSAIDs  is  recommended  (161).  In  patients  with
osteoarthritis pain in multiple joints or incompletely controlled pain with topical NSAIDs,
systemic NSAIDs or duloxetine can be used. However, systemic NSAIDs should be used
at  the  lowest  effective  dosage  and  shortest  duration  needed  because  risks  might
increase with longer use and at higher dosages (178). Oral NSAIDs should be used with
caution, particularly in older persons and in patients with cardiovascular comorbidities,
chronic  renal  failure,  or  previous  gastrointestinal  bleeding.  In  patients  with
gastrointestinal comorbidities but without current or previous gastrointestinal bleeding,
cyclooxygenase-2  inhibitors  or  NSAIDs  with  proton  pump  inhibitors  can  be  used  to
minimize  risk  compared  with  risk  with  use  of  NSAIDs  alone  (161).  Moderate-quality
evidence demonstrates small improvements in chronic low back pain with NSAIDs (119)
and  with  duloxetine  (8).  When  patients  with  low  back  pain  have  had  an  insufficient
response  to  nonpharmacologic  approaches  such  as  exercise,  clinicians  can  consider
NSAIDs
 or
 duloxetine
 (119)
 for
 patients
 without
 contraindications.
 For

temporomandibular
 disorder
 pain
 that
 is
 not
 sufficiently
 improved
 with
nonpharmacologic  interventions,  NSAIDs  can  be  effective  (179,180).  Tricyclic,
tetracyclic,  and  SNRI  antidepressants;  selected  anticonvulsants;  and  capsaicin  and
lidocaine patches are recommended for neuropathic pain (156). However, evidence on
topical  lidocaine  and  capsaicin  is  limited  (8).  SNRI  antidepressant  duloxetine  and
anticonvulsants  pregabalin,  gabapentin,  enacarbil,  and  oxcarbazepine  are  associated
with  small  improvements  in  neuropathic  pain  (mainly  diabetic  neuropathy  and
postherpetic  neuralgia)  (8).  Duloxetine  and  pregabalin  are  FDA-approved  for  the
treatment of diabetic neuropathy, and pregabalin and gabapentin are FDA-approved for
treatment of postherpetic neuralgia. In patients with fibromyalgia, multiple medications
are associated with small to moderate improvements in pain, function, and quality of
life,  including  SNRI  antidepressants  (duloxetine  and  milnacipran),  NSAIDs  (topical
diclofenac), and specific anticonvulsants (pregabalin and gabapentin) (8). Tricyclic and
SNRI antidepressants also can relieve fibromyalgia symptoms. Duloxetine, milnacipran,
and  pregabalin  are  FDA-approved  for  and  are  recommended  for  the  treatment  of
fibromyalgia
 (156).
 Tricyclic
 antidepressant
 amitriptyline
 often
 is
 used
 and
recommended  for  patients  with  fibromyalgia  (156),  although  evidence  for  its
effectiveness  is  limited  (8).  Because  patients  with  chronic  pain  might  experience
concurrent  depression  (181)  and  depression  can  exacerbate  physical  symptoms
including pain (182), patients with co-occurring pain and depression might be especially
likely  to  benefit  from  antidepressant  medication  (see  Recommendation  8).  Tricyclic
antidepressants are potentially inappropriate for older adults (aged ≥65 years) because
of their anticholinergic effects (165). Evidence on effectiveness of cannabis for painful
conditions is limited and inconsistent across studies, and some studies have reported
adverse  events  such  as  dizziness,  nausea,  and  sedation  (8,183).  Clinical  evidence
reviews found insufficient evidence to determine long-term benefits of opioid therapy
for  chronic  pain  and  found  an  increased  risk  for  serious  harms  related  to  long-term

opioid therapy that appears to be dose dependent (7). Compared with no opioid use,
opioid  use  was  associated  with  increased  risk  for  opioid  use  disorder,  overdose,
all-cause  deaths,  fractures,  falls,  and  myocardial  infarction  (7).  Opioids  also  were
associated  with  increased  risk  for  discontinuation  because  of  gastrointestinal  adverse
events, somnolence, dizziness, and pruritus (7). Compared with placebo, at short-term
follow-up (1 to <6 months), opioids were associated with small mean improvements in
pain  intensity  (mean  difference:  −0.79  on  a  0–10  scale;  95%  CI:  −0.93  to  −0.67;
I2: 71%) and function (7). Some evidence indicates that improvement in pain is reduced
with longer duration of opioid therapy, from a mean improvement of 1 on a 0–10 scale
at  1–3  months  to  approximately  0.5  at  3–6  months  (7).  No  placebo-controlled  trial
evaluated effectiveness of opioids at intermediate (6 to <12 months) or long-term (≥12
months)  follow-up  (7).  Compared  with  nonopioid  treatments  at  short-term  follow-up,
there  were  no  differences  in  mean  pain  improvement  (mean  difference:  −0.29  on  a
0–10 scale; 95% CI: −0.61 to 0.03) or functional improvement. No trials were identified
that compared opioids with nonopioid therapies at intermediate- or long-term follow-up,
with the exception of one trial that found stepped therapy starting with opioids to be
associated with higher pain intensity than stepped therapy starting with nonopioids (4.0
versus 3.5; mean difference: 0.5; 95% CI: 0–1.0) at 12 months (7,74). Clinical evidence
reviews  identified  an  observational  study  (54)  finding  long-term  (>90  days’  supply)
opioid prescription to be associated with considerably increased risk for a new opioid
use  disorder  diagnosis  for  all  dosages  of  long-term  (>90  days’  supply)  opioids
prescribed  compared  with  no  opioids  prescribed,  with  adjusted  odds  ratios  of  15,  29,
and 122 at low (1–36 MME/day), medium (36–120 MME/day), and high (≥120 MME/day)
opioid dosages, respectively. Compared with no opioid use, opioid use was associated
with increased risk for opioid use disorder, overdose, all-cause deaths, fractures, falls,
and myocardial infarction (7). Multiple experts from OWG stated that they appreciated
this recommendation because of the importance of highlighting both pain and function,

sharing  realistic  expectations  with  patients  before  initiating  treatment,  and  paying
attention  to  tapering  and  exit  strategies.  Although  some  experts  reasoned  the
recommendation  statement  could  state  nonopioid  therapies  “may  be  preferred”  or
“may  be  effective”  for  chronic  pain,  others  agreed  with  language  that  nonopioid
therapies “are preferred” for chronic pain because opioid therapies are associated with
small  short-term  benefits  compared  with  placebo,  comparable  or  reduced  short-term
benefits compared with nonopioid therapies, uncertain long-term benefits, and potential
for  serious  harms.  Opioids  should  not  be  considered  first-line  or  routine  therapy  for
subacute  or  chronic  pain.  Although  evidence  on  long-term  benefits  of  nonopioid
therapies also is limited, these therapies also are associated with short-term benefits,
no evidence exists for attenuated benefit over time or difficulty stopping therapy when
benefits do not outweigh risks, and risks for serious harms are usually lower. This does
not  mean  that  patients  should  be  required  to  sequentially  fail  nonpharmacologic  and
nonopioid pharmacologic therapy or be required to use any specific treatment before
proceeding to opioid therapy. Rather, expected benefits specific to the clinical context
should  be  weighed  against  risks  before  initiating  therapy.  In  some  clinical  contexts
(e.g.,  serious  illness  in  a  patient  with  poor  prognosis  for  return  to  previous  level  of
function, contraindications to other therapies, and clinician and patient agreement that
the  overriding  goal  is  patient  comfort),  opioids  might  be  appropriate  regardless  of
previous therapies used. In other situations (e.g., headache or fibromyalgia), expected
benefits  of  initiating  opioids  are  unlikely  to  outweigh  risks  regardless  of  previous
nonpharmacologic  and  nonopioid  pharmacologic  therapies  used.  Clinical  evidence
reviews  found  no  instrument  with  high  accuracy  for  predicting  opioid-related  harms,
such as overdose or opioid use disorder (7). For clinicians, predicting whether benefits
of opioids for chronic pain will outweigh risks of ongoing opioid treatment for individual
patients  can  be  challenging.  Therefore,  opioid  therapy  should  only  be  initiated  with
consideration by the clinician and patient of an exit strategy that could be used if opioid

therapy  is  unsuccessful  in  improving  pain  and  pain-related  function.  Before  opioid
therapy  is  initiated  for  subacute  or  chronic  pain,  clinicians  should  determine  with
patients how functional benefit will be evaluated and establish treatment goals. Some
patients  have  reported  treatment  goals  are  effective  in  increasing  motivation  and
functioning  (7).  Goals  ideally  include  improvement  in  function  (including  social,
emotional, and physical dimensions), pain, and quality of life. Goals can be tailored to
specific  patient  and  clinical  circumstances.  For  example,  for  some  patients  with
diseases  typically  associated  with  progressive  functional  impairment  or  catastrophic
injuries such as spinal cord trauma, reductions in pain without improvement in physical
function  might  be  more  realistic.  Clinicians  can  assess  and  then  follow  function,  pain
severity,  and  quality  of  life  using  tools  such  as  the  three-item  PEG  (Pain  average,
interference with Enjoyment of life, and interference with General activity) assessment
scale  (184)  (see  Recommendation  7).  Clinically  meaningful  improvement  has  been
defined as a 30% improvement in scores for both pain and function (185). Clinicians can
ask patients about functional goals that have meaning for them (e.g., walking the dog
or walking around the block, returning to part-time work, and attending family events or
recreational activities), and then use these goals in assessing benefits of opioid therapy
and weighing benefits against risks of continued opioid therapy for individual patients
(see Recommendation 7). Patients with subacute pain might be at a particularly critical
point, both for potential transition to chronic pain and potential transition to long-term
opioid  therapy.  Clinicians  should  reevaluate  patients  with  subacute  pain  and  their
treatment  course,  ensure  that  potentially  reversible  causes  of  ongoing  pain  are
addressed, and optimize pain management as needed. For patients with subacute pain
who started opioid therapy for acute pain and have been treated with opioid therapy for
≥30  days,  clinicians  should  ensure  that  opioid  prescribing  for  acute  pain  does  not
unintentionally  become  long-term  opioid  prescribing  simply  because  medications  are
continued  without  reassessment.  Continuation  of  opioid  therapy  at  this  point  might

represent  initiation  of  long-term  opioid  therapy,  which  should  occur  only  as  an
intentional decision that benefits are likely to outweigh risks after informed discussion
between  the  clinician  and  patient  and  as  part  of  a  comprehensive  pain  management
approach.  Clinicians  seeing  new  patients  already  using  opioid  medication  should
establish  treatment  goals,  including  functional  goals,  for  continued  opioid  therapy.
Clinicians  should  avoid  rapid  tapering  or  abrupt  discontinuation  of  opioids  (see
Recommendation  5).  Although  the  clinical  evidence  reviews  did  not  find  studies
evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  written  agreements  or  treatment  plans  (7),  clinicians
and patients who clearly document a treatment plan including specific functional goals
in advance of prescribing will clarify expectations about how opioids will be prescribed
and  monitored  with  an  aim  to  improve  patient  safety,  health,  and  well-being.  Patient
education  and  discussion  before  starting  opioid  therapy  are  critical  so  that  patient
preferences  and  values  can  be  understood  and  used  to  inform  clinical  decisions.
Clinicians should ensure that patients are aware of expected benefits of, common risks
of,  serious  risks  of,  and  alternatives  to  opioids  before  starting  or  continuing  opioid
therapy and should involve patients in decisions about whether to start opioid therapy.
Many patients rank pain relief, nausea, vomiting, and constipation as important effects
(7).  The  following  elements  are  essential  for  communication  and  discussion  with
patients before starting opioid therapy: Because of the possibility that benefits of opioid
therapy might diminish or that risks might become more prominent over time, clinicians
should elicit patients’ experiences and preferences and review expected benefits and
risks  of  continued  opioid  therapy  with  patients  periodically  (see  Recommendation  7).
Office-based  interventional  approaches,  such  as  arthrocentesis  and  intra-articular
glucocorticoid  injection  for  pain  associated  with  rheumatoid  arthritis  (186)  or
osteoarthritis  (187)  and  subacromial  corticosteroid  injection  for  rotator  cuff  disease
(188),  can  provide  short-term  improvement  in  pain  and  function  to  supplement  or
facilitate  exercise,  physical  therapy,  and  other  conservative  approaches.  Evidence  is

insufficient to determine the extent to which repeated glucocorticoid injection increases
potential risks such as articular cartilage changes (in osteoarthritis) and sepsis (187).
Interventional  pain  management  specialists  offer  additional  interventions  that  can
alleviate pain as part of a comprehensive pain management approach (6) for patients
with  indications  including  back  pain,  persistent  pain  after  spinal  surgery,  neuropathic
pain, and complex regional pain syndrome. Certain more common procedures include
epidural steroid injections (for lumbar radiculopathy with herniated disc), nerve ablation
procedures (e.g., radiofrequency denervation for low back pain), and neurostimulation
procedures (e.g., peripheral nerve stimulation and spinal cord stimulation). Descriptions
of  common  interventional  procedures  are  available  (6).  Level  of  evidence  for
effectiveness  and  risks  varies  by  procedure,  and  additional  research  is  needed  to
establish the clinical benefits as well as risks of specific interventional procedures for
specific  pain  conditions  (6,189)  compared  with  risks  of  opioid  pain  medications  and
other pharmacologic therapies. Rare, serious adverse events have been reported with
epidural  injection  (190).  Interventional  procedures  should  be  performed  by  properly
trained clinicians following meticulous infection control protocols. Clinicians can consult
with a qualified pain management specialist who is well versed in benefits and risks of
diagnostic  and  therapeutic  options  to  determine  potential  appropriateness  of  specific
interventional  procedures  for  their  patients’  indications  and  clinical  circumstances.
Integrated pain management requires coordination of medical, psychological, and social
aspects of health care and includes primary care, mental and behavioral health care,
and specialist services when needed (191). Multimodal therapies and multidisciplinary
biopsychosocial  rehabilitation  (e.g.,  combining  psychological  therapies  with  exercise)
can reduce long-term pain and disability compared with usual care and compared with
physical  treatments  (e.g.,  exercise)  alone.  Nonpharmacologic  therapies  also  can
provide  synergistic  benefits  when  nonopioid  or  opioid  pain  medications  are  used  (6).
When needed, medications should ideally be combined with nonpharmacologic therapy

to  provide  greater  benefits  to  patients  in  improving  pain  and  function.  Multimodal
therapies  are  not  always  available  or  reimbursed  by  insurance  and  can  be  time
consuming and costly for patients, and disparities in abilities to access multimodal care
exist  (6).  Evidence  exists  that  less-intensive  multidisciplinary  rehabilitation  can  be
similarly  effective  to  high-intensity  multidisciplinary  rehabilitation  (9).  Multimodal
therapies should be considered for patients not responding to single-modality therapy,
and  combinations  should  be  tailored  depending  on  patient  needs,  cost,  convenience,
and  other  individual  factors.  Depending  on  patient  comorbidities  and  benefit-to-risk
ratios  in  individual  patients,  combinations  of  medications  (e.g.,  two  nonopioid
medications  with  different  mechanisms  of  action  or  a  nonopioid  with  an  opioid
medication) also might be used. In some cases, medication combinations might provide
complementary  or  synergistic  benefits  and  facilitate  lower  dosing  of  individual
medications, as has been demonstrated in trials of patients with neuropathic pain (7).
However,  this  approach  should  be  used  with  caution  to  avoid  synergistic  risks  of
medications.  For  example,  combinations  of  medications  that  depress  the  central
nervous system and cause sedation (see Recommendation 11), such as an opioid with
gabapentin,  have  been  associated  with  increased  risk  for  overdose  compared  with
either  medication  alone  (7).  When  starting  opioid  therapy  for  acute,  subacute,  or
chronic  pain,  clinicians  should  prescribe  immediate-release  opioids  instead  of
extended-release  and  long-acting  (ER/LA)  opioids  (recommendation  category:  A;
evidence  type:  4).  ER/LA  opioids  include  methadone,  transdermal  fentanyl,  and
extended-release
 versions
 of
 opioids
 such
 as
 oxycodone,
 hydromorphone,
hydrocodone, and morphine. Clinical evidence reviews found that effects of opioids on
short-term pain and function were generally consistent across duration of action (short-
or  long-acting)  and  opioid  type  (opioid  agonist,  partial  agonist,  or  mixed  mechanism
[with  mixed  opioid  and  nonopioid  mechanisms  of  action]  agent),  although  five  trials
directly  comparing  different  types  of  opioids  found  a  mixed  mechanism  agent

associated with greater pain relief versus a pure opioid agonist, with fewer nonserious
adverse events (7). A fair-quality study demonstrated a higher risk for overdose among
patients treated with ER/LA opioids than among those treated with immediate-release
opioids, especially within the first 2 weeks of therapy, with relative risk decreasing with
longer  duration  of  exposure  (7,192).  Clinical  evidence  reviews  did  not  find  evidence
that  continuous,  time-scheduled  use  of  ER/LA  opioids  is  more  effective  or  safer  than
intermittent  use  of  immediate-release  opioids  or  that  time-scheduled  use  of  ER/  LA
opioids reduces risk for opioid use disorder (7). In 2014, FDA modified the labeling for
ER/LA  opioid  pain  medications,  noting  serious  risks  and  recommending  that  ER/LA
opioids  be  reserved  for  management  of  pain  severe  enough  to  require  daily,
around-the-clock, long-term opioid treatment when alternative treatment options (e.g.,
nonopioid  analgesics  or  immediate-release  opioids)  are  ineffective,  not  tolerated,  or
would be otherwise inadequate to provide sufficient management of pain and not used
as  as-needed  pain  relievers  (49).  FDA  also  noted  that  some  ER/LA  opioids  are  only
appropriate for opioid-tolerant patients, defined as patients who have received certain
dosages of opioids (e.g., 60 mg daily of oral morphine, 30 mg daily of oral oxycodone,
or  equianalgesic  dosages  of  other  opioids)  for  at  least  1  week  (193).  Time-scheduled
opioid use can be associated with greater total average daily opioid dosage compared
with intermittent, as-needed opioid use (194). Technologies have been used to prevent
manipulation  intended  to  defeat  extended-release  properties  of  ER/LA  opioids  and  to
prevent  opioid  use  by  unintended  routes  of  administration,  such  as  intravenous
injection of oral opioids. FDA guidance for industry on evaluation and labeling of these
“abuse-deterrent”  opioids  (195)  indicates  that  these  technologies,  although  they  are
expected to make manipulation of opioids more difficult or reduce the potent effects of
manipulation, do not prevent opioid misuse or overdose through oral intake (the most
common  route  of  opioid  misuse)  and  can  still  be  misused  by  nonoral  routes.  The
“abuse-deterrent” label does not indicate that there is no risk for misuse or opioid use

disorder.  No  studies  were  found  in  the  clinical  evidence  reviews  assessing  the
effectiveness  of  “abuse-deterrent”  technologies  as  a  risk  mitigation  strategy  for
deterring  or  preventing  opioid  misuse,  opioid  use  disorder,  or  overdose  (7).  Experts
from OWG agreed with the recommendation for clinicians to initiate opioid treatment
with immediate-release opioids instead of with ER/LA opioids and said they appreciated
discussion  of  the  lack  of  evidence  for  “abuse-deterrent”  formulations.  In  comparing
different  ER/LA  formulations,  clinical  evidence  reviews  found  inconsistent  results  for
overdose  risk  with  methadone  versus  other  ER/LA  opioids  used  for  chronic  pain,  with
two  cohort  studies  of  Medicaid  beneficiaries  finding  methadone  associated  with
increased risk for overdose or all-cause deaths versus morphine and one cohort study
of  U.S.  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  patients  finding  methadone  to  be  associated
with decreased risk (7). Methadone has been associated with disproportionate numbers
of overdose deaths relative to the frequency with which it is prescribed for pain (196).
In  addition,  methadone  is  associated  with  cardiac  arrhythmias  along  with  QT
prolongation  on  the  electrocardiogram,  and  it  has  complicated  pharmacokinetics  and
pharmacodynamics,  including  a  long  and  variable  half-life  and  peak  respiratory
depressant  effect  occurring  later  and  lasting  longer  than  peak  analgesic  effect
(197–199).  In  regard  to  other  ER/LA  opioid  formulations,  the  absorption  and
pharmacodynamics  of  transdermal  fentanyl  are  complex,  with  gradually  increasing
serum concentration during the first part of the 72-hour dosing interval, and variable
absorption  affected  by  factors  such  as  external  heat.  In  addition,  the  dosing  of
transdermal fentanyl is in mcg/hour, which is not typical for a drug used by outpatients
and  can  be  confusing.  These  complexities  might  increase  the  risk  for  fatal  overdose
when  methadone  or  transdermal  fentanyl  is  prescribed.  Clinicians  should  not  treat
acute pain with ER/LA opioids or initiate opioid treatment for subacute or chronic pain
with  ER/LA  opioids,  and  clinicians  should  not  prescribe  ER/LA  opioids  for  intermittent
use.  Because  of  the  longer  half-life  and  longer  duration  of  effects  (e.g.,  respiratory

depression)  of  ER/LA  opioids  (e.g.,  methadone,  fentanyl  patches,  or  extended-release
versions  of  oxycodone,  hydromorphone,  hydrocodone,  or  morphine),  clinicians  should
not  prescribe  ER/LA  opioids  for  the  treatment  of  acute  pain.  ER/LA  opioids  should  be
reserved  for  severe,  continuous  pain  and  should  be  considered  only  for  patients  who
have received certain dosages of immediate-release opioids daily (e.g., 60 mg daily of
oral  morphine,  30  mg  daily  of  oral  oxycodone,  or  equianalgesic  dosages  of  other
opioids)  for  at  least  1  week  (193).  When  changing  to  an  ER/LA  opioid  for  a  patient
previously  receiving  a  different  immediate-release  opioid,  clinicians  should  consult
product  labeling  and  reduce  total  daily  dosage  to  account  for  incomplete  opioid
cross-tolerance.  Clinicians  should  use  additional  caution  with  ER/LA  opioids  and
consider  a  longer  dosing  interval  when  prescribing  to  patients  with  renal  or  hepatic
dysfunction  because  decreased  clearance  of  medications  among  these  patients  can
lead  to  accumulation  of  medications  to  toxic  levels  and  persistence  in  the  body  for
longer  durations.  Although  in  certain  situations  clinicians  might  need  to  prescribe
immediate-release  and  ER/LA  opioids  together  (e.g.,  when  transitioning  patients  from
ER/LA opioids to immediate-release opioids by temporarily using lower dosages of both,
for  temporary  postoperative  use  of  short-term  opioids  in  a  patient  already  receiving
ER/LA  opioids,  or  in  patients  with  opioid  use  disorder  treated  and  stabilized  on
methadone who need short-acting opioids for acute pain), clinicians should consider the
potential
 for
 increased
 overdose
 risk
 and
 use
 caution
 when
 prescribing
immediate-release opioids in combination with ER/LA opioids. When an ER/LA opioid is
prescribed,  using  one  with  predictable  pharmacokinetics  and  pharmacodynamics  is
preferred to minimize unintentional overdose risk. In particular, unique characteristics
of methadone and transdermal fentanyl make safe prescribing of these medications for
pain  especially  challenging.  Methadone  should  not  be  the  first  choice  for  an  ER/LA
opioid. Only clinicians who are familiar with methadone’s unique risk profile and who
are prepared to educate and closely monitor their patients, including risk assessment

for  QT  prolongation  and  consideration  of  electrocardiographic  monitoring,  should
consider  prescribing  methadone  for  pain.  A  clinical  practice  guideline  regarding
methadone  prescribing  for  pain  has  been  published  previously  (200).  Because  dosing
effects of transdermal fentanyl often are misunderstood by both clinicians and patients,
only  clinicians  who  are  familiar  with  its  dosing  and  absorption  properties  of  and  are
prepared  to  educate  their  patients  about  its  use  should  consider  prescribing
transdermal  fentanyl.  When  opioids  are  initiated  for  opioid-naïve  patients  with  acute,
subacute,  or  chronic  pain,  clinicians  should  prescribe  the  lowest  effective  dosage.  If
opioids are continued for subacute or chronic pain, clinicians should use caution when
prescribing  opioids  at  any  dosage,  should  carefully  evaluate  individual  benefits  and
risks  when  considering  increasing  dosage,  and  should  avoid  increasing  dosage  above
levels  likely  to  yield  diminishing  returns  in  benefits  relative  to  risks  to  patients
(recommendation category: A; evidence type: 3). Benefits of high-dose opioids for pain
are  not  well  established.  Few  trials  evaluated  opioid  dosages  of  ≥90  MME/day  (7).
Opioid dosages of 50–90 MME/day were associated with a minimally greater (below the
threshold for small) improvement in mean pain intensity compared with dosages of <50
MME/day (mean difference: −0.26; 95% CI: −0.57 to −0.02); there was no difference in
mean  improvement  in  function  (7).  Analyses  of  placebo-controlled  trials  also  found
some evidence of a plateauing effect at ≥50 mg MME/day (7). One trial of more liberal
dose escalation compared with maintenance of current dosage found no difference in
outcomes  related  to  pain  or  function  (7).  At  the  same  time,  risks  for  serious  harms
related  to  opioid  therapy,  including  opioid  misuse,  overdose,  and  death,  increase  at
higher  opioid  dosage,  without  a  single  point  below  which  there  is  no  risk  (201).  One
cohort study from the clinical evidence reviews found higher dosages of opioids were
associated  with  increased  risk  for  all-cause  deaths;  one  cohort  study  found  modest
associations between higher dose of long-term opioid and increased risk for falls and
major  trauma;  one  case-control  study  found  opioid  dosages  of  >20  MME/day  were

associated with increased odds of road trauma injury when the analysis was restricted
to drivers, with no dose-dependent association at dosages of >20 MME/day; and cohort
studies  found  association  between  higher  opioid  dose  and  risk  for  various
endocrinological  adverse  events  (7).  Patients  on  higher  doses  reported  reliance  on
opioids  despite  ambivalence  about  their  benefits  (7).  Four  observational  studies
identified  in  the  clinical  evidence  reviews  consistently  found  an  association  between
higher doses of long-term opioids and risk for overdose or overdose death (7). Opioid
dosages  for  chronic  pain  of  50  to  <100  MME/day  in  observational  studies  have  been
associated with increased risks for opioid overdose by factors of 1.9–4.6 compared with
dosages  of  1  to  <20  MME/day,  and  dosages  of  ≥100  MME/day  were  found  to  be
associated  with  increased  risks  for  overdose  2.0–8.9  times  the  risk  at  1  to  <20
MME/day, after adjusting for confounders on the basis of demographics, comorbidities,
concomitant medications, and other factors (55,202,203). When opioids are prescribed
for  acute  pain,  similar  associations  have  been  found,  with  dosages  of  50  to  <100
MME/day  associated  with  4.73  times  the  risk  for  overdose  and  dosages  of  ≥100
MME/day  associated  with  6.64  times  the  risk,  compared  with  dosages  of  1  to  <20
MME/day  (55).  The  MME  cut  points  in  these  studies  (e.g.,  20  MME,  50  MME,  and  100
MME) were selected by the authors for research purposes, and whereas their findings
are  consistent  with  progressive  increases  in  overdose  risk  being  associated  with
increases  in  prescribed  opioid  dosages,  they  do  not  demonstrate  a  specific  dosage
threshold below which opioids are never associated with overdose. In a national sample
of  Veterans  Health  Administration  patients  with  chronic  pain  who  were  prescribed
opioids,  mean  prescribed  daily  opioid  dosage  among  patients  who  died  from  opioid
overdose was 98 MME (median: 60 MME), compared with mean prescribed daily opioid
dosage of 48 MME (median: 25 MME) among patients not experiencing fatal overdose
(204). A narrative review conducted by FDA staff concluded that, although there is not
a  single  dosage  threshold  below  which  overdose  risk  is  eliminated  (201),  the  studies

included in the review indicated an increasing risk for serious adverse health outcomes,
including  misuse,  overdose,  and  death  associated  with  increasing  opioid  dose.  These
studies  examined  dose-response  risk  for  overdose  for  full  agonist  opioids  and  not  for
partial  agonist  opioids  such  as  buprenorphine,  which  is  unlikely  to  have  the  same
continuous  association  between  dosage  and  overdose  risk  because  respiratory
depressant effects of buprenorphine reach a plateau (205). Multiple experts from OWG
expressed concern that including specific dosage thresholds in a main recommendation
statement  would  emphasize  them  as  authoritative  absolutes  and  would  lead  to
noncollaborative tapers or other potentially harmful consequences. Experts also noted
the  lack  of  a  single  standard  formula  for  calculating  MMEs  (206).  However,  experts
agreed there is a need for thresholds as benchmarks and suggested including them in
the  supporting  text  after  the  main  recommendation  statement.  Experts  also  agreed
with  separating  recommendations  on  dosage  into  a  recommendation  applying  to
patients starting opioids and patients already receiving opioids. When opioids are used
for  acute,  subacute,  or  chronic  pain,  clinicians  should  start  opioids  at  the  lowest
possible effective dosage. For patients not already taking opioids, the lowest effective
dose can be determined using product labeling as a starting point with calibration as
needed on the basis of the severity of pain and other clinical factors, such as renal or
hepatic insufficiency (see Recommendation 8). The lowest starting dose for opioid-naïve
patients  is  often  equivalent  to  a  single  dose  of  approximately  5–10  MME  or  a  daily
dosage of 20–30 MME/day. A listing of common opioid medications and their doses in
MME equivalents is provided (Table). For example, a label for hydrocodone bitartrate (5
mg) and acetaminophen (300 mg) (207) states that the usual adult dosage is one or
two tablets every 4–6 hours as needed for pain, and the total daily dosage should not
exceed eight tablets. Clinicians should use additional caution when initiating opioids for
patients aged ≥65 years and patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency because of a
potentially smaller therapeutic window between safe dosages and dosages associated

with respiratory depression and overdose (see Recommendation 8). Formulations with
lower  opioid  doses  (e.g.,  hydrocodone  bitartrate  2.5  mg/acetaminophen  325  mg)  are
available and can facilitate dosing when additional caution is needed. Product labeling
regarding tolerance includes guidance for patients already taking opioids. In addition to
opioids,  clinicians  should  consider  cumulative  dosages  of  other  medications,  such  as
acetaminophen,  that  are  combined  with  opioids  in  many  formulations  and  for  which
decreased  clearance  of  medications  might  result  in  accumulation  of  medications  to
toxic  levels.  Clinicians  should  generally  avoid  unnecessary  dosage  increases,  use
caution when increasing opioid dosages, and increase dosage by the smallest practical
amount  because  overdose  risk  increases  with  increases  in  opioid  dosage.  Although
evidence to recommend specific intervals for dosage titration is limited, rapid dosage
increases  put  patients  at  greater  risk  for  sedation,  respiratory  depression,  and
overdose. For opioid-naïve outpatients with acute pain treated with an opioid for a few
days or less, dosage increases are usually unnecessary and should not be attempted
without close monitoring because of the risks for respiratory depression. In the context
of long-term opioid use, when dosage is increased, clinicians should reevaluate patients
after  increasing  dosage  for  changes  in  pain,  function,  and  risk  for  harm  (see
Recommendation 7). Before increasing total opioid dosage to ≥50 MME/day, clinicians
should  pause,  considering  that  dosage  increases  to  >50  MME/day  are  unlikely  to
provide  substantially  improved  pain  control  for  most  patients  while  overdose  risk
increases  with  dosage,  and  carefully  reassess  evidence  of  benefits  and  risks.  If  a
patient’s  opioid  dosage  for  all  sources  of  opioids  combined  reaches  or  exceeds  50
MME/day,  clinicians  should  implement  additional  precautions,  including  increased
frequency  of  follow-up  (see  Recommendation  7),  and  offer  naloxone  and  overdose
prevention  education  to  both  the  patient  and  the  patient’s  household  members  (see
Recommendation 8). Additional dosage increases beyond 50 MME/day are progressively
more likely to yield diminishing returns in benefits for pain and function relative to risks

to patients. Clinicians should carefully evaluate a decision to increase dosage after an
individualized assessment of benefits and risks and weighing factors such as diagnosis,
incremental  benefits  for  pain  and  function  relative  to  risks  with  previous  dosage
increases,  other  treatments  and  effectiveness,  and  patient  values  and  preferences.
Certain  states  require  clinicians  to  implement  clinical  protocols  at  specific  dosage
levels.  For  example,  before  increasing  long-term  opioid  therapy  dosage  to  >120
MME/day, clinicians in Washington state must obtain consultation from a pain specialist
who agrees that the increase is indicated and appropriate (208). Clinicians should be
aware  of  policies  related  to  MME  thresholds  and  associated  clinical  protocols
established  by  their  states.  For  patients  already  receiving  opioid  therapy,  clinicians
should  carefully  weigh  benefits  and  risks  and  exercise  care  when  changing  opioid
dosage.  If  benefits  outweigh  risks  of  continued  opioid  therapy,  clinicians  should  work
closely with patients to optimize nonopioid therapies while continuing opioid therapy. If
benefits do not outweigh risks of continued opioid therapy, clinicians should optimize
other therapies and work closely with patients to gradually taper to lower dosages or, if
warranted based on the individual circumstances of the patient, appropriately taper and
discontinue  opioids.  Unless  there  are  indications  of  a  life-threatening  issue  such  as
warning  signs  of  impending  overdose  (e.g.,  confusion,  sedation,  or  slurred  speech),
opioid  therapy  should  not  be  discontinued  abruptly,  and  clinicians  should  not  rapidly
reduce  opioid  dosages  from  higher  dosages  (recommendation  category:  B;  evidence
type: 4). Patients receiving long-term, high-dosage opioid therapy for chronic pain are
at  increased  risk  for  adverse  events  including  overdose  death  (55,72,202,203,209).
However, discontinuation of long-term, high-dosage opioid therapy has been associated
with  adverse  events  including  mental  health  crisis,  overdose  events,  and  overdose
death  (71–73,210,211).  In  addition,  opioid  tapering  has  been  found  to  be  associated
with  subsequent  termination  of  care  (212).  One  study  found  that  whereas  sustained
opioid  therapy  discontinuation  (i.e.,  opioid  discontinuation  for  at  least  3  months)  was

associated with an approximately 50% reduction in risk for overdose, dose variability
was  a  risk  factor  for  opioid  overdose  (213).  In  another  study,  discontinuation  of
long-term,  high-dosage  opioid  therapy  was  associated  with  increased  risk  for  suicide
but  with  reduced  risk  for  overdose  when  compared  with  stable  or  increasing  dosage
(211). Both starting and stopping opioids were associated with overdose or suicide risk
in  another  study;  risk  associated  with  stopping  opioids  was  increased  when  patients
had  received  opioids  for  longer  durations.  Death  rates  for  overdose  or  suicide  in  one
study increased immediately after starting or stopping treatment with opioids, with the
incidence  decreasing  over  approximately  3–12  months  (214)  in  one  study  and
persisting  over  2  years  in  another  study  (215).  In  observational  studies  evaluating
outcomes related to heroin use after discontinuation of prescription opioids, one study
found  that  heroin  use  was  associated  with  discontinuation  of  long-term  opioid  use
(216);  another  study  found  that  among  persons  experiencing  heroin  overdose,
prescription  opioid  use  in  the  past  12  months  was  common  but  discontinuation  of
long-term  opioid  use  was  uncommon  (217).  Discontinuation  of  opioids  has  been
associated with greater risks when it occurs over shorter periods. FDA has advised that
risks  of  rapid  tapering  or  sudden  discontinuation  of  opioids  in  physically  dependent
patients
 include
 acute
 withdrawal
 symptoms,
 exacerbation
 of
 pain,
 serious
psychological  distress,  and  thoughts  of  suicide  (68).  One  observational  study  found
that,  among  adults  prescribed  stable  higher  opioid  dosages  (mean:  ≥50  MME/day)
long-term,  increasing  maximum  monthly  dose  reduction  rate  by  10%  was  associated
with an adjusted incidence rate ratio of 1.09 for overdose (95% CI: 1.07–1.11) and 1.18
for  mental  health  crisis  (95%  CI:  1.14–1.21)  (210).  Another  study  of  patients  on
long-term,  high-dosage  (≥120  MME/day)  opioid  therapy  found  that  each  additional
week of tapering time before opioid discontinuation was associated with a 7% relative
reduction in the risk for opioid-related emergency department visits or hospitalizations
(71).  The  clinical  evidence  reviews  did  not  find  studies  comparing  different  rates  of

opioid tapering; however, a taper support intervention (psychiatric consultation, opioid
dosage  tapering,  and  18  weekly  meetings  with  a  physician  assistant  to  explore
motivation  for  tapering  and  learn  pain  self-management  skills)  was  associated  with
better  functional  outcomes  (specifically,  improvement  in  pain  interference)  compared
with  usual  care,  with  effects  persisting  at  34-week  follow-up  (7).  A  systematic  review
(218)  found  that,  among  studies  rated  as  good  or  fair  quality,  when  opioids  were
tapered after discussion with patients who agreed to taper, opioid dose reduction was
associated with improved pain, function, and quality of life. These results suggest that
involving  patients  in  decisions  regarding  continuation  or  discontinuation  of  opioid
medications  as  well  as  practices  including  behavioral  support,  integration  of
nonpharmacologic  pain  management,  and  slower  tapers  might  improve  outcomes.
Experts from OWG said they appreciated the complexity of managing patients already
receiving higher dosages of opioids long-term. Although some experts indicated there
should  be  more  consideration  of  obtaining  informed  consent  before  tapering  opioids,
others  believed  that  informed  discussion  is  more  appropriate  than  informed  consent
when  considering  tapering  opioids  because  of  clinicians’  overriding  responsibility  to
avoid  providing  treatment  that  harms  patients.  Some  experts  were  concerned  that
overemphasizing  risks  of  tapering  could  increase  harm  from  continued  high-dosage
opioid  use.  The  benefits  and  risks  of  opioid  therapy  change  over  time  and  should  be
reevaluated  periodically  (see  Recommendations  6  and  7).  Opioid  therapy  should  be
limited  to  circumstances  where  benefits  of  therapy  outweigh  risks.  Because  tapering
opioids can be harmful in some circumstances, benefits of continuing opioids in patients
who have already received them long-term might include avoiding risks of tapering and
discontinuing  opioids.  In  situations  where  benefits  and  risks  of  continuing  opioids  are
considered to be close or unclear, shared decision-making with patients is particularly
important.  At  times,  clinicians  and  patients  might  not  be  able  to  agree  on  whether
tapering is necessary. When patients and clinicians are unable to arrive at a consensus

on  the  assessment  of  benefits  and  risks,  clinicians  should  acknowledge  this
discordance,  express  empathy,  and  seek  to  implement  treatment  changes  in  a
patient-centered  manner  while  avoiding  patient  abandonment.  Unless  there  is  a
life-threatening issue such as warning signs of an imminent overdose, the benefits of
rapidly  tapering  or  abruptly  discontinuing  opioids  are  unlikely  to  outweigh  the
substantial risks of these practices (71,219). However, after slow, voluntary reduction of
long-term opioid dosages, patients might experience improvements in function, quality
of life, anxiety, and mood without worsening pain or with decreased pain levels (218).
Clinicians  and  patients  should  consider  whether  opioids  continue  to  meet  treatment
goals,  including  functional  goals;  whether  opioids  are  exposing  the  patient  to  an
increased risk for serious adverse events or opioid use disorder; and whether benefits
continue to outweigh risks of opioids. Clinicians should not insist on opioid tapering or
discontinuation  when  opioid  use  might  be  warranted  (i.e.,  when  benefits  of  opioids
outweigh risks) (66,219). Clinicians should access appropriate expertise if considering
tapering opioids during pregnancy because of possible risk to the pregnant patient and
the  fetus  if  the  patient  goes  into  withdrawal.  For  pregnant  persons  with  opioid  use
disorder,  medications  for  opioid  use  disorder  are  preferred  over  withdrawal
management  (i.e.,  discontinuation  of  opioids  through  either  short-  or  medium-term
tapering) (220,221). Some patients using more than one respiratory depressant (e.g.,
benzodiazepines  and  opioids)  might  require  tapering  one  or  more  medications  to
reduce  risk  for  respiratory  depression.  Tapering  decisions  and  plans  should  be
coordinated
 with
 prescribers
 of
 all
 respiratory
 depressant
 medications
 (see
Recommendation  11).  Benzodiazepines  should  be  tapered  gradually  because  of  risks
(anxiety,
 hallucinations,
 seizures,
 delirium
 tremens,
 and,
 rarely,
 death)
 of
benzodiazepine  withdrawal  (222,223).  Patients  who  are  not  taking  prescribed  opioids
(e.g.,  patients  who  are  diverting  all  opioids  they  obtain)  do  not  require  tapers.
Consistent with the HHS Guide for Clinicians on the Appropriate Dosage Reduction or

Discontinuation  of  Long-Term  Opioid  Analgesics  (219),  clinicians  should  consider
tapering to a reduced opioid dosage or tapering and discontinuing opioid therapy and
discuss  these  approaches  with  patients  before  initiating  changes  when  For  patients
already  taking  opioids  long  term  (both  established  patients  and  patients  transferring
from  other  clinicians),  the  possibility  of  opioid  dosage  reduction  might  provoke
substantial  anxiety.  In  addition,  tapering  opioids  after  years  of  taking  them  can  be
especially  challenging  because  of  physical  and  psychological  dependence.  However,
patients should be offered the opportunity to reevaluate their continued use of opioids.
Clinicians should review benefits and risks of continued opioid therapy with empathy.
Whenever
 possible,
 clinicians
 should
 collaborate
 with
 patients
 and
 share
decision-making  about  whether  and  how  to  taper  opioids.  Clinicians  should  review
benefits  and  risks  of  opioid  therapy  with  the  patient  and  decide  whether  tapering  is
appropriate for the patient. If the existing opioid regimen does not put the patient at
imminent  risk  for  overdose  or  other  injury,  tapering  does  not  need  to  occur
immediately, and clinicians can take time to reach agreement with patients (224). For
patients who agree to taper opioids to lower dosages, clinicians should collaborate with
the  patient  on  a  tapering  plan.  Open  discussion  between  the  clinician  and  patient
should take place, whether the goal of the taper is stopping opioids or reducing opioids
to  a  point  where  benefits  outweigh  risks;  the  goal  will  depend  on  the  patient’s
circumstances and an individualized assessment of benefits and risks. Tapering is more
likely  to  be  successful  when  patients  collaborate  in  the  taper  (224).  Clinicians  can
discuss with patients the patient’s perceptions of benefits, risks, and adverse effects of
continued  opioid  therapy;  include  patient  concerns  in  taper  planning;  and  include
patients in making decisions such as which medication will be decreased first (e.g., in
patients  prescribed  more  than  one  opioid)  and  how  quickly  tapering  will  occur.
Clinicians  should  advise  patients  that  overall,  after  voluntary  reduction  of  long-term
opioid  dosages,  most  patients  report  stable  or  improved  function,  anxiety,  and  mood

without worsening pain or with decreased pain levels (66,218,225–228). However, other
patients  report  insomnia,  anxiety,  depression,  and  increased  pain,  particularly  in  the
short  term  (66,225,227,229,230).  Increased  pain  might  be  related  to  hyperalgesia  or
opioid  withdrawal  and  can  be  prolonged  in  some  patients  (229).  Patients  can  be
counseled that worsening of pain is a frequent symptom of opioid withdrawal that tends
to diminish over time (219). Clinicians should advise patients about the increased risk
for  overdose  with  abrupt  return  to  a  previously  prescribed  higher  dosage  because  of
loss of opioid tolerance and warn of a risk for overdose if the patient returns to their
original  dosage  (219).  Clinicians  should  provide  opioid  overdose  education  and  offer
naloxone.  Clinicians  should  commit  to  working  with  patients  to  improve  function  and
decrease  pain,  whether  or  not  opioids  are  tapered.  Nonpharmacologic  and  nonopioid
treatments  should  be  integrated  into  patients’  pain  management  plans  after  an
individualized assessment of benefits and risks that considers the patient’s diagnosis,
circumstances, and unique needs (see Recommendation 2). Integrating behavioral and
nonopioid  pain  therapies  before  and  during  a  taper  can  help  manage  pain  (218)  and
strengthen  the  therapeutic  relationship  between  the  clinician  and  patient.  Whether
patients are agreeing to taper to lower opioid dosages or remaining on higher opioid
dosages,  clinicians  should  work  with  them  to  establish  functional  goals  for  continued
opioid  therapy  (see  Recommendations  2  and  7)  and  maximize  pain  treatment  with
nonpharmacologic  and  nonopioid  pharmacologic  treatments  as  appropriate  (see
Recommendation  2).  Integrating  behavioral  and  nonopioid  pain  therapies  and
treatment  for  comorbid  mental  health  conditions  before  and  during  a  taper  can  help
manage pain (218), strengthen the therapeutic relationship between the clinician and
patient, and improve the likelihood of positive tapering outcomes (228). Mental health
comorbidities  including  depression  and  anxiety  are  common  in  patients  with  painful
conditions,  especially  those  receiving  long-term  opioid  therapy  (231).  Depressive
symptoms  predict  taper  dropout  (225,226).  Primary  care  clinicians  should  collaborate

with mental health specialists and with other specialty clinicians as needed to optimize
nonopioid  pain  management  (see  Recommendation  2)  and  provide  psychosocial
support for patients who have anxiety related to the taper. Clinicians should consider
arranging for consultation with a behavioral health specialist before initiating a taper in
patients  with  serious  mental  illness  who  are  at  high  risk  for  suicide  or  with  suicidal
ideation  (219).  Clinicians  should  remain  alert  to  signs  of  and  screen  for  anxiety,
depression, and opioid misuse or opioid use disorder (see Recommendations 8 and 12)
that  might  be  revealed  by  an  opioid  taper  and  provide  treatment  or  arrange  for
management  of  these  comorbidities.  Successful  tapering  studies  have  used  at  least
weekly  follow-up  (218),  and  clinicians  should  follow  up  frequently  (at  least  monthly)
with  patients  engaging  in  opioid  tapering.  Team  members  (e.g.,  nurses,  pharmacists,
and  behavioral  health  professionals)  can  support  the  clinician  and  patient  during  the
ongoing  taper  process  through  telephone  contact,  telehealth  visits,  or  face-to-face
visits. Clinicians can acknowledge patient fears about tapering (232), ask how they can
support the patient (232), and make sure patients receive appropriate and accessible
psychosocial  support  (228).  Many  patients  fear  withdrawal  symptoms,  pain,  or
abandonment  (233),  and  clinicians  can  help  patients  by  telling  them  what  to  expect
(e.g.,  the  rate  will  be  kept  slow  to  minimize  withdrawal  symptoms  and  pain  might
worsen at first but usually improves over time) and that they will be supporting them
through the process. Evidence to support specific tapering rates is limited. The rate of
tapering should be individualized based on the patient’s clinical situation. When opioids
are reduced or discontinued, a taper slow enough to minimize symptoms and signs of
opioid  withdrawal  (e.g.,  anxiety,  insomnia,  abdominal  pain,  vomiting,  diarrhea,
diaphoresis, mydriasis, tremor, tachycardia, or piloerection) should be used. Tapers can
be completed over several months to years depending on the opioid dosage and should
be  individualized  based  on  patient  goals  and  concerns.  Longer  durations  of  previous
opioid therapy might require longer tapers. Evidence on optimal taper rate is emerging.

Tapers of approximately 10% per month or slower are likely to be better tolerated than
more rapid tapers when patients have been taking opioids for longer durations (e.g., ≥1
year)  (219).  When  patients  have  taken  opioids  for  shorter  durations  (e.g.,  weeks  to
months rather than years), a decrease of 10% of the original dose per week or slower
(until approximately 30% of the original dose is reached, followed by a weekly decrease
of approximately 10% of the remaining dose) is less likely to trigger withdrawal (225)
and  can  be  successful  for  some  patients.  For  patients  struggling  to  tolerate  a  taper,
clinicians should maximize nonopioid treatments for pain and should address behavioral
distress (234). Clinically significant opioid withdrawal symptoms can signal the need to
further  slow  the  taper  rate.  At  times,  tapers  might  have  to  be  paused  and  restarted
again  when  the  patient  is  ready  and  might  have  to  be  slowed  as  patients  reach  low
dosages to allow gradual accommodation to lower opioid dosages and development of
new skills for nonopioid management of pain and emotional distress. Before reversing a
taper, clinicians should carefully assess and discuss with patients benefits and risks of
increasing opioid dosage. If the clinician and patient have determined that the goal is
discontinuing opioids, after the smallest available dose is reached, the interval between
doses  can  be  extended  and  opioids  can  be  stopped  when  taken  less  frequently  than
once  a  day.  More  rapid  tapers  might  be  needed  for  patient  safety  under  certain
circumstances  (e.g.,  for  patients  who  have  experienced  overdose  on  their  current
dosage) (219). However, unless there are indications of a life-threatening issue, such as
warning  signs  of  impending  overdose,  opioid  therapy  should  not  be  discontinued
abruptly, and clinicians should not rapidly reduce opioid dosages from higher dosages.
Sudden  discontinuation  might  precipitate  substantial  opioid  withdrawal  (71).  Rapid
tapering or sudden discontinuation of opioids in physically dependent patients also can
increase  risks  for  psychological  distress  and  opioid-related  emergency  department
visits  and  hospitalizations  (68,71).  Ultrarapid  detoxification  under  anesthesia  is
associated  with  substantial  risks,  including  death,  and  should  not  be  used  (235).  The

first approach to withdrawal symptoms and signs should generally be consideration of
slowing  or  pausing  the  taper  rate.  If  needed,  short-term  oral  medications  might  also
help  manage  withdrawal  symptoms  (232).  These  include  alpha-2  agonists  for  the
management  of  autonomic  signs  and  symptoms  (e.g.,  sweating  and  tachycardia).
Alpha-2 agonists clonidine and lofexidine are more effective than placebo in reducing
severity  of  withdrawal  (236)  from  heroin  or  methadone  in  the  context  of  abrupt  (not
gradual)  discontinuation.  Similar  research  could  not  be  found  on  clonidine  and
lofexidine in patients tapering from long-term opioid treatment for pain (225); however,
alpha-2  agonist  tizanidine  has  been  used  to  help  taper  patients  from  long-term,
high-dosage  opioids  for  chronic  pain  (230).  Other  medications  addressing  specific
symptoms (NSAIDs, acetaminophen, or topical menthol or methyl salicylate for muscle
aches;
 trazodone
 for
 sleep
 disturbance;
 prochlorperazine,
 promethazine,
 or
ondansetron  for  nausea;  dicyclomine  for  abdominal  cramping;  and  loperamide  or
bismuth  subsalicylate  for  diarrhea)  also  have  been  used  (232).  Some  patients  with
unanticipated  challenges  to  tapering,  such  as  inability  to  make  progress  in  tapering
despite  opioid-related  harm,  might  have  undiagnosed  opioid  use  disorder.  Therefore,
patients experiencing such challenges should be assessed for opioid use disorder using
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria and,
if criteria for opioid use disorder are met, offered evidence-based medication treatment
(see
 Recommendation
 12)
 and
 naloxone
 for
 opioid
 overdose
 reversal
 (see
Recommendation  8).  Emerging  evidence  suggests  that  patients  for  whom  risks  of
continued high-dose opioid use outweigh benefits but who are unable to taper and who
do  not  meet  criteria  for  opioid  use  disorder  might  benefit  from  transition  to
buprenorphine (219,237,238). Buprenorphine is a partial agonist opioid that can treat
pain and opioid use disorder (239) and has other properties that might be helpful (155),
including  less  respiratory  depression  (205)  and  overdose  risk  than  other  opioids
(155,237).  Although  overdose  is  less  likely  with  buprenorphine  than  with  full  agonist

opioids,  overdose  is  still  possible,  particularly  if  buprenorphine  is  taken  concurrently
with  other  respiratory  depressants  (e.g.,  full  agonist  opioids,  benzodiazepines,  or
alcohol) (240). A specialty clinic offering opioid tapering services for patients receiving
high-dosage opioids (defined in this study as ≥90 MME/day) for chronic pain found that
44.6%  of  patients  referred  for  opioid  taper  were  able  to  successfully  taper  to  <90
MME/day, and an additional 18.8% who were unable to taper were able to successfully
transition  to  sublingual  buprenorphine  (230).  Different  buprenorphine  products,
available  at  different  formulations  and  doses,  are  approved  for  the  treatment  of  pain
and for the treatment of opioid use disorder. Although prescription of buprenorphine for
treatment of opioid use disorder requires the clinician to have a waiver from SAMHSA
(see Recommendation 12), prescription of buprenorphine for treatment of chronic pain
does  not  require  a  waiver  (237).  To  avoid  precipitating  withdrawal,  transitioning  any
patient taking full agonist opioids to buprenorphine requires specific timing of the initial
buprenorphine  dose  (219)  (see  Recommendation  12  for  application  to  patients  with
opioid use disorder). Patients should be in mild to moderate withdrawal from full agonist
opioids before the first buprenorphine dose (219). To do this, experts have advised that
clinicians and patients should wait at least 8–12 hours after the last dose of short-acting
full  agonist  opioids  and  longer  after  the  last  dose  of  long-acting  full  agonist  opioids
(e.g., at least 12–24 hours after the last dose of an ER/LA full agonist opioid, and longer
for  methadone)  before  the  first  dose  of  buprenorphine  is  administered  (229).  As  an
alternative for patients not yet in opioid withdrawal, certain studies have described low
dose  initiation  of  buprenorphine  to  allow  for  initiation  of  buprenorphine  in  patients
receiving  full  agonist  opioids  for  acute  or  chronic  pain  (241).  SAMHSA’s  Providers
Clinical Support System (https://pcssnow.org) offers training, technical assistance, and
mentors to assist clinicians who are unfamiliar with initiation of buprenorphine and have
additional questions about the diagnosis and treatment of opioid use disorder. Because
the  duration  of  action  for  analgesia  is  shorter  than  the  duration  of  action  for

suppression of opioid withdrawal and stabilization of opioid use disorder (242), dosing
of buprenorphine for pain is typically multiple times daily rather than once-a-day dosing
as done for the treatment of opioid use disorder (229). Clinicians should closely monitor
patients  who  are  unable  to  taper  and  who  continue  on  high-dosage  or  otherwise
high-risk opioid regimens (e.g., opioids prescribed concurrently with benzodiazepines)
and  should  work  with  patients  to  mitigate  overdose  risk  (e.g.,  by  providing  overdose
education  and  naloxone)  (see  Recommendation  8).  Clinicians  can  use  periodic  and
strategic  motivational  questions  and  statements  to  encourage  movement  toward
appropriate  therapeutic  changes  (224).  Management  of  chronic  pain  with  opioids  can
be challenging, as can management of opioid discontinuation (67). However, clinicians
have  a  responsibility  to  provide  or  arrange  for  coordinated  management  of  patients’
pain  and  opioid-related  challenges.  Payers  and  health  systems  should  not  use  this
clinical practice guideline to set rigid standards related to dosage or duration of opioid
therapy and should ensure that policies based on cautionary dosage thresholds do not
result in rapid tapers or abrupt discontinuation of opioids, do not penalize clinicians for
accepting new patients who are receiving opioids for chronic pain, and do not provide
incentives  to  clinicians  to  implement  rapid  tapering.  Patients  prescribed  opioids  but
unable to access ongoing care (243) might be at risk for abrupt opioid discontinuation
and might miss opportunities to receive life-saving interventions, including monitoring
for and management of mental health and substance use comorbidities. When opioids
are needed for acute pain, clinicians should prescribe no greater quantity than needed
for  the  expected  duration  of  pain  severe  enough  to  require  opioids  (recommendation
category: A; evidence type: 4). Data suggest that pain improves within days for many
patients with common types of acute pain in primary care or emergency department
settings.  Analysis  of  nationwide  U.S.  commercial  insurance  claims  in  2014  found
median  durations  of  initial  opioid  analgesic  prescriptions  for  acute  pain  indications  in
primary  care  settings  were  4–7  days  (244),  suggesting  that  in  most  cases,  clinicians

considered an initial opioid prescription of 4–7 days’ duration sufficient. Some patients
(17.8%; range: 11.7%–30.0% depending on the acute pain condition) obtained at least
one refill within 30 days after their initial opioid prescription, suggesting that although
these durations might have been sufficient or more than necessary for most patients,
variation across diagnoses and among patients in time to recovery is likely. In an older
study  of  the  course  of  acute  low  back  pain  (not  associated  with  malignancies,
infections,  spondyloarthropathies,  fractures,  or  neurologic  signs)  in  a  primary  care
setting,  a  large  decrease  in  pain  occurred  until  the  fourth  day  after  treatment  with
paracetamol,  with  smaller  decreases  thereafter  (245).  A  more  recent  single-center
survey  of  patients  prescribed  opioids  for  acute  pain  on  emergency  department
discharge  (246)  found  that  patients  taking  opioids  continued  them  for  a  median  of  4
days (IQR: 2–7 days), including on the day of discharge, with variation across patients
and  diagnoses.  Median  numbers  of  days  that  patients  continued  taking  prescribed
opioids were 6 days (IQR: 4–8 days) for back pain and fractures, 2 days (IQR: 1–5 days)
for  renal  colic,  5.5  days  (IQR:  4–7  days)  for  musculoskeletal  injury,  and  3  days  (IQR:
2–6)  for  other  diagnoses.  Most  patients  (92.5%)  reported  having  leftover  pills,  with
52.2%  of  pills  unused  overall.  A  Canadian  study  following  patients  for  14  days  after
discharge  from  the  emergency  department  with  opioid  prescriptions  for  acute  pain
similarly found most (68%) total prescribed opioids were unused, and the quantity of
5-mg morphine tablets to prescribe to adequately supply 80% of the patients with the
amount of opioids they used was 20 tablets for musculoskeletal pain, 30 for fracture, 15
for renal colic or abdominal pain, and 20 for other pain conditions (247). Since 2017,
multiple studies have found that many patients do not use all prescribed opioids after
surgery and that prescribing a lower quantity of opioids postoperatively is associated
with  less  opioid  use  without  increases  in  pain  score  or  in  requests  for  refills  of  pain
medication and without reductions in satisfaction with pain management (77–79). One
study  found  that,  after  five  common  surgical  procedures,  median  opioid  consumption

was three 5-mg oxycodone pills or less, and that following consensus recommendations
intended to reduce unnecessary postoperative opioid prescribing published in 2018 and
2019 would still result in 47%–56% of pills prescribed remaining unused (248). Evidence
exists  of  variation  in  opioid  needs  across  patients  undergoing  the  same  procedures
attributable to factors including pain at discharge and previous opioid use (249). One
study found that, although a majority of patients used no or few (>0 to <50 MME during
their entire postoperative course) opioids, some patients required opioids for up to 15
days after surgery (250). Clinical evidence reviews found observational evidence that
opioid  use  for  acute  pain  is  associated  with  long-term  opioid  use  and  that  a  greater
amount of early opioid exposure is associated with greater likelihood of long-term use,
noting
 recent
 evidence
 for
 a
 dose-
 and
 duration-dependent
 effects
(63,75,141,244,251,252).  Opioids  prescribed  for  surgery  and  other  acute  pain
conditions  that  go  unused  are  a  potential  source  for  misuse  and  diversion
(249,253–255). In addition, sudden discontinuation of opioids might result in clinically
significant opioid withdrawal (71). Therefore, limiting duration of opioids prescribed can
minimize  the  need  for  a  taper  to  prevent  distressing  or  unpleasant  withdrawal
symptoms. Many common causes of nonsurgical, nontraumatic acute pain can often be
managed without opioids (see Recommendation 1). When the diagnosis and severity of
acute pain warrant the use of opioids, clinicians should prescribe no greater quantity
than needed for the expected duration of pain severe enough to require opioids. A few
days or less are often sufficient when opioids are needed for many common causes of
nonsurgical  acute  pain,  and  limiting  the  duration  of  opioid  therapy  can  minimize  the
need to taper to prevent withdrawal symptoms at the end of the course of opioids and
limit  unused  opioids.  Certain  circumstances  (e.g.,  severe  traumatic  injuries)  might
require  use  of  opioids  for  durations  of  >7  days.  Durations  should  be  individualized
based on the patient’s clinical circumstances. When patients are discharged from the
hospital after surgery, the course and dosage of any opioid medications administered

during hospitalization and before discharge can help predict ongoing pain management
needs  (150,256,257).  For  postoperative  pain,  procedure-specific  opioid  prescribing
recommendations  are  available  with  ranges  for  amounts  of  opioids  needed  (on  the
basis of use and refills and on consensus) (149,151,250). Clinicians should generally not
prescribe  additional  opioids  to  patients  just  in  case  pain  continues  longer  than
expected. However, if pain continues longer than expected, some patients might face
challenges  in  successfully  navigating  the  health  care  system  (e.g.,  clinician  and
pharmacy  contact,  transportation,  and  need  for  assistance)  to  obtain  additional
medication  as  needed,  leading  to  potential  disparities  in  treatment.  Clinicians,
practices,  and  health  systems  should  have  mechanisms  in  place  for  the  subset  of
patients  who  experience  severe  acute  pain  that  continues  longer  than  the  expected
duration. These mechanisms should allow for timely reevaluation to confirm or revise
the initial diagnosis and adjust pain management accordingly. In particular, clinicians,
practices,  and  health  systems  should  ensure  all  patients  can  obtain  and  afford
additional evaluation and treatment as needed to minimize disparities in access to and
affordability of care and refills. Patients should be evaluated at least every 2 weeks if
they continue to receive opioids for acute pain. If opioids are continued for ≥1 month,
clinicians should ensure that potentially reversible causes of chronic pain are addressed
and that opioid prescribing for acute pain does not unintentionally become long-term
opioid  therapy  simply  because  medications  are  continued  without  reassessment.
Continuation  of  opioid  therapy  at  this  point  might  represent  initiation  of  long-term
opioid  therapy,  which  should  occur  only  as  an  intentional  decision  that  benefits  are
likely to outweigh risks after discussion between the clinician and patient and as part of
a
 comprehensive
 pain
 management
 approach.
 Clinicians
 should
 refer
 to
recommendations  on  subacute  and  chronic  pain  for  initiation  (Recommendation  2),
follow-up  (Recommendation  7),  and  tapering  (Recommendation  5)  of  ongoing  opioid
therapy.  If  patients  already  receiving  long-term  opioids  require  additional  opioids  for

superimposed severe acute pain (e.g., major surgery), opioids should be continued only
for  the  duration  of  pain  severe  enough  to  require  additional  opioids,  returning  to  the
patient’s  baseline  opioid  dosage  as  soon  as  possible,  including  a  taper  to  baseline
dosage if additional opioids were used around the clock for more than a few days. If
opioids  are  used  continuously  (around  the  clock)  for  more  than  a  few  days  for  acute
pain,  clinicians  should  prescribe  a  brief  taper  to  minimize  withdrawal  symptoms  on
discontinuation of opioids. Taper durations might need to be adjusted depending on the
duration of the initial opioid prescription. For example, if opioids are used continuously
for >3 days but for <1 week, clinicians can consider reducing the daily dosage to 50%
for  2  days  to  ameliorate  withdrawal  symptoms  when  discontinuing  opioids.  When
patients have taken opioids continuously for ≥1 week but <1 month, clinicians might
consider a slower taper (e.g., reducing the daily dosage by approximately 20% every 2
days,  a  range  consistent  with  tapering  rates  successfully  used  in  studies  of
postoperative  opioid  prescribing)  (256,257).  When  patients  are  discharged  from  the
hospital  after  surgery,  opioid  dosages  needed  during  hospitalization  and  before
discharge  can  help  predict  tapering  needs  to  prevent  withdrawal  symptoms
(150,256,257).  Tapering  plans  should  be  discussed  with  the  patient  before  discharge
and  with  clinicians  coordinating  the  patient’s  care  as  an  outpatient.  (See
Recommendation  5  for  tapering  considerations  when  patients  have  taken  opioids
continuously for >1 month.) Clinicians should evaluate benefits and risks with patients
within 1–4 weeks of starting opioid therapy for subacute or chronic pain or of dosage
escalation. Clinicians should regularly reevaluate benefits and risks of continued opioid
therapy with patients (recommendation category: A; evidence type: 4). Although clinical
evidence  reviews  did  not  find  studies  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  more  frequent
monitoring intervals (7), they identified an observational study (54) that found risk for
opioid use disorder was associated with continuing opioid therapy for ≥3 months. The
reviews  also  identified  a  study  that  found  risk  for  overdose  associated  with  ER/LA

opioids might be particularly high during the first 2 weeks of treatment (192). Another
study  found  the  first  3  months  after  opioid  initiation  to  be  a  period  of  higher  risk  for
opioid overdose (214). Patients who do not have pain relief with opioids at 1 month are
unlikely to experience pain relief with opioids at 6 months (258). Although evidence is
insufficient to determine at what point within the first 3 months of opioid therapy the
risks for opioid use disorder increase, reassessment of pain and function within 1 month
of  initiating  opioids  provides  an  opportunity  to  modify  the  treatment  plan  to  achieve
pain treatment goals, including functional goals, and minimize risks of long-term opioid
use by tapering and discontinuing opioids among patients not receiving a clear benefit
from these medications. In addition, evaluation within the first 3 months might provide
opportunities  to  identify  and  mitigate  risks  for  opioid  use  disorder  and  overdose.
Experts from OWG noted that although little evidence exists for specific follow-up time
frames,  the  recommendation  was  reasonable  and  reflects  common  practice  and
therefore
 supported
 the
 recommendation.
 Experts
 further
 noted
 that
 social
determinants of health affecting ability to return frequently for care (e.g., role as unpaid
caregiver  or  work  at  a  job  with  minimal  paid  time  off)  or  payer  issues  (e.g.,  copays)
could  have  consequences  when  recommending  frequent  visits  and  should  be
considered. Clinicians should evaluate patients to assess benefits and risks of opioids
within 1–4 weeks of starting long-term opioid therapy or of dosage escalation. Clinicians
should  consider  follow-up  intervals  within  the  lower  end  of  this  range  when  ER/LA
opioids are started or increased, because of the increased risk for overdose within the
first  2  weeks  of  treatment  (192),  or  when  total  daily  opioid  dosage  is  ≥50  MME/day,
because the overdose risk is doubled across multiple studies for dosages of 50 to <100
MME/day relative to <20 MME/day (see Recommendation 4). Shorter follow-up intervals
(every  2–3  days  for  the  first  week)  should  be  strongly  considered  when  starting  or
increasing the dosage of methadone because of the variable half-life of this drug (see
Recommendation  3)  and  the  potential  for  drug  accumulation  during  initiation  and

during upward titration of dosage. An initial follow-up interval closer to 4 weeks can be
considered  when  starting  immediate-release  opioids  at  a  dosage  of  <50  MME/day.
Patients who started opioid therapy for acute pain and are continuing to receive opioids
for  subacute  pain  might  be  at  a  particularly  critical  point  for  potential  transition  to
chronic  pain  and  potential  transition  to  long-term  opioid  therapy.  Clinicians  should
follow up with and evaluate patients with subacute pain who have been treated with
opioid  therapy  for  30  days.  Clinicians  should  ensure  that  opioid  prescribing  for  acute
pain  does  not  unintentionally  become  long-term  opioid  therapy  simply  because
medications  are  continued  without  reassessment,  but  only  as  an  intentional  decision
that  benefits  are  likely  to  outweigh  risks  after  discussion  between  the  clinician  and
patient. Clinicians should reassess the patient’s pain, function, and treatment course;
ensure that potentially reversible causes of chronic pain are addressed; and optimize
pain
 management
 as
 needed
 (see
 Recommendation
 2).
 In
 analyses
 of
placebo-controlled trials, the clinical evidence reviews found that effects of opioids on
mean  improvement  in  pain  and  in  function  were  greater  at  1–3  months  than  at  3–6
months  (7).  A  cohort  study  found  an  association  between  longer  duration  of  therapy
and  increased  risk  for  new-onset  depression  (7).  Because  of  potential  changes  in  the
balance  of  benefits  and  risks  of  opioid  therapy  over  time,  clinicians  should  regularly
reassess all patients receiving long-term opioid therapy, including patients who are new
to the clinician but on long-term opioid therapy, with a suggested interval of every 3
months  or  more  frequently.  Clinicians  seeing  new  patients  already  receiving  opioids
should  establish  treatment  goals,  including  functional  goals,  for  continued  opioid
therapy  (see  Recommendation  2).  Clinicians  should  reevaluate  patients  who  are  at
greater risk for opioid use disorder or overdose (e.g., patients with depression or other
mental  health  conditions,  a  history  of  substance  use  disorder,  a  history  of  overdose,
taking ≥50 MME/day, or taking other central nervous system depressants with opioids)
more frequently than every 3 months. Clinicians should regularly screen all patients for

these
 conditions,
 which
 can
 change
 during
 the
 course
 of
 treatment
 (see
Recommendation  8).  Clinicians,  practices,  and  health  systems  can  help  minimize
unintended effects on patients by ensuring all patients can access and afford follow-up
evaluation  (86).  In  addition,  policymakers  can  consider  evidence-based  methods  of
minimizing  barriers  to  care  (e.g.,  paid  sick  leave)  (259).  In  practice  contexts  where
virtual visits are part of standard care (e.g., in remote areas where distance or other
context  makes  follow-up  visits  challenging),  or  for  patients  for  whom  in-person
follow-up  visits  are  challenging  (e.g.,  frail  patients),  follow-up  assessments  that  allow
the  clinician  to  communicate  with  and  observe  the  patient  through  telehealth
modalities  might  be  conducted  when  available.  At  follow-up,  clinicians  should  review
patient  perspectives  on  progress  and  challenges  in  moving  toward  treatment  goals;
determine  whether  opioids  continue  to  meet  treatment  goals,  including  sustained
improvement  in  pain  and  function;  determine  whether  the  patient  has  experienced
common or serious adverse events or early warning signs of serious adverse events or
has  signs  of  opioid  misuse  or  opioid  use  disorder  (e.g.,  difficulty  controlling  use,
cravings, work, and social or family problems related to opioid use); determine whether
benefits of opioids continue to outweigh risks; and determine whether there is a need
for  opioid  dosage  reduction  or  discontinuation.  Clinicians  should  assess  benefits  in
function,  pain  control,  and  quality  of  life  by  asking  patients  about  progress  toward
person-centered functional goals that have meaning for them (see Recommendation 2)
or  by  using  tools  such  as  the  three-item  PEG  assessment  scale  (184);  clinically
meaningful improvement has been defined as a 30% improvement in scores for both
pain  and  function  (185).  Clinicians  also  should  ask  patients  about  common  adverse
effects such as constipation and drowsiness (see Recommendation 2) and should ask
about  and  assess  for  effects  that  might  be  early  warning  signs  for  more  serious
problems  such  as  overdose  (e.g.,  sedation  or  slurred  speech)  or  opioid  use  disorder
(e.g.,  craving,  wanting  to  take  opioids  in  greater  quantities  or  more  frequently  than

prescribed,  difficulty  controlling  use,  or  work,  social,  or  family  problems  related  to
opioid  use).  Clinicians  can  use  validated  screening  tools  such  as  the  Drug  Abuse
Screening Test (DAST) (260), the Tobacco, Alcohol, Prescription medication, and other
Substance  use  Tool  (TAPS)  (261),  and  the  three-question  version  of  the  Alcohol  Use
Disorders  Identification  Test  (AUDIT-C)  (262,263)  (see  Recommendations  8  and  12).
Because depression, anxiety, and other psychological comorbidities often coexist with
and can interfere with resolution of pain, clinicians should use validated instruments to
assess  for  these  conditions  (see  Recommendation  8)  and  ensure  that  treatment  for
these conditions is optimized. Clinicians should ask patients about their preferences for
continuing opioids considering their effects on pain and function relative to any adverse
effects  experienced.  If  risks  outweigh  benefits  of  continued  opioid  therapy  (e.g.,  if
patients  do  not  experience  meaningful,  sustained  improvements  in  pain  and  function
compared  with  before  initiation  of  opioid  therapy;  if  patients  are  taking  higher-risk
regimens  [e.g.,  dosages  of  ≥50  MME/day  or  opioids  combined  with  benzodiazepines]
without  evidence  of  benefit;  if  patients  believe  benefits  no  longer  outweigh  risks;  if
patients  request  dosage  reduction  or  discontinuation;  or  if  patients  experience
overdose or other serious adverse events), clinicians should work with patients to taper
and  reduce  opioid  dosage  or  to  taper  and  discontinue  opioids  when  possible  (see
Recommendation 5). Clinicians should maximize pain treatment with nonpharmacologic
and  nonopioid  pharmacologic  treatments  as  appropriate  (see  Recommendation  2).
Before starting and periodically during continuation of opioid therapy, clinicians should
evaluate risk for opioid-related harms and discuss risk with patients. Clinicians should
work with patients to incorporate into the management plan strategies to mitigate risk,
including  offering  naloxone  (recommendation  category:  A;  evidence  type:  4).  The
clinical  evidence  reviews  found  evidence  too  limited  to  determine  effects  of  patient
demographics and comorbidities on risk for opioid-related harms (7). However, on the
basis of observational studies (181,264–273) and expert opinion, certain risk factors are

likely  to  increase  susceptibility  to  opioid-related  harms  and  warrant  incorporation  of
additional  strategies  into  the  management  plan  to  mitigate  risk.  Clinicians  should
assess  these  risk  factors  periodically,  with  frequency  individualized  to  patient
comorbidities and other risk factors. For example, factors that vary over time, such as
alcohol  use,  require  more  frequent  assessment.  Clinicians  should  offer  naloxone  and
reevaluate patients more frequently (see Recommendation 7) when factors are present
that  increase  risk  for  harm,  such  as  sleep-disordered  breathing,  history  of  overdose,
history of substance use disorder, higher dosages of opioids (e.g., ≥50 MME/day), and
concurrent use of benzodiazepines with opioids. Experts from OWG had concerns about
the  cost  of  purchasing  naloxone  for  patients  with  limited  means  and  reported  that
purchasing of naloxone has in some cases been required to fill opioid prescriptions. In
part  because  of  these  concerns  and  because  in  certain  settings  naloxone  is  directly
provided by a practice or health system to patients, “offering” naloxone (which can be
done by offering a prescription or by offering naloxone directly) is recommended rather
than  specifying  “prescribing”  naloxone.  Clinicians,  health  systems,  and  payers  should
work  to  ensure  patients  can  obtain  naloxone,  a  potentially  lifesaving  treatment.  A
case-control  analysis  among  veterans  prescribed  opioids  found  that  sleep  apnea  was
associated  with  increased  risk  for  life-threatening  respiratory/central  nervous  system
depression or overdose (264). Careful monitoring and cautious dose titration should be
used  if  opioids  are  prescribed  for  patients  with  mild  sleep-disordered  breathing.
Clinicians  should  avoid  prescribing  opioids  to  patients  with  moderate  or  severe
sleep-disordered  breathing,  whenever  possible,  to  minimize  risks  for  respiratory
depression.
 Pregnant,
 postpartum,
 and
 parenting
 persons
 should
 receive
compassionate, evidence-based care for pain or opioid use disorder. ACOG has noted
that  a  cautious  approach  to  prescribing  opioids  should  be  balanced  with  the  need  to
address pain, and pregnancy should not be a reason to avoid treating acute pain (274).
At the same time, opioid use during pregnancy might be associated with risks to both

the  pregnant  person  and  the  fetus.  Certain  observational  studies  have  shown  an
association  of  opioid  use  in  pregnancy  with  stillbirth,  poor  fetal  growth,  and  preterm
delivery (265–268,275). In some cases, opioid use during pregnancy leads to neonatal
abstinence
 syndrome/neonatal
 opioid
 withdrawal
 syndrome
 (269).
 ACOG
 has
emphasized  that  pregnancy  should  not  be  a  reason  to  avoid  treating  acute  pain
because  of  concern  for  opioid  misuse  or  neonatal  abstinence  syndrome  and  that
neonatal abstinence syndrome is an expected and treatable condition that can follow
prenatal exposure to opioid agonists. Clinicians and patients together should carefully
weigh  benefits  and  risks  when  making  decisions  about  whether  to  initiate  opioid
therapy  for  pain  during  pregnancy.  In  addition,  before  initiating  opioid  therapy  for
persons  who  can  become  pregnant,  clinicians  and  patients  should  discuss  family
planning and potential effects of long-term opioid use on any future pregnancy. For all
persons  with  reproductive  potential,  discussing  future  pregnancy  intentions  and
engaging  in  shared  decision-making  regarding  contraception,  if  appropriate,  is  a  core
component  of  care.  A  review  of  all  prescription  and  nonprescription  medications  is
recommended  during  prepregnancy  and  interpregnancy  care  (276,277).  Intentional
application  of  a  patient-centered  reproductive  justice  framework  and  use  of  a  shared
decision-making  model  is  the  recommended  approach  for  providing  supportive
contraceptive counseling and care to help patients to achieve their reproductive goals
(278). Counseling should be noncoercive and include a discussion of all contraceptive
options  (276–278).  When  opioids  are  needed  for  treatment  of  acute  pain  in  pregnant
persons,  the  lowest  effective  dose  (see  Recommendation  4)  should  be  used  for  no
longer  than  the  expected  duration  of  pain  severe  enough  to  require  opioids  (see
Recommendation 6). For pregnant persons with chronic pain, ACOG recommends that
practice  goals  include  strategies  to  avoid  or  minimize  the  use  of  opioids  for  pain
management,  highlighting  alternative  pain  therapies  such  as  nonpharmacologic  (e.g.,
exercise, physical therapy, and behavioral approaches), and nonopioid pharmacologic

treatments  (274).  Pharmacokinetic  and  physiologic  changes  occur  during  pregnancy,
especially  in  the  third  trimester,  and  these  changes  might  require  dose  adjustments
(274).  For  pregnant  persons  already  receiving  opioids,  clinicians  should  access
appropriate  expertise  if  considering  tapering  opioids  because  of  possible  risk  to  the
pregnant
 patient
 and
 the
 fetus
 if
 the
 patient
 goes
 into
 withdrawal
 (see
Recommendation 5). ACOG has noted that early universal screening, brief intervention
(e.g., engaging in a short conversation and providing feedback and advice), and referral
for treatment of pregnant persons with opioid use disorder improve both maternal and
infant outcomes (274). For pregnant persons with opioid use disorder, medication for
opioid  use  disorder  (buprenorphine  or  methadone)  is  the  recommended  therapy,  has
been associated with improved maternal outcomes, and should be offered as early as
possible  in  pregnancy  to  prevent  harms  to  both  the  patient  and  the  fetus  (274)  (see
Recommendation 12). In contrast, criminalization or otherwise punishing (e.g., through
threatened loss of child custody) the use of opioids, including for opioid use disorder,
discourages  pregnant,  postpartum,  and  parenting  persons  from  seeking  care;
nonpunitive public health approaches to treatment result in better outcomes (274,279).
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has published recommendations for the care
of infants with neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, including that pregnant persons
with  opioid  use  disorder  should  receive  antenatal  counseling  to  provide  education  on
the  clinical  signs  of  withdrawal  and  on  postnatal  treatment  for  neonatal  opioid
withdrawal syndrome (e.g., nonpharmacologic treatment, including breastfeeding, and
pharmacotherapy) (280). In addition, all infants with long-term opioid exposure should
be  observed  for  at  least  72  hours  (4–7  days  if  exposed  to  buprenorphine  or  ER/LA
opioids  and  5–7  days  if  exposed  to  methadone)  to  monitor  for  the  development  of
withdrawal (280). Clinicians caring for pregnant persons receiving prescribed or using
nonprescribed  opioids  should  arrange  for  delivery  at  a  facility  prepared  to  monitor,
evaluate for, and treat neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome. In instances when travel

to  such  a  facility  would  present  an  undue  burden  on  the  pregnant  person,  it  is
appropriate  for  the  clinician  to  arrange  delivery  locally,  monitor  and  evaluate  the
newborn  for  neonatal  opioid  withdrawal  syndrome,  and  transfer  the  newborn  for
additional  treatment  if  needed.  Previous  consensus  recommendations  have  advised
that  if  a  codeine-containing  medication  is  selected  for  postpartum  management,
clinicians should review duration of therapy and neonatal signs of toxicity with patients
and
 their
 families
 (133).
 A
 case-control
 study
 of
 risk
 for
 life-threatening
respiratory/central nervous system depression or overdose among veterans prescribed
opioids found that renal disease and moderate or severe liver disease were associated
with increased risk for these events (264). Clinicians should use additional caution and
increased monitoring (see Recommendation 7) to minimize risks of opioids prescribed
for  patients  with  renal  or  hepatic  insufficiency  because  of  their  decreased  ability  to
process and excrete medications, susceptibility to accumulation of opioids, and reduced
therapeutic  window  between  safe  dosages  and  dosages  associated  with  respiratory
depression and overdose (281) (see Recommendations 3, 4, and 7). Older adults are a
heterogenous  group  comprising  a  wide  span  of  ages  and  functional  abilities,  ranging
from healthy, active older adults to frail older adults. Frail older adults in particular can
be at risk for changes in function that might be exacerbated by pain and contribute to
deterioration  in  overall  health  and  independence.  Functional  assessment  is  especially
important in patients aged ≥65 years to better assess effects of pain on function and
independence.  Persons  aged  ≥65  years  can  be  at  risk  for  inadequate  pain  treatment
(2,6,17,282). For certain older adults (e.g., older adults with serious illness that requires
advanced  management  of  pain  or  other  distressing  symptoms)  (94),  palliative  care,
which is beyond the scope of this guideline but addressed in other guidelines (93), is
appropriate.  Pain  management  for  older  patients  can  be  challenging  because  of
increased  risks  of  both  nonopioid  pharmacologic  therapies  (see  Recommendation  2)
and  opioid  therapy  in  this  population.  Because  of  reduced  renal  function  and

medication  clearance  even  in  the  absence  of  renal  disease,  patients  aged  ≥65  years
might have increased susceptibility to accumulation of all medications, increased risk
for drug-drug interactions, and a smaller therapeutic window between safe dosages and
dosages  associated  with  adverse  effects.  These  adverse  effects  include  renal,
cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal effects with oral NSAIDs (see Recommendation 2)
and  respiratory  depression  and  overdose  with  opioids.  A  case-control  analysis  among
veterans  prescribed  opioids  found  that  age  ≥55  years  was  associated  with  increased
risk  for  life-threatening  respiratory/central  nervous  system  depression  or  overdose
(264).  Some  older  adults  might  have  a  cognitive  impairment,  such  as  dementia,  that
can  increase  risk  for  medication  errors  and  make  opioid-related  confusion  riskier.  In
addition,  older  adults  are  more  likely  than  younger  adults  to  experience  comorbid
medical conditions and are more likely to receive multiple medications, some of which
might  interact  with  opioids.  Clinicians  should  review  all  current  medications,
over-the-counter  drugs,  and  natural  remedies  before  prescribing  any  new  drugs.
Clinicians
 should
 use
 additional
 caution
 and
 increased
 monitoring
 (see
Recommendation  7)  for  patients  aged  ≥65  years  to  ensure  pain  is  addressed  and
minimize  risks  of  opioids  prescribed.  Clinicians  should  educate  older  adults  receiving
opioids to avoid medication-related behaviors that increase risk, such as saving unused
medications. Caregivers can have an important role in management of opioid therapy
for  older  persons  with  cognitive  impairment.  Clinicians  also  should  implement
interventions to mitigate common risks of opioid therapy among older adults, such as
monitoring for cognitive impairment, risk assessment for falls, and exercise and bowel
regimens to prevent constipation. A safety critical job involves work or an occupational
environment  where  limitations  in  physical  or  mental  performance,  or  both,  involve
dangers  to  self,  coworkers,  or  the  public.  According  to  the  American  College
Occupational  Environmental  Medicine,  for  occupations  with  higher  risks  (especially
public transportation), prescription of an opioid might be incompatible with continued

employment in a safety critical job (270,283). For patients with safety critical jobs who
are receiving opioids or other medications that can negatively affect sleep, cognition,
balance, or coordination, clinicians should assess patients’ abilities to perform jobs that
involve driving, using heavy equipment, climbing ladders, working at heights or around
moving  machinery,  or  working  with  high-voltage  equipment.  Psychological  distress
frequently  interferes  with  improvement  of  pain  and  function  in  patients  with  chronic
pain; therefore, using validated instruments such as the Generalized Anxiety Disorder
(GAD)-7 and the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9 or PHQ-4) to support assessment
for  anxiety,  posttraumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD),  and  depression  (284)  might  help
clinicians  improve  overall  pain  treatment  outcomes.  Patients  with  mental  health
conditions  including  depression  might  be  at  higher  risk  than  other  patients  for  opioid
use  disorder  (181,271)  and  drug  overdose  (272).  Additional  caution  and  increased
monitoring  (see  Recommendation  7)  might  lessen  the  increased  risk  for  overdose
among patients with depression (264,272). In addition, patients with anxiety disorders
and other mental health conditions are more likely to receive benzodiazepines, which
can  exacerbate  opioid-induced  respiratory  depression  and  increase  risk  for  overdose
(see Recommendation 11). Clinicians should ensure that treatment for depression and
other  mental  health  conditions  as  well  as  treatment  for  pain  is  optimized,  consulting
with behavioral health specialists when needed. Treatment for depression can improve
pain symptoms and depression and might decrease overdose risk (272). For treatment
of chronic pain in patients with depression, clinicians should consider using tricyclic or
SNRI  antidepressants  for  analgesic  as  well  as  antidepressant  effects  if  these
medications are not otherwise contraindicated (see Recommendation 2). Patients with
substance  use  disorders  are  likely  to  experience  greater  risks  for  opioid  use  disorder
and  overdose  (55,202,264)  than  persons  without  these  conditions.  Despite  increased
risk  for  opioid  misuse  and  opioid  use  disorder  when  prescribed  opioid  analgesics
(271,285), patients with histories of substance use disorders are more likely than other

patients  to  receive  long-term  opioid  treatment  for  chronic  pain  (286).  Previous
guidelines have recommended screening or risk assessment tools to identify patients at
higher  risk  for  opioid  misuse  or  opioid  use  disorder.  However,  the  clinical  evidence
reviews found that available risk stratification tools (e.g., Opioid Risk Tool, Screener and
Opioid  Assessment  for  Patients  with  Pain  [SOAPP]  Version  1,  SOAPP-R,  and  Brief  Risk
Interview) demonstrate limited and variable accuracy for classification of patients as at
low  or  high  risk  for  opioid  use  disorder  or  misuse  (7).  If  these  tools  are  used,  they
should  be  supplemented  with  other  assessments,  such  as  discussions  with  patients,
family,  and  caregivers;  clinical  records;  PDMP  data  (see  Recommendation  9);  and
toxicology  screening  data  (see  Recommendation  10).  Clinicians  should  always  use
caution when considering or prescribing opioids and should not overestimate the ability
of  available  risk  stratification  tools  to  rule  out  risks  of  long-term  opioid  therapy.
Nonprescribed  drugs  (e.g.,  heroin,  illicitly  manufactured  fentanyl,  cocaine,  and
methamphetamine)  (287)  and  alcohol  (288)  are  listed  as  contributory  factors  on  a
substantial  proportion  of  death  certificates  for  prescription  opioid–involved  overdose
deaths.  Clinicians  should  ask  patients  about  their  drug  (289)  and  alcohol  use.  Single
screening questions can be used (290). For example, the question “How many times in
the  past  year  have  you  used  an  illegal  drug  or  used  a  prescription  medication  for
nonmedical reasons?” (with an answer of one or more considered positive) was found in
a primary care setting to be 100% sensitive and 73.5% specific for the detection of a
drug use disorder compared with a standardized diagnostic interview (291). Validated
screening  tools,  such  as  the  Drug  Abuse  Screening  Test  (DAST)  (260);  the  Tobacco,
Alcohol, Prescription medication, and other Substance use Tool (TAPS) (261); and the
three-question  version  of  the  Alcohol  Use  Disorders  Identification  Test  (AUDIT-C)
(262,263), also can be used. Clinicians should use PDMP data (see Recommendation 9)
and  toxicology  screening  (see  Recommendation  10)  as  appropriate  to  assess  for
concurrent  substance  use  that  might  place  patients  at  higher  risk  for  opioid  use

disorder and overdose. Clinicians should also provide specific counseling on increased
risks  for  overdose  when  opioids  are  combined  with  other  drugs  or  alcohol  (see
Recommendation 2) and ensure that patients receive effective treatment for substance
use disorders when needed (see Recommendation 12). If clinicians consider prescribing
opioid  therapy  for  chronic  pain  to  patients  with  substance  use  disorders,  they  should
discuss  increased  risks  for  opioid  use  disorder  and  overdose  with  patients;  carefully
consider  whether  benefits  of  opioids  outweigh  increased  risks;  and  incorporate
strategies  to  mitigate  risk  into  the  management  plan,  such  as  offering  naloxone  (see
Offering  Naloxone  to  Patients)  and  increasing  frequency  of  monitoring  (see
Recommendation 7) when opioids are prescribed. Clinicians should communicate with
patients’ substance use disorder treatment providers if opioids are prescribed. Although
substance use disorders can alter the expected benefits and risks of opioid therapy for
pain, patients with co-occurring pain and substance use disorder require ongoing pain
management that maximizes benefits relative to risks. (See Recommendation 12, Pain
Management  for  Patients  with  Opioid  Use  Disorder  for  additional  considerations.)
Previous  opioid  overdose  is  associated  with  substantially  increased  risk  for  future
nonfatal  or  fatal  opioid  overdose  (273).  Yet,  a  cohort  study  of  commercially  insured
patients  found  that  opioids  were  dispensed  to  91%  of  patients  who  had  a  previous
overdose;  a  substantial  percentage  experienced  a  repeated  opioid  overdose,  with  a
cumulative incidence at 2 years of 17% among patients receiving ≥100 MME/day, 15%
among those prescribed 50–100 MME/day, 9% among those prescribed <50 MME/day,
and 8% among those prescribed no opioids (273). If patients experience nonfatal opioid
overdose,  clinicians  should  evaluate  them  for  opioid  use  disorder  and  provide  or
arrange  treatment  if  needed.  Treatment  with  buprenorphine  or  methadone  for  opioid
use  disorder  after  overdose  is  associated  with  reduced  all-cause  and  opioid-related
deaths  (292).  Clinicians  should  work  with  patients  to  reduce  opioid  dosage  and
discontinue  opioids  when  indicated  (see  Recommendation  5)  and  should  ensure

continued  close  monitoring  and  support  for  patients  prescribed  or  not  prescribed
opioids. If clinicians continue opioid therapy in patients with previous opioid overdose,
they  should  discuss  increased  risks  for  overdose  with  patients;  carefully  consider
whether  benefits  of  opioids  outweigh  substantial  risks;  and  incorporate  strategies  to
mitigate  risk  into  the  management  plan,  such  as  offering  naloxone  (see  Offering
Naloxone  to  Patients),  involving  patient-identified  trusted  family  members,  and
increasing  frequency  of  monitoring  combined  with  shorter  prescription  durations  (see
Recommendation  7).  Naloxone  is  an  opioid  antagonist  that  can  reverse  severe
respiratory  depression;  its  administration  by  laypersons,  such  as  friends,  family,  and
caregivers of persons who experience opioid overdose, can save lives (293). Naloxone
precipitates acute withdrawal among patients physically dependent on opioids. Serious
adverse effects (e.g., pulmonary edema, cardiovascular instability, and seizures) have
been  reported  but  are  rare  at  doses  consistent  with  labeled  use  for  opioid  overdose
(294). The clinical evidence reviews identified one observational study (295) that found
provision  of  naloxone  to  patients  prescribed  opioids  in  primary  care  clinics  was
associated with decreased likelihood of opioid-related emergency department visits (7).
Clinicians  should  offer  naloxone  when  prescribing  opioids,  particularly  to  patients  at
increased risk for overdose, including patients with a history of overdose, patients with
a history of substance use disorder, patients taking benzodiazepines with opioids (see
Recommendation 11), patients at risk for returning to a high dose to which they have
lost tolerance (e.g., patients undergoing tapering or recently released from prison), and
patients  taking  higher  dosages  of  opioids  (≥50  MME/day).  Practices  should  provide
education  on  overdose  prevention  and  naloxone  use  to  patients  receiving  naloxone
prescriptions  and  members  of  their  households.  Naloxone  coprescribing  can  be
facilitated  by  clinics  or  practices  with  resources  to  provide  naloxone  training  and  by
collaborative practice models with pharmacists. Resources for prescribing naloxone in
primary
 care
 settings
 can
 be
 found
 through
 Prescribe
 to
 Prevent
 at

https://prescribetoprevent.org.  When  prescribing  initial  opioid  therapy  for  acute,
subacute,  or  chronic  pain,  and  periodically  during  opioid  therapy  for  chronic  pain,
clinicians should review the patient’s history of controlled substance prescriptions using
state  prescription  drug  monitoring  program  (PDMP)  data  to  determine  whether  the
patient is receiving opioid dosages or combinations that put the patient at high risk for
overdose  (recommendation  category:  B;  evidence  type:  4).  PDMPs  are  databases
overseen  by  states,  territories,  counties,  and  the  District  of  Columbia  that  collect
information on controlled prescription drugs dispensed by pharmacies and, in selected
jurisdictions, by dispensing clinicians. PDMPs do not report nonprescribed opioid use. A
clinical evidence review did not find studies evaluating the effectiveness of PDMPs for
risk  mitigation  (7).  However,  among  patients  receiving  concurrent  treatment  with
opioids  and  benzodiazepines,  overdose  risk  is  further  increased  among  patients
receiving  these  treatments  from  multiple  prescribers  rather  than  one  prescriber,
highlighting potential room for improvement in care coordination (296). PDMP data also
can be helpful when patient medication history is not otherwise available (e.g., when
patients transition care to a new clinician). A contextual evidence review (7) identified a
survey of physicians in Maryland (297) finding that although barriers to PDMP review
were noted (e.g., not knowing about the program, registration difficulties, and difficulty
accessing  data),  most  participants  felt  that  PDMPs  improved  opioid  prescribing  by
decreasing opioid prescription amounts and increasing comfort with prescribing opioids
(7). Integration of PDMPs with electronic health records (EHRs) can reduce burden on
clinicians  compared  with  having  to  access  a  separate  system  (298,299).  Special
attention should be paid to ensure that PDMP information is not used in a way that is
harmful to patients. For example, PDMP information has been used to dismiss patients
from clinician practices (300), which might adversely affect patient safety and result in
untreated  or  undertreated  pain.  Many  state  laws  require  PDMP  use  under  specific
circumstances (301). Experts from OWG had concerns about PDMP risk scores or other

algorithmic  interpretations  from  software  platforms  that  can  lead  to  distrust  between
clinicians and patients and stigmatization, particularly for patients with conditions such
as  opioid  use  disorder.  Risk  scores  are  reportedly  generated  by  applying  proprietary
algorithms that are not publicly available to information from patient EHRs and other
sources  such  as  court  records  and  criminal  and  sexual  trauma  histories;  these
algorithms might disparately affect women, persons of color, and persons who live in
poverty (302). Importantly, whereas one PDMP-generated risk measure has shown fair
concurrence  with  the  WHO  Alcohol,  Smoking,  and  Substance  Involvement  Screening
Test  (ASSIST),  these  scores  have  not  been  externally  validated  against  clinical
outcomes  (302,303).  Such  risk  scores  should  not  take  the  place  of  clinical  judgment.
Rather, clinicians should use specific PDMP information about medications prescribed to
their patient in the context of other clinical information, including their patient’s history,
physical  findings,  and  other  relevant  testing,  to  help  them  communicate  with  and
protect their patient. Experts raised varying points regarding frequency of PDMP use,
with many agreeing that PDMPs should be consulted before every opioid prescription,
several  agreeing  that  universal  application  would  mitigate  bias  in  application  to
different patients, and others believing it might not be warranted or feasible to check
the PDMP in all cases, particularly before prescribing opioids for acute pain for a small
number of days. Ideally, PDMP data should be reviewed before every opioid prescription
for acute, subacute, or chronic pain. This practice is recommended in all jurisdictions
where  PDMP  availability  and  access  policies  make  it  practicable  (e.g.,  clinician  and
delegate access permitted). At a minimum, PDMP data should be reviewed before initial
opioid  prescriptions  for  subacute  or  chronic  pain  and  then  every  3  months  or  more
frequently during long-term opioid therapy. Recommendation category B acknowledges
variation  in  PDMP  availability  and  circumstances  (e.g.,  a  clinician  might  reasonably
determine that a patient with severe acute pain in the emergency department during a
PDMP  system  access  failure  would  be  adversely  affected  by  waiting  hours  for  a

prescription). However, because PDMP information can be most helpful when results are
unexpected  and,  to  minimize  bias  in  application,  clinicians  should  apply  this
recommendation when feasible to all patients rather than differentially on the basis of
assumptions about what they will learn about specific patients. Clinicians should review
PDMP  data  for  prescription  opioids  and  other  controlled  medications  patients  might
have  received  from  additional  prescribers  to  determine  the  total  amount  of  MME
prescribed  and  to  assess  if  the  total  dosage  or  combinations  (e.g.,  opioids  combined
with benzodiazepines) put the patient at high risk for overdose. If patients are found to
have total opioid dosages or combinations of medications that might put them at risk
for  overdose,  or  multiple  controlled  substance  prescriptions  written  by  different
clinicians,
 clinicians
 should
 take
 actions
 to
 improve
 patient
 safety
 (see
Recommendation  9,  Implementation  Considerations).  When  prescribing  opioids  for
subacute or chronic pain, clinicians should consider the benefits and risks of toxicology
testing  to  assess  for  prescribed  medications  as  well  as  other  prescribed  and
nonprescribed controlled substances (recommendation category: B; evidence type: 4).
The  clinical  evidence  reviews  did  not  find  studies  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of
toxicology  screening  for  risk  mitigation  during  opioid  prescribing  for  pain.  However,
concurrent  use  of  opioid  pain  medications  with  other  opioid  pain  medications,
benzodiazepines, or heroin or other nonpharmaceutical opioids can increase patients’
risk for overdose. Toxicology tests can provide information about drug use that is not
reported by the patient. In addition, toxicology tests can assist clinicians in identifying
when patients are not taking opioids prescribed for them, which might in certain cases
indicate diversion or other clinically important issues such as difficulties with adverse
effects.  The  most  commonly  drug-tested  bodily  specimen  is  urine.  Oral  fluid  (saliva)
testing also is available (304), although testing protocols using oral fluid are not as well
established. On October 25, 2019, SAMHSA published guidelines for the inclusion of oral
fluid  specimens  in  toxicology  testing  programs  of  federal  executive  branch  agencies

(305),  effective  January  1,  2020.  Toxicology  testing  results  can  be  associated  with
outcomes  and  practices  that  harm  patients  (e.g.,  stigmatization  and  inappropriate
termination  from  care).  False  positive  and  false  negative  presumptive  results  are  not
uncommon,  a  problem  that  can  be  compounded  because  clinicians  commonly
misinterpret  results  (306,307),  leading  to  inappropriate  consequences  for  patients.
Urine  toxicology  tests  do  not  provide  accurate  information  about  how  much  or  what
doses of opioids or other drugs a patient took. Testing for fentanyl is not available in
widely used toxicology assays, potentially leading to false assurance. Ideally, clinicians
would  only  test  for  substances  for  which  results  could  affect  patient  management.
However,  it  can  be  challenging  for  clinicians  in  many  settings  to  tailor  widely  used
toxicology panels to include the specific substances most relevant to clinical decisions
for their patient. Toxicology testing costs are not always covered fully by insurance and
can  be  a  burden  for  patients,  and  clinician  time  is  needed  to  interpret,  confirm,  and
communicate  results.  Experts  from  OWG  had  concerns  that  biases  and  disparities
affecting  which  patients  undergo  toxicology  testing  could  have  disproportionately
negative  consequences  among  Black  and  Hispanic  patients.  In  addition,  testing  costs
would  have  the  greatest  consequences  for  patients  with  the  least  ability  to  pay.
Because  of  these  concerns,  some  experts  said  that  grading  the  recommendation  as
category A could potentially reduce bias and disparities. However, others indicated that
although universal application could mitigate bias in who is tested, it would not mitigate
stigma  associated  with  testing.  In  addition,  experts  had  concerns  about  accuracy,
clinician interpretation, testing costs, and potential for a delay in care while waiting for
test  results.  Because  of  these  concerns,  the  recommendation  is  rated  category  B.
However,  clinicians,  practices,  and  health  systems  should  aim  to  minimize  bias  in  its
application  and  should  not  apply  this  recommendation  differentially  on  the  basis  of
assumptions  about  what  they  will  learn  about  specific  patients.  Predicting  risk  is
challenging, and available tools do not allow clinicians to reliably identify patients who

are  at  low  risk  for  substance  use  disorder  (7).  Rather,  clinicians  should  consider
toxicology  test  results  as  potentially  useful  data,  in  the  context  of  other  clinical
information,  for  all  patients  and  consider  toxicology  testing  whenever  its  potential
problems can be mitigated. For example, clinicians can become familiar with the drugs
included  in  toxicology  testing  panels  used  in  their  practice  and  understand  how  to
interpret results; practices and health systems can ensure a laboratorian or toxicologist
is available to discuss unexpected results, that costs to patients are not burdensome,
and  that  practice  policies  regarding  testing  and  frequency  can  minimize  bias.  For
example, routine use of testing with standardized policies at the practice or clinic level
might help destigmatize their use. Because truly random testing might not be feasible
in  clinical  practice,  some  clinics  obtain  a  specimen  at  every  visit  but  only  send  it  for
testing  on  a  random  schedule.  Before  starting  opioids  and  periodically  (at  least
annually)  during  opioid  therapy,  clinicians  should  consider  benefits  and  risks  of
toxicology  testing  to  assess  for  prescribed  opioids  and  other  prescription  and
nonprescribed substances that increase risk for overdose when combined with opioids,
including  nonprescribed  and  illicit  opioids  and  benzodiazepines.  Before  ordering
toxicology testing, clinicians should have a plan for responding to unexpected results.
Clinicians should explain to patients that toxicology testing will not be used punitively
(e.g., will not be used to dismiss patients from care) and is intended to improve their
safety.  Clinicians  should  also  explain  expected  results  (e.g.,  presence  of  prescribed
medication  and  absence  of  substances,  including  nonprescribed  substances,  not
reported  by  the  patient).  Clinicians  should  ask  patients  about  use  of  prescribed
medications and other substances and ask whether there might be unexpected results.
This  will  provide  an  opportunity  for  patients  to  provide  information  about  changes  in
their  use  of  prescribed  opioids  or  other  drugs.  In  most  situations,  initial  toxicology
testing can be performed with a relatively inexpensive immunoassay panel that tests
for opiates and benzodiazepines as classes and for multiple nonprescribed substances.

Patients  prescribed  oxycodone  or  nonmorphine-based  opioids  (e.g.,  buprenorphine  or
methadone) require specific testing for those agents. The use of confirmatory testing
can  add  costs  and  should  be  used  when  toxicology  results  will  inform  decisions  with
major  clinical  or  nonclinical  implications  for  the  patient,  a  need  exists  to  detect  a
specific  opioid  that  is  prescribed  or  that  cannot  be  identified  on  standard
immunoassays, or to confirm unexpected toxicology screening results for which there is
no other explanation. Clinicians and health systems can work to minimize inequitable
cost burdens for patients and limit specific testing to situations when it is necessary.
Clinicians should be familiar with the compounds included in toxicology testing panels
used in their practice and should understand how to interpret results. For example, a
positive opiate immunoassay test result detects morphine, which might reflect patient
use of morphine, codeine, or heroin, but this immunoassay does not detect synthetic
opioids (e.g., fentanyl or methadone) and might not detect semisynthetic opioids (e.g.,
oxycodone or buprenorphine). Many laboratories use an oxycodone immunoassay that
detects oxycodone and oxymorphone; however, these agents might need to be ordered
or identified separately in a toxicology testing panel. In some cases, positive results for
specific opioids might reflect metabolites from opioids the patient is taking and might
not mean the patient is taking the specific opioid for which the test was positive. For
example,  hydromorphone  is  a  metabolite  of  hydrocodone,  and  oxymorphone  is  a
metabolite of oxycodone. Detailed considerations for interpretation of urine toxicology
test results, including which tests to order and expected results, drug detection time in
urine, and drug metabolism, have been published previously (308). A review including
interpretation  of  oral  fluid  sample  toxicology  test  results  is  also  available  (304).
Restricting  confirmatory  testing  to  situations  and  substances  for  which  results  can
reasonably be expected to affect patient management can reduce costs of toxicology
testing. Clinicians might want to discuss unexpected results with the local laboratory or
toxicologist  and  should  discuss  unexpected  results  with  the  patient.  Discussion  with

patients before specific confirmatory testing can sometimes yield a candid explanation
of  why  a  particular  substance  is  present  or  absent  and  obviate  the  need  for
confirmatory testing on that visit. For example, a patient might explain that the test is
negative  for  prescribed  opioids  because  they  felt  opioids  were  no  longer  helping  and
discontinued them. If unexpected results are not explained, a confirmatory test using a
method selective enough to differentiate specific opioids and metabolites (e.g., gas or
liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry) might be warranted to clarify the situation.
Clinicians should use unexpected results to improve patient safety (e.g., change pain
management  strategy  [see  Recommendation  2],  carefully  weigh  benefits  and  risks  of
reducing  or  continuing  opioid  dosage  [see  Recommendation  5],  reevaluate  more
frequently [see Recommendation 7], offer naloxone [see Recommendation 8], and offer
or refer patients for substance use disorder treatment [see Recommendation 12], all as
appropriate).  If  tests  for  prescribed  opioids  are  repeatedly  negative,  including
confirmatory  tests,  and  the  clinician  has  verified  that  the  patient  is  not  taking  the
prescribed  opioid,  clinicians  can  discontinue  the  prescription  without  a  taper  and
discuss options for safe disposal of unused opioids (154). Clinicians should not dismiss
patients from care on the basis of a toxicology test result. Dismissal could have adverse
consequences for patient safety, potentially including the patient obtaining opioids from
alternative sources and the clinician missing opportunities to facilitate treatment for a
substance use disorder. Clinicians should use particular caution when prescribing opioid
pain  medication  and  benzodiazepines  concurrently  and  consider  whether  benefits
outweigh  risks  of  concurrent  prescribing  of  opioids  and  other  central  nervous  system
depressants  (recommendation  category:  B;  evidence  type:  3).  Benzodiazepines  and
opioids  both  cause  central  nervous  system  depression,  and  benzodiazepines  can
potentiate  opioid-induced  decreases  in  respiratory  drive.  Epidemiologic  studies  find
concurrent benzodiazepine use in large proportions of opioid-related overdose deaths
(203,309,310). The clinical evidence reviews identified three cohort studies that found

an association between concurrent use of benzodiazepines and opioids versus opioids
alone  and  increased  risk  for  overdose  (7).  A  case-cohort  study  found  concurrent
benzodiazepine  prescription  with  opioid  prescription  to  be  associated  with  a
near-quadrupling  of  risk  for  overdose  death  compared  with  opioid  prescription  alone
(311). The clinical evidence reviews did not find studies evaluating the effectiveness of
avoiding  coprescribing  of  benzodiazepines  and  opioids  on  risk  for  overdose  (7).  The
clinical  evidence  reviews  identified  three  observational  studies  that  found  an
association between concurrent use of gabapentinoids and opioids versus opioids alone
and increased risk for overdose, with higher risks at increased gabapentinoid doses (7).
Experts from OWG noted that rather than necessarily being a direct cause of overdose,
benzodiazepines  might  serve  as  a  marker  of  risk  for  overdose  because  of  underlying
conditions, in specific situations benzodiazepines can be beneficial, and that stopping
benzodiazepines can be destabilizing. In addition, experts noted that long-term, stable
use  might  be  safer  than  erratic,  unpredictable  use.  Because  of  these  considerations,
multiple  experts  indicated  that  recommending  extreme  caution  with  concurrent
prescription of opioid pain medications and benzodiazepines was more appropriate than
a  recommendation  to  avoid  prescribing  opioid  pain  medication  and  benzodiazepines
concurrently and that category B would be more appropriate than category A for this
recommendation.  Although  in  certain  circumstances  it  might  be  appropriate  to
prescribe opioids to a patient receiving benzodiazepines (e.g., severe acute pain in a
patient taking long-term, stable low-dosage benzodiazepine therapy), clinicians should
use  particular  caution  when  prescribing  opioid  pain  medication  and  benzodiazepines
concurrently.  In  addition,  because  other  central  nervous  system  depressants  (e.g.,
muscle  relaxants,  nonbenzodiazepine  sedative  hypnotics,  and  potentially  sedating
anticonvulsant  medications  such  as  gabapentin  and  pregabalin)  (312)  can  potentiate
respiratory  depression  associated  with  opioids,  clinicians  should  consider  whether
benefits outweigh risks of concurrent use of these medications. Clinicians should check

PDMPs  for  concurrent  controlled  medications  prescribed  by  other  clinicians  (see
Recommendation  9)  and  should  consider  involving  pharmacists  as  part  of  the
management  team  when  opioids  are  coprescribed  with  other  central  nervous  system
depressants.  In  patients  receiving  opioids  and  benzodiazepines  long-term,  clinicians
should  carefully  weigh  the  benefits  and  risks  of  continuing  therapy  with  opioids  and
benzodiazepines  and  discuss  with  patients  and  other  members  of  the  patient’s  care
team,  as  appropriate.  In  specific  situations,  benzodiazepines  can  be  beneficial,  and
stopping  benzodiazepines  can  be  destabilizing.  As  emphasized  in  an  FDA  advisory
(313), buprenorphine or methadone for opioid use disorder should not be withheld from
patients taking benzodiazepines or other medications that depress the central nervous
system.  Whereas  the  combined  use  of  these  medications  increases  risks,  the  harm
caused  by  untreated  opioid  use  disorder  can  outweigh  these  risks.  If  risks  are
determined  to  outweigh  benefits  of  continuing  opioids  for  pain  and  benzodiazepine
therapy  at  current  dosages,  decisions  about  tapering  medications  (e.g.,  whether  to
taper opioids first, taper benzodiazepines first, or consider carefully transitioning from
full  agonist  opioids  to  buprenorphine  before  tapering  benzodiazepines)  should  be
individualized and reevaluated over time. Considerations include patient priorities, the
patient’s  clinical  considerations,  the  patient’s  response  to  therapeutic  changes,
consultation  with  other  clinicians  managing  the  patient’s  care,  and,  consultation  with
other  specialists  (e.g.,  an  addiction  specialist)  if  needed.  Clinicians  should  taper
benzodiazepines  gradually  before  discontinuation  because  abrupt  withdrawal  can  be
associated with rebound anxiety, hallucinations, seizures, delirium tremens, and, rarely,
death (222,223). Tapering rates should be individualized. Examples of benzodiazepine
tapers and tips for managing benzodiazepine withdrawal are available (314). Cognitive
behavioral therapy increases tapering success rates and might be particularly helpful
for patients struggling with a benzodiazepine taper (315). If benzodiazepines prescribed
for  anxiety  are  tapered  or  discontinued,  or  if  patients  receiving  opioids  require

treatment  for  anxiety,  evidence-based  psychotherapies  (e.g.,  cognitive  behavioral
therapy),  specific  antidepressants  or  other  nonbenzodiazepine  medications  approved
for  anxiety,  or  both,  should  be  offered.  Clinicians  should  communicate  with  mental
health  professionals  managing  the  patient  to  discuss  the  patient’s  needs,  prioritize
patient  goals,  weigh  risks  of  concurrent  benzodiazepine  and  opioid  exposure,  and
coordinate  care.  Clinicians  should  offer  or  arrange  treatment  with  evidence-based
medications to treat patients with opioid use disorder. Detoxification on its own, without
medications  for  opioid  use  disorder,  is  not  recommended  for  opioid  use  disorder
because  of  increased  risks  for  resuming  drug  use,  overdose,  and  overdose  death
(recommendation category: A; evidence type: 1). Opioid use disorder (previously known
as opioid abuse or opioid dependence in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition [DSM-IV]) (316) is defined in DSM-5 as a problematic pattern
of  opioid  use  leading  to  clinically  significant  impairment  or  distress  (317).  Treatment
with  opioids  for  pain  is  associated  with  increased  risk  for  opioid  use  disorder,
particularly if opioids are prescribed for >90 days (54). A systematic review found the
rate of opioid addiction among patients with chronic pain averaged 8%–12% in studies
published  during  2000–2013  (318).  More  recent  studies  have  found  prevalence
estimates of 23.9%–26.5% for any prescription opioid use disorder and 5.2%–9.0% for
moderate to severe opioid use disorder (using DSM-5 diagnostic criteria) among adults
receiving long-term opioid therapy for pain, with slightly lower prevalence (21.5% for
any  and  4.2%  for  moderate  to  severe  opioid  use  disorder)  in  clinics  with  more
consistent use of risk reduction practices (319,320). Opioid use disorder is manifested
by at least two of 11 defined criteria occurring within a year (317): Criteria 10 and 11
are not considered to be met for those persons taking opioids solely under appropriate
medical  supervision  (317).  Severity  is  specified  as  mild  (2–3  criteria),  moderate  (4–5
criteria),  or  severe  (≥6  criteria)  (317).  FDA-approved  medications  indicated  for  the
treatment  of  opioid  use  disorder  include  buprenorphine  (a  partial  agonist  opioid),

methadone (a full agonist opioid), and naltrexone (an opioid antagonist). Experts from
OWG  stated  that  partial  agonist  opioid,  full  agonist  opioid,  and  opioid  antagonist
treatment  should  not  be  framed  as  equal  options  for  opioid  use  disorder,  noting  that
partial and full agonist opioid treatments have stronger evidence for better outcomes,
do  not  require  abstinence,  have  less  challenges  with  initiation,  and  are  much  more
widely used than opioid antagonist treatment. Clinical evidence reviews found evidence
on the effectiveness of interventions (e.g., medications and behavioral treatments) for
opioid  use  disorder  related  to  prescription  opioids  to  be  limited  (7).  However,
moderate-quality  evidence  indicated  buprenorphine  (a  partial  agonist  opioid)  and
methadone  (a  full  agonist  opioid)  to  be  effective  in  preventing  return  to  drug  use
among  patients  with  opioid  use  disorder  involving  heroin  (321–323),  although  the
presence of pain among patients in these studies is generally not described. In addition,
a small number of studies have evaluated buprenorphine for patients with prescription
opioid  dependence  (using  DSM-IV  criteria)  (316)  and  found  it  to  be  effective  in
preventing  return  to  drug  use  (324,325).  One  study  found  that  among  persons  with
opioid  use  disorder,  previous  prescription  opioid  use  predicts  stabilization  on
buprenorphine  (326).  Another  trial  that  performed  buprenorphine  initiation  and  then
randomized patients to buprenorphine taper versus maintenance was terminated early
without  reporting  of  planned  outcomes  because  all  patients  randomized  to  the  taper
arm switched to maintenance or experienced a return to drug use; five of six patients in
the maintenance arm completed the trial (327). In another trial identified by the clinical
evidence  reviews,  no  difference  was  found  between  buprenorphine/naloxone  and
methadone in likelihood of retention in the study and in pain, function, or self-reported
side effects (328). Buprenorphine and methadone treatment of opioid use disorder has
been  associated  with  reduced  overdose  deaths  (329)  and  reduced  all-cause  deaths
(330).  Naltrexone  (an  opioid  antagonist)  also  can  be  used  for  opioid  use  disorder,
particularly  for  highly  motivated  persons  (331,332).  Naltrexone  blocks  the  effects  of

opioids  if  they  are  used.  Naltrexone  has  not  been  evaluated  in  persons  with
concomitant  pain  and  opioid  use  disorder,  and  opioid  medications  for  pain  generally
cannot  be  used  in  patients  receiving  naltrexone.  Naltrexone  requires  adherence  to
monthly, long-acting injections. The effectiveness of oral naltrexone can be limited by
poor medication adherence (332), and oral naltrexone should not be used except under
very  limited  circumstances  (96)  (e.g.,  for  patients  who  would  be  able  to  comply  with
observed daily dosing to enhance adherence) (96,317). Naltrexone also must be started
after full withdrawal from opioids, which is a challenge for some patients; however, for
patients  who  have  completed  or  are  able  to  complete  withdrawal,  naltrexone  has
comparable effectiveness as buprenorphine in prevention of return to drug use (333).
Certain  studies  suggest  that  using  behavioral  therapies  in  combination  with
medications  for  opioid  use  disorder  can  reduce  opioid  misuse  and  increase  retention
during  treatment  (334,335).  At  the  same  time,  a  study  of  treatment  for  prescription
opioid  dependence  (using  DSM-IV  criteria)  (316)  found  buprenorphine  treatment
combined
 with
 standard
 medical
 management
 (including
 basic
 counseling
recommending  abstinence  and  self-help  group  participation)  as  effective  as
buprenorphine  combined  with  more  intensive  opioid  dependence  counseling  (i.e.,
addiction, recovery, and prevention of return to drug use education with self-help and
lifestyle  change  recommendations,  interactive  exercises,  and  take-home  assignments
delivered by trained substance use treatment or mental health professionals in 45–60
minute  sessions  using  drug  counseling  manuals  with  demonstrated  efficacy);  neither
standard  medical  management  nor  opioid  dependence  counseling  alone,  without
buprenorphine, was effective in preventing return to drug use (325). Recommendations
for treatment of opioid use disorder include assessing the patient’s psychosocial needs
and  offering  or  referring  the  patient  to  psychosocial  treatment  in  collaboration  with
qualified behavioral health care providers based on those needs; however, a patient’s
decision  to  decline  psychosocial  treatment  or  the  absence  of  available  psychosocial

treatment  should  not  preclude  or  delay  medications  for  opioid  use  disorder  (96).
Additional recommendations have been published on goals, components of, and types
of effective psychosocial treatment to use in conjunction with pharmacologic treatment
of  opioid  use  disorder  (96).  If  clinicians  suspect  opioid  use  disorder  on  the  basis  of
patient concerns or behaviors or on findings in PDMP data (see Recommendation 9) or
from  toxicology  testing  (see  Recommendation  10),  they  should  discuss  their  concern
with  their  patient  and  provide  an  opportunity  for  the  patient  to  disclose  related
concerns or problems. Clinicians should assess for the presence of opioid use disorder
using  DSM-5  criteria  (317).  Opioid  use  disorder  can  coexist  with  other  substance  use
disorders,  and  patients  who  are  actively  using  substances  during  opioid  use  disorder
treatment  might  require  greater  support,  potentially  including  involvement  of  an
addiction  specialist  (96).  Clinicians  should  ask  about  use  of  alcohol  and  other
substances  (see  Recommendation  8).  Alternatively,  clinicians  can  arrange  for  a
substance  use  disorder  treatment  specialist  to  assess  for  the  presence  of  opioid  and
other  substance  use  disorders.  For  patients  meeting  criteria  for  opioid  use  disorder,
particularly  if  moderate  or  severe,  clinicians  should  offer  or  arrange  for  patients  to
receive  evidence-based  treatment  with  medications  for  opioid  use  disorder.  Patients
with  opioid  use  disorder  might  benefit  from  counseling  and  referrals  to  mutual  help
groups such as Narcotics Anonymous (336), although this should not take the place of
treatment with medication. Clinicians also should offer naloxone and training on proper
use for overdose reversal to patients with opioid use disorder and to their household
members  and  significant  others  (96)  (see  Recommendation  8).  Clinicians  should  not
dismiss  patients  from  their  practice  because  of  opioid  use  disorder  because  this  can
adversely  affect  patient  safety.  Identification  of  opioid  use  disorder  represents  an
opportunity  for  a  clinician  to  initiate  potentially  life-saving  interventions,  and  it  is
important  for  the  clinician  to  collaborate  with  the  patient  regarding  their  safety  to
increase  the  likelihood  of  successful  treatment.  Detoxification  on  its  own,  without

medications  for  opioid  use  disorder,  is  not  recommended  for  opioid  use  disorder
because of increased risks for return to drug use, overdose, and overdose death (96).
For  pregnant  persons  with  opioid  use  disorder,  medications  for  opioid  use  disorder
(buprenorphine or methadone) have been associated with improved maternal outcomes
and should be offered as early as possible in pregnancy to prevent harms to both the
patient  and  the  fetus  (see  Recommendation  8)  (133,220).  Previous  recommendations
have  suggested  that  transmucosal  buprenorphine  (without  naloxone)  is  preferred
during  pregnancy  to  avoid  potential  prenatal  exposure  to  naloxone,  especially  if
injected, and evidence on the safety of naloxone in pregnant persons remains limited
(96,274). However, combination buprenorphine/naloxone products are frequently used,
a  systematic  review  did  not  find  reports  of  serious  maternal  or  neonatal  outcomes
associated  with  maternal  buprenorphine/naloxone  use  (337),  and  experts  have  noted
that combination products are likely to be safe and effective for pregnant persons when
taken  as  prescribed  (96,274).  ACOG  also  recommends  that  if  a  person  is  stable  on
naltrexone  before  pregnancy,  the  decision  regarding  whether  to  continue  naltrexone
treatment during pregnancy should involve a careful discussion between the clinician
and the patient, weighing the limited safety data on naltrexone with the potential risk
for  return  to  drug  use  with  discontinuation  of  treatment  (274).  For  persons  receiving
buprenorphine  or  methadone  for  opioid  use  disorder  and  considering  breastfeeding,
AAP recommends breastfeeding be supported if there has been no return to drug use
for ≥90 days and there are no other contraindications, considered if there has been no
return to drug use within 30–90 days, and discouraged if there is active substance use
or has been a return to drug use within the last 30 days (280). In April 2021, to expand
access
 to
 buprenorphine,
 the
 Practice
 Guidelines
 for
 the
 Administration
 of
Buprenorphine  for  Treating  Opioid  Use  Disorder  (338)  exempted  eligible  physicians,
physician  assistants,  nurse  practitioners,  clinical  nurse  specialists,  certified  registered
nurse anesthetists, and certified nurse midwives from previous Controlled Substances

Act  certification  requirements  related  to  training,  counseling  and  other  ancillary
services (i.e., psychosocial services). To prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder
for  up  to  30  patients  in  an  office-based  setting,  clinicians  can  forgo  or  choose  to
undertake  training  but  must  still  receive  a  waiver  from  SAMHSA.  Information  about
qualifications  and  the  process  to  obtain  a  waiver  are  available  from  SAMHSA  (339).
Additional recommendations have been published on initiation, use, and monitoring of
buprenorphine treatment for opioid use disorder (96,336). Buprenorphine for treatment
of opioid use disorder is usually combined with naloxone in a sublingual or buccal film
or  tablet  (e.g.,  Suboxone),  to  reduce  the  potential  for  misuse  of  buprenorphine  when
injected.  Naloxone  is  poorly  absorbed  orally;  however,  if  buprenorphine/naloxone  is
manipulated  and  injected,  naloxone  can  trigger  opioid  withdrawal  (340).  In  2018,
long-acting  injectable  formulations  of  buprenorphine  became  available  (341).  As  a
partial agonist, buprenorphine should generally not be initiated until there are objective
signs of withdrawal, to avoid precipitating withdrawal. As an alternative for patients not
yet in opioid withdrawal, certain studies have described a low-dose initiation approach
(sometimes  referred  to  as  microdosing)  (342,343)  to  avoid  precipitating  withdrawal
when  initiating  buprenorphine,  although  evidence  regarding  this  approach  is  limited.
Low-dose  buprenorphine  initiation  is  a  potential  option  for  patients  with  opioid  use
disorder  who  are  taking  opioid  medications  for  pain.  With  this  dosing  strategy,  full
agonist opioids can be continued while buprenorphine is initiated, and the patient does
not  need  to  experience  opioid  withdrawal  symptoms.  For  standard  (not  low-dose)
buprenorphine
 initiation,
 after
 objective
 signs
 of
 withdrawal
 are
 observed,
buprenorphine  should  be  initiated  (96)  and  titrated  upward  under  supervision  at
approximately  2-hour  intervals  as  needed  to  control  withdrawal  symptoms.  Protocols
for  initiating  buprenorphine  by  patients  at  home  after  an  initial  encounter  with  a
clinician  to  establish  the  diagnosis  of  opioid  use  disorder  and  discuss  medication
options  are  in  use  by  more  experienced  clinicians  (344).  Importantly,  opioid  dosage

thresholds  for  caution  in  the  treatment  of  pain  are  not  applicable  to  opioid  agonist
treatment of opioid use disorder (345) because recommended dosages of methadone
and buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (96) differ from those for pain management.
No  recommended  duration  limit  exists  for  treatment  of  opioid  use  disorder  with
buprenorphine or methadone, and discontinuation is associated with risks for return to
drug  use  and  opioid  overdose  (96).  If  discontinued,  buprenorphine  should  be  tapered
very gradually (over several months) (96). Compared with buprenorphine, which can be
prescribed  by  clinicians  with  a  waiver  in  any  setting  or  dispensed  from  a
SAMHSA-certified  opioid  treatment  program,  ongoing  methadone treatment  for  opioid
use disorder can only be provided through an opioid treatment program. As short-term
exceptions,  any  clinician  may  administer  (but  not  prescribe)  methadone  or
buprenorphine to treat acute opioid withdrawal for up to 3 days, while working to refer
the  patient  to  opioid  use  disorder  treatment  (346).  Previously,  up  to  a  1-day  supply
could be administered per day for up to 3 days; in December 2020, Congress directed
the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to revise regulations to allow for a 3-day
supply  of  medication  to  be  dispensed  at  one  time  (347);  DEA  subsequently  advised
practitioners  how  to  request  exceptions  to  the  1-day  supply  limitation  pending
amendment of 21 CFR 1306.07(b) (348). Patients already receiving treatment for opioid
use disorder and admitted for other medical reasons may continue to directly receive
methadone or buprenorphine treatment in an emergency department or in a hospital
throughout  inpatient  hospitalization  (336,346,349).  Naltrexone  does  not  require  a
waiver  and  can  be  prescribed  in  any  setting.  Additional  recommendations  have  been
published previously on naltrexone treatment for opioid use disorder (96). A minimum
of 7–10 days free of opioids is recommended before the first naltrexone dose to avoid
precipitation of severe opioid withdrawal (350). Extended-release injectable naltrexone
is typically administered every 4 weeks by deep intramuscular injection in the gluteal
muscle at 380 mg per injection (96), alternating buttocks for each subsequent injection

(350). Certain patients, including those who metabolize naltrexone more rapidly, might
benefit from dosing as frequently as every 3 weeks (96). Oral naltrexone is no longer
recommended and should not be used except under very limited circumstances (96).
No  recommended  duration  limit  exists  for  treatment  of  opioid  use  disorder  with
naltrexone.  If  discontinued,  naltrexone  can  be  stopped  abruptly  without  precipitating
withdrawal symptoms (96). Clinicians should warn patients who discontinue naltrexone
of the risk for potentially fatal opioid overdose if opioid use is resumed (96), because of
the loss of tolerance to the previous opioid dosage. Clinicians are strongly encouraged
to  provide  medication  treatment  for  their  patients  with  opioid  use  disorder.  Those
unable  to  provide  treatment  themselves  should  arrange  for  patients  with  opioid  use
disorder  to  receive  care  from  a  colleague  who  is  able  to  provide  treatment,  from  a
substance  use  disorder  treatment  specialist  (e.g.,  an  office-based  buprenorphine  or
naltrexone  treatment  clinician),  or  from  an  opioid  treatment  program  certified  by
SAMHSA to provide methadone or buprenorphine for patients with opioid use disorder.
Resources  to  help  clinicians  arrange  for  treatment  include  SAMHSA’s  buprenorphine
physician
 locator
(https://www.samhsa.gov/medication-assisted-treatment/find-treatment/treatment-prac
titioner-locator)
 and
 SAMHSA’s
 Opioid
 Treatment
 Program
 Directory
(https://dpt2.samhsa.gov/treatment/directory.aspx). Clinicians should assist patients in
finding  qualified  treatment  specialists,  should  arrange  for  patients  to  follow  up  with
these specialists, and should coordinate continuing care with these specialists. Rapidly
identifying  appropriate  care  can  be  challenging.  Treatment  need  in  a  community  is
often  not  met  by  capacity  to  provide  buprenorphine  or  methadone  therapy  (351).
Clinicians prescribing opioids in communities without sufficient treatment capacity for
opioid  use  disorder  should  obtain  a  waiver  to  prescribe  buprenorphine.  SAMHSA’s
Providers  Clinical  Support  System  (https://pcssnow.org/)  offers  training,  technical
assistance,  and  mentors  to  assist  clinicians  in  assessment  for  and  treatment  of

substance use disorders, specifically opioid use disorder, and on the interface of pain
and opioid misuse. Clinicians prescribing opioids should identify treatment resources for
substance  use  disorders  including  opioid  use  disorders  in  the  community,  establish  a
network  of  referral  options  that  span  the  levels  of  care  that  patients  might  need  to
enable  rapid  collaboration  and  referral,  when  needed,  and  work  together  to  ensure
sufficient  treatment  capacity  at  the  practice  level.  Clinicians  can  have  challenges
distinguishing between opioid misuse behaviors without opioid use disorder and mild or
moderate opioid use disorder (352). For patients with opioid misuse that does not meet
criteria  for  opioid  use  disorder  (e.g.,  taking  opioids  in  larger  amounts  than  intended
without  meeting  other  criteria  for  opioid  use  disorder),  clinicians  should  reassess  the
patient’s pain, ensure that therapies for pain management have been optimized (see
Recommendation  2),  discuss  with  patients,  and  carefully  weigh  benefits  and  risks  of
continuing  opioids  at  the  current  dosage  (see  Recommendation  5).  For  patients  who
choose to but are unable to taper, clinicians can reassess for opioid use disorder and
offer  buprenorphine  treatment  or  refer  for  buprenorphine  or  methadone  treatment  if
criteria for opioid use disorder are met. Even without a diagnosis of opioid use disorder,
transitioning to buprenorphine for pain also can be considered because of reduced risk
for overdose with buprenorphine compared with risk associated with full agonist opioids
(see Recommendation 5). Although identification of an opioid use disorder can alter the
expected benefits and risks of opioid therapy for pain, patients with co-occurring pain
and substance use disorder require ongoing pain management that maximizes benefits
relative to risks. Clinicians should use nonpharmacologic and nonopioid pharmacologic
pain treatments as appropriate (96) (see Recommendations 1 and 2) to provide optimal
pain management. For patients with pain who have an active opioid use disorder but
are not in treatment, clinicians should consider buprenorphine or methadone treatment
for opioid use disorder, which also can help with concurrent management of pain (96).
For patients who are treated with buprenorphine for opioid use disorder and experience

acute  pain,  clinicians  can  consider  temporarily  increasing  the  buprenorphine  dosing
frequency  (e.g.,  to  twice  per  day)  (96)  to  help  manage  pain  because  the  duration  of
effects of buprenorphine is shorter for pain than for suppression of withdrawal (242).
For  severe  acute  pain  (e.g.,  from  trauma  or  unplanned  major  surgery)  in  patients
receiving  buprenorphine  for  opioid  use  disorder,  clinicians  can  consider  additional
as-needed  doses  of  buprenorphine.  In  supervised  settings,  adding  a  short-acting  full
agonist  opioid  to  the  patient’s  regular  dosage  of  buprenorphine  can  be  considered
without  discontinuing  the  patient’s  regular  buprenorphine  dosage;  however,  if  a
decision  is  made  to  discontinue  buprenorphine  to  allow  for  more  µ-opioid  receptor
availability, patients should be monitored closely because high doses of a full agonist
opioid might be required, potentially leading to oversedation and respiratory depression
as buprenorphine’s partial agonist effect lessens (96). For patients receiving naltrexone
for  opioid  use  disorder,  short-term  use  of  higher-potency  nonopioid  analgesics  (e.g.,
NSAIDs)  can  be  considered  to  manage  severe  acute  pain  (96).  Patients  receiving
methadone  for  opioid  use  disorder  who  require  additional  opioids  as  treatment  for
severe  acute  pain  management  should  be  monitored  carefully,  and  when  feasible,
should  optimally  be  treated  by  a  clinician  experienced  in  the  treatment  of  pain  in
consultation  with  their  opioid  treatment  program  (96).  The  ASAM  National  Practice
Guideline  for  the  Treatment  of  Opioid  Use  Disorder  (2020  Focused  Update)  provides
additional recommendations (see Part 9) (96) for the management of patients receiving
medications  for  opioid  use  disorder  who  have  planned  surgeries  for  which  nonopioid
therapies  are  not  anticipated  to  provide  sufficient  pain  relief.  Top  CDC  indicated  the
intent  to  evaluate  and  reassess  the  2016  CDC  Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline  as  new
evidence became available and determine when sufficient new evidence would prompt
an  update  (56).  CDC  funded  AHRQ  to  conduct  systematic  reviews  of  the  scientific
evidence.  The  following  five  areas  were  assessed:  1)  noninvasive  nonpharmacologic
treatments for chronic pain, 2) nonopioid pharmacologic treatments for chronic pain, 3)

opioid  treatments  for  chronic  pain,  4)  treatments  for  acute  pain,  and  5)  acute
treatments for episodic migraine (7–11). An update to the 2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing
Guideline  was  warranted  on  the  basis  of  these  reviews.  The  new  evidence  reviews
conducted by AHRQ’s Evidence-based Practice Centers affirmed the appropriateness of
the recommendations in the 2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline for using opioids to
treat chronic pain. The reviews also prompted CDC to modify the recommendations to
include acute and subacute pain more explicitly. This updated clinical practice guideline
also  includes  a  new  topline  recommendation  for  patients  who  are  already  receiving
ongoing opioid therapy for pain. Specifically, the clinical practice guideline outlines how
clinicians  and  patients  should  work  together  in  assessing  the  benefits  and  risks  of
continued opioid use and if or when to taper opioids to a lower dosage or discontinue
opioids  altogether  in  accordance  with  the  HHS  Tapering  Guide  (219,353).  Four  key
areas  are  covered  in  this  clinical  practice  guideline  for  prescribing  of  opioid  pain
medication for patients aged ≥18 years for pain, excluding pain management related to
sickle cell disease, cancer-related pain treatment, palliative care, and end-of-life care.
These areas are 1) determining whether or not to initiate opioids for pain; 2) selecting
opioids  and  determining  opioid  dosages;  3)  deciding  duration  of  initial  opioid
prescription  and  conducting  follow-up;  and  4)  assessing  risk  and  addressing  potential
harms  of  opioid  use.  In  addition,  five  guiding  principles  were  identified  to  inform
implementation  across  recommendations.  These  guiding  principles  focus  on  1)  the
appropriate  treatment  of  pain;  2)  flexibility  to  meet  the  care  needs  and  clinical
circumstances of each patient; 3) a multimodal and multidisciplinary approach to pain
management;  4)  avoiding  misapplication  of  the  clinical  practice  guideline  beyond  its
intended use; and 5) vigilance in attending to health inequities and ensuring access to
appropriate,  affordable,  diversified,  coordinated,  and  effective  nonpharmacologic  and
pharmacologic  pain  treatment  for  all  persons.  A  central  tenet  of  this  clinical  practice
guideline  is  that  acute,  subacute,  and  chronic  pain  needs  to  be  appropriately  and

effectively  treated  regardless  of  whether  opioids  are  part  of  a  treatment  regimen.
Clinicians  should  select  nonpharmacologic  or  pharmacologic  treatment  modalities,  or
both, that maximize patient safety and optimize outcomes in pain, function, and quality
of life. A multimodal and multidisciplinary approach to pain management that considers
the biologic, psychological, and social characteristics of each person is critical (6). The
care  provided  needs  to  be  individualized  and  person  centered  (6).  Clinicians  and
patients  should  work  together  to  identify  treatment  goals,  including  functional  goals,
and tailor an approach that considers both the benefits and risks of available options
(6).  Progress  should  be  monitored  over  time  and  treatment  protocols  adjusted
accordingly.  Health  systems  and  payers  can  work  to  ensure  multimodal  treatment
options are available, accessible, and reimbursed for patients. Public and private payers
can  support  a  broader  array  of  nonpharmacologic  interventions  such  as  exercise,
multidisciplinary  rehabilitation,  mind-body  interventions,  cognitive  behavioral  therapy,
and certain complementary and integrative medicine therapies (e.g., acupuncture and
spinal  manipulation)  that  increasingly  are  known  to  be  effective  (9).  Reimbursement
often is cited as a principle barrier to why these nonpharmacologic treatments are not
more  widely  used  (9).  An  integral  part  of  providing  access  to  and  delivery  of
high-quality  health  care,  including  pain  treatment,  is  understanding  how  the  social
determinants of health influence the health care provided and the differential outcomes
observed  (354).  Social,  economic,  educational,  and  neighborhood-level  factors  might
create  and  exacerbate  health  inequities  that  certain  persons  experience  throughout
their  lives  (354).  These  social  determinants  of  health  are  borne  out  of  historical  and
contemporary  injustices  that  advantage  some  and  disadvantage  others  in  society,
leading  to  the  systemic  marginalization  or  oppression  of  some  groups  (355).  These
inequities affect persons from some racial and ethnic groups, women, persons living in
rural areas, persons experiencing homelessness, persons with disabilities, persons with
substance  use  disorders,  justice-involved  populations,  persons  with  diverse  sexual

orientation,  identity,  or  gender,  and  non-U.S.  born  persons,  among  others  (356).
Outcomes  such  as  function  and  quality  of  life  also  are  influenced  by  the  health  care
context  (354).  Differential  access  to  and  coverage  for  high-quality,  culturally  and
linguistically  appropriate,  health-literate  care  might  influence  attitudes  toward  health
care  and  use  of  available  services  (354).  Prejudice,  bias,  discrimination,  and
stereotyping  by  clinicians,  practices,  health  systems,  and  payers  serve  to  reinforce
these health disparities (355). Clinicians, practices, health systems, and payers should
attend to health inequities to protect patient safety; guard against unnecessary risks;
and  ensure  access  to  appropriate,  diversified,  effective  nonpharmacologic  and
pharmacologic  pain  management  options  that  are  person  centered,  affordable,
accessible,
 and
 well
 coordinated.
 This
 begins
 with
 raising
 awareness
 and
acknowledging  the  presence  of  these  inequities,  strengthening  patient-clinician
communication, leveraging community health workers, implementing multidisciplinary
care  teams,  tracking  and  monitoring  performance  measures,  and  integrating  quality
improvement  initiatives  that  support  and  invest  in  guideline-concordant  care  for  all
persons  (355).  To  avoid  unintended  consequences  for  patients,  this  clinical  practice
guideline should not be misapplied, or policies derived from it, beyond its intended use
(67).  Examples  of  misapplication  or  inappropriate  policies  include  being  inflexible  on
opioid  dosage  and  duration,  discontinuing  or  dismissing  patients  from  a  practice,
rapidly  and  noncollaboratively  tapering  patients  who  might  be  stable  on  a  higher
dosage,  and  applying  recommendations  to  populations  that  are  not  a  focus  of  the
clinical  practice  guideline  (e.g.,  patients  with  cancer-related  pain,  patients  with  sickle
cell  disease,  or  patients  during  end-of-life  care)  (67).  This  clinical  practice  guideline
provides overarching voluntary recommendations on the use of opioids to manage pain.
To assist in the uptake and understanding of this new clinical practice guideline, CDC
will provide tools and resources for clinicians, health systems, patients, and others on
the use of opioid and nonopioid pain treatments. The uptake and widespread use of the

2016 CDC Opioid Prescribing Guideline hinged on its successful dissemination, and CDC
supported its translation and integration in clinical practice. CDC produced a checklist
and  mobile  app  so  clinicians  could  more  readily  apply  guideline  recommendations;
developed  fact  sheets,  posters,  and  public  service  announcements  to  make  the
guideline more accessible and understandable to clinicians and patients; and developed
a  14-module  interactive,  web-based  training  with  self-paced  learning,  case-based
content, knowledge checks, and integrated resources for clinicians (57). Updated and
new  resources  and  tools  will  align  with  this  new  clinical  practice  guideline  and  will
support health equity. CDC will work with public and private payers by sharing evidence
that can be used to inform decisions about coverage for nonpharmacologic treatments,
access to nonopioid pain medication, support for patient counseling and coordination of
care,  access  to  evidence-based  treatments  of  opioid  use  disorder,  and  availability  of
multidisciplinary  and  multimodal  care.  Robust  coverage  and  access  (e.g.,  limited
utilization management and cost sharing for evidence-based treatments) and decision
support  (e.g.,  adjustment  of  EHR  prescribing  defaults)  can  be  used  to  facilitate  and
encourage  evidence-based  treatments  as  default  treatments  for  pain  (357,358).  This
clinical practice guideline updates and expands the recommendations in the 2016 CDC
Opioid  Prescribing  Guideline  using  the  best  available  evidence  as  interpreted  and
informed by expert opinion and attending to the values and preferences expressed by
patients, caregivers, and clinicians. Although the strength of the evidence is sometimes
low quality and research gaps remain (Box 5), clinical scientific evidence continues to
advance  and  supports  the  recommendations  in  this  clinical  practice  guideline
(6–11,359).  The  principal  aim  of  this  clinical  practice  guideline  is  to  ensure  persons
have  equitable  access  to  safe  and  effective  pain  management  that  improves  their
function  and  quality  of  life  while  illuminating  and  reducing  risks  associated  with
prescription  opioids.  CDC  will  evaluate  this  clinical  practice  guideline  to  identify  the
effects  of  the  recommendations  on  clinician  and  patient  outcomes  and  on  health

disparities, including intended and unintended consequences. Communication between
clinicians  and  patients  about  the  benefits  and  risks  of  opioids  should  be  central  to
treatment decisions for patients in pain. This clinical practice guideline can help inform
those decisions and assist clinicians in meeting the unique needs of each person. CDC
will  revisit  this  clinical  practice  guideline  when  remaining  evidence  gaps  have
sufficiently  been  addressed  and  another  update  is  warranted.  Top  The  Board  of
Scientific Counselors of the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control; the Board
of Scientific Counselors of the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control Opioid
Workgroup;  peer  reviewers;  members  of  the  public  who  provided  comments  during
meetings;  members  of  the  public  who  provided  comments  through  Federal  Register
opportunities;  patients,  caregivers,  and  clinicians  who  participated  in  telephone  or
video conversations; and participants of the codesign workshops. Guidehouse: Marissa
R.  Kessler;  Cara  M.  Klansek,  MPH;  Laura  Riley,  MPH;  Bintu  Fofana,  MPH;  Truc  Pham,
MPH;  Chamnan  Po,  MS;  Shelby  Scott,  PhD;  Gillian  Shulman,  MPH;  and  Rachel  Travis,
MBA. The Lab at the U.S. Office of Personnel Management: Benjamin P. Winter, Sarah E.
Hughes,  Jennifer  Gardner,  and  Katherine  Fisher;  federal  partners;  CDC  Office  of  the
Director:  Rochelle  P.  Walensky,  MD;  Anne  Schuchat,  MD  (Retired);  Debra  Houry,  MD;
and Celeste Philip, MD. CDC National Center for Injury Prevention and Control: Amy B.
Peeples,  MPA;  Arlene  I.  Greenspan,  DrPH;  Gwendolyn  H.  Cattledge,  PhD  (Retired);
Elizabeth J. Solhtalab, MPA; Kelly Holton; S. Kinzie Lee, MPH; Erica Reott, MPH; C. Leah
Chan,  MPH;  Valerie  Godoshian,  MPH;  Tonia  Lindley;  Victor  Cabada,  MPH;  Board  of
Scientific  Counselors  of  the  National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control  support
staff; Jan L. Losby, PhD, Division of Overdose Prevention; Melanie R. Ross, MPH, Division
of  Overdose  Prevention;  Christine  R.  Curtis,  MD,  Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;
Christina  A.  Mikosz,  MD,  Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;  Amy  Holmes-Chavez,  MPH,
Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;  Michelle  Putnam,  MPH,  Division  of  Overdose
Prevention;  Parul  Parikh,  JD,  Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;  JinYoung  Kim,  MPH,

Division  of  Overdose  Prevention,  LeShaundra  Cordier,  MPH,  Division  of  Overdose
Prevention;  Helen  Kingery,  MPH,  Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;  Loretta  Jackson
Brown,  PhD,  Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;  Robin  A.  Rinker,  MPH,  Division  of
Overdose Prevention; Takeydra Jones, MPH, Division of Overdose Prevention; Kristin M.
Holland,  PhD,  Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;  Erin  M.  Parker,  PhD,  Division  of
Overdose  Prevention;  Lara  DePadilla,  PhD,  Division  of  Overdose  Prevention;  Elizabeth
Hazelwood, MPH, Division of Overdose Prevention; and Terry W. Davis, EdD, Division of
Overdose Prevention. Chair: Chinazo O. Cunningham, MD. Workgroup Members: Anne L.
Burns;  Beth  Darnall,  PhD;  Frank  Floyd,  MD;  Christine  Goertz,  DC,  PhD;  Elizabeth
Habermann, PhD; Joseph Hsu, MD; Marjorie Meyer, MD; Paul Moore, DMD, PhD; Aimee
Moulin,  MD;  Kate  Nicholson,  JD;  Tae  Woo  Park,  MD;  Jeanmarie  Perrone,  MD;  Travis
Rieder,  PhD;  Roberto  Salinas,  MD;  Doreleena  Sammons-Hackett,  SM;  Wally  R.  Smith,
MD; Jennifer Waljee, MD; Mark Wallace, MD. Ex Officio Members: Wilson Compton, MD;
Neeraj  Gandotra,  MD;  Mallika  Mundkur,  MD;  Stephen  Rudd,  MD.  Designated  Federal
Officer:  Melanie  R.  Ross,  MPH.  Anika  Alvanzo,  MD,  Pyramid  Healthcare,  Inc.;  Michael
Englesbe,  MD,  University  of  Michigan;  Joseph  Frank,  MD,  University  of  Colorado
Hospital;  Ajay  D.  Wasan,  MD,  University  of  Pittsburgh  Medical  Center,  University  of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine. Co-Chairs: Amy Bonomi, PhD (04/20/2021–08/31/2024);
Chinazo
 O.
 Cunningham,
 MD
 (04/20/2021–12/01/2021);
 Victoria
 Frye,
 DrPH
(07/17/2019–02/28/2021); Daniel J. Whitaker, PhD (11/04/2019–02/28/2021). Members:
Donna
 H.
 Barnes,
 PhD
 (09/01/2018–02/28/2021);
 Amy
 Bonomi,
 PhD
(04/20/2021–08/31/2024); Roger Chou, MD (09/01/2019–08/31/2023); Phillip Coffin, MD
(01/03/2017–02/28/2021);  Kermit  A.  Crawford,  PhD  (01/31/2017–02/28/2021);  Chinazo
O.
 Cunningham,
 MD
 (09/01/2018–12/01/2021);
 Wendy
 Ellis,
 DrPH
(04/22/2021–08/31/2024); Frank Floyd, MD (09/01/2019–08/31/2022); Frank A. Franklin
II, PhD, JD (09/01/2018–08/31/2022); Victoria Frye, DrPH (01/27/2017–2/28/2021); Kevin
M.
 Guskiewicz,
 PhD
 (09/01/2018–01/14/2020);
 Elizabeth
 Habermann,
 PhD

(09/01/2019–08/31/2023);  James  H.  Hedlund,  PhD  (01/30/2017–02/28/2021);  Todd
Herrenkohl,
 PhD
 (09/01/2018–02/28/2021);
 Mark
 S.
 Kaplan,
 DrPH
(09/01/2018–08/31/2022);  Karen  D.  Liller,  PhD  (09/01/2018–08/31/2022);  Angela
Lumber-Brown,
 MD
 (04/22/2021–08/31/2022);
 Jeffrey
 P.
 Michael,
 EdD
(04/20/2021–08/31/2023); Elizabeth Miller, MD, PhD (04/20/2021–08/31/2024); Steven J.
Ondersma,
 PhD
 (04/21/2021–08/31/2024);
 Rosalie
 Liccardo
 Pacula,
 PhD
(04/20/2021–08/31/2023);  Christina  A.  Porucznik,  PhD  (09/01/2019–08/31/2023);  John
Armand
 Rich,
 MD
 (04/22/2021–08/31/2024);
 David
 C.
 Schwebel,
 PhD
(02/03/2017–02/28/2021);
 Lyle
 Ungar,
 PhD
 (04/22/2021–08/31/2024);
 Daniel
 J.
Whitaker,  PhD  (01/31/2017–02/28/2021).  Ex  Officio  Members:  Melissa  L.  Brodowski,
PhD; Dawn Castillo, MPH; Mindy J. D. Chai, PhD; Wilson Compton, MD; Jennifer Fan, PhD;
Meredith A. Fox, PhD; Holly Hedegaard, MD; John Howard, MD; Lyndon J. O. Joseph, PhD;
Valerie Maholmes, PhD; Bethany D. Miller, MEd; Constantinos Miskis, JD; Judy A. Staffa,
PhD; Kelly M. Taylor, MS. Top Corresponding author: Division of Overdose Prevention,
National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control,  CDC.  Email:  cdcinfo@cdc.gov.  Top
1Division  of  Overdose  Prevention,  National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control,
CDC;  2Office  of  the  Director,  National  Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control,  CDC;
3Pacific  Northwest  Evidence-based  Practice  Center  and  Oregon  Health  &  Science
University,  Portland,  Oregon  Top  All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the
International  Committee  of  Medical  Journal  Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential
conflicts  of  interest;  no  significant  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.The  National
Center  for  Injury  Prevention  and  Control  (NCIPC)  Associate  Director  for  Science
reviewed  peer  reviewers’  conflict  of  interest  disclosure  forms  and  determined  no
conflicts of interest were present.The Opioid Workgroup’s (OWG’s) Designated Federal
Officer  (DFO);  the  Board  of  Scientific  Counselors  of  NCIPC’s  (BSC/NCIPC’s)  DFO;  and
CDC’s  Strategic  Business  Initiatives  Unit  (SBIU),  which  oversees  the  Federal  Advisory
Committee Act program, reviewed OWG members’ conflict of interest disclosure forms

and  determined  all  reported  potential  financial  or  other  conflicts  of  interest  were  not
present or nonsignificant.OWG members disclosed the following activities related to the
content of this clinical practice guideline: Anne L. Burns disclosed that she is employed
by the American Pharmacists Association, a nonprofit 501c6 organization, where she is
involved in advancing pharmacists’ patient care services, including pain management
services, and she serves on the board of directors for the Pharmacy Quality Alliance, a
nonprofit  organization  that  develops  quality  measures,  including  opioid-related
measures. Beth Darnall disclosed that she consulted with AppliedVR, a virtual reality for
chronic  and  acute  pain  company.  Neeraj  Gandotra  disclosed  that  he  provided  expert
testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee on December 17, 2019, on behalf of
the  Substance  Abuse  and  Mental  Health  Services  Administration  (SAMHSA)  regarding
the opioid epidemic. Christine Goertz disclosed that she served as a consultant to the
American Chiropractic Association until September 30, 2019, and that she has received
National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH)  foundation  funding  to  conduct  research  on
nonpharmacologic approaches to pain management. Jennifer Waljee disclosed that she
received research support funding from CDC, NIH, the Michigan Department of Health
and  Human  Services,  and  SAMHSA  for  research  examining  the  effect  of  opioid  use
before  and  after  surgery  on  postoperative  outcomes.SBIU  reviewed  BSC/NCIPC
members’ Office of Government Ethics Form 450 and determined all reported potential
financial  or  other  conflicts  of  interest  were  not  present  or  nonsignificant.  Three
BSC/NCIPC members (Chinazo O. Cunningham, Frank Floyd, and Elizabeth Habermann)
served  on  OWG.  Roger  Chou  is  a  BSC/NCIPC  member  and  coauthor  of  the  clinical
practice guideline and AHRQ-sponsored systematic clinical evidence reviews. Dr. Chou
disclosed that he receives funding to conduct reviews on opioids and recused himself
from the July 16, 2021, BSC/NCIPC meeting and discussion of the OWG report on the
draft clinical practice guideline. Wilson Compton disclosed that he has long-term stock
holdings  in  General  Electric,  Pfizer,  and  3M  Companies.  Top  *  Financial  conflict  of

interest means a significant financial interest that could directly and significantly affect
the  design,  conduct,  or  reporting  of  Public  Health  Service-funded  research  (42  CFR
50.603).  Although  certain  members  reported  receiving  research  support  totaling  or
equivalent to more than $10,000, SBIU determined these activities did not constitute a
substantial  conflict  of  interest  pertaining  to  the  content  of  this  clinical  practice
guideline.  Top  Top  This  clinical  practice  guideline  updates  and  expands  the  CDC
Guideline  for  Prescribing  Opioids  for  Chronic  Pain  —  United  States,  2016  (MMWR
Recomm Rep 2016;65[No. RR-1]:1–49]) and provides evidence-based recommendations
for primary care and other clinicians (including physicians, nurse practitioners and other
advanced practice registered nurses, physician assistants, and oral health practitioners)
providing pain care, including those prescribing opioids, for outpatients aged ≥18 years
with  acute  (duration  of  <1  month)  pain,  subacute  (duration  of  1–3  months)  pain,  or
chronic  (duration  of  >3  months)  pain.  Recommendations  on  use  of  opioids  for  acute
pain  and  on  tapering  opioids  for  patients  already  receiving  opioid  therapy  have  been
substantially expanded in this update. These recommendations do not apply to patients
experiencing  pain  associated  with  the  following  conditions  or  settings:  pain
management  related  to  sickle  cell  disease,  cancer-related  pain  treatment,  palliative
care, and end-of-life care. Applicable outpatient settings include clinician offices, clinics,
and  urgent  care  centers.  The  recommendations  do  not  apply  to  providing  care  to
patients  who  are  hospitalized  or  in  an  emergency  department  or  other  observational
setting from which they might be admitted to inpatient care. These recommendations
do  apply  to  prescribing  for  pain  management  when  patients  are  discharged  from
hospitals,  emergency  departments,  or  other  facilities.  This  clinical  practice  guideline
addresses the following areas: CDC developed this clinical practice guideline using the
Grading  of  Recommendations  Assessment,  Development,  and  Evaluation  (GRADE)
framework,  and  recommendations  are  made  based  on  a  systematic  review  of  the
available  scientific  evidence  while  considering  benefits  and  harms;  values  and

preferences of patients, caregivers, and clinicians; and resource allocation (e.g., costs
to  patients  or  health  systems,  including  clinician  time).  CDC  obtained  input  on  this
clinical  practice  guideline  through  individual  conversations  with  patients,  caregivers,
and clinicians and public comment opportunities available via Federal Register notices.
CDC also sought input from the Board of Scientific Counselors of the National Center for
Injury Prevention and Control (BSC/NCIPC) (a federally chartered advisory committee),
federal partners, and peer reviewers with scientific and clinical expertise. The clinical
evidence reviews found that a number of nonpharmacologic treatments and a number
of nonopioid medications are associated with improvements in pain, function, or both,
that  appear  comparable  to  improvements  associated  with  opioid  use.  Multiple
noninvasive
 nonpharmacologic
 interventions
 (e.g.,
 exercise
 and
 psychological
therapies)  are  associated  with  improvements  in  pain,  function,  or  both,  that  are
sustained after treatment and are not associated with serious harms. Nonopioid drugs,
including  serotonin  and  norepinephrine  reuptake  inhibitor  (SNRI)  antidepressants,
pregabalin  and  gabapentin,  and  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  (NSAIDs),  are
associated  with  small  to  moderate  improvements  in  chronic  pain  and  function  for
certain  chronic  pain  conditions.  Nonopioid  drug  class–specific  adverse  events  include
serious cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, or renal effects with NSAIDs and sedation with
anticonvulsants. Opioid therapy is associated with similar or decreased effectiveness for
pain  and  function  versus  NSAIDs  across  several  acute  pain  conditions  and  with  small
improvements  in  short-term  (1  to  <6  months)  pain  and  function  compared  with
placebo;  evidence  was  found  of  attenuated  pain  reduction  over  time  with  opioids
(between  3  and  6  months  versus  between  1  and  3  months).  Opioid  therapy  is
associated  with  increased  risk  for  serious  harms  (including  opioid  use  disorder  and
overdose)  that  appears  to  increase  with  increase  in  opioid  dosage,  without  a  clear
threshold below which there is no risk. No validated, reliable way exists to predict which
patients will suffer serious harm from opioid therapy. Evidence was sparse for long-term

improvement  of  pain  or  function  for  any  treatment  for  chronic  pain.  Some  evidence
indicated that beneficial effects of some nonpharmacologic therapies persist for up to
12  months  after  the  end  of  a  course  of  a  treatment.  Among  154  trials  of  nonopioid
medications rated as good or fair quality, eight were long term (≥1 year). A single trial
evaluated  outcomes  at  1  year  for  opioid  medications  (compared  with  nonopioid
medications).  CDC  invited  input  on  the  draft  clinical  practice  guideline  and  received
approximately  5,500  public  comments.  Many  of  these  comments  were  related  to
experiences  with  pain  or  with  the  aftermath  of  a  family  member’s,  friend’s,  or
significant person’s overdose; barriers to and access to pain care and evidence-based
treatment;  concerns  about  the  level  of  specificity  of  recommendations;  and  overall
communication
 and
 implementation
 of
 the
 clinical
 practice
 guideline.
 Some
respondents expressed concerns that insufficient specificity of recommendations might
leave  clinicians  without  sufficient  practical  advice  or  context,  whereas  others  were
concerned  that  inclusion  of  more-specific  recommendations  or  information  in  the
guideline  could  facilitate  misapplication  through  adaption  of  the  clinical  practice
guideline or components of the guideline into rigid policies and laws. CDC incorporated
insights  from  public  comments  into  the  clinical  practice  guideline,  including  special
considerations  for  each  recommendation.  To  help  prevent  misapplication  of
recommendations as inflexible rules and enable clinicians to account for individualized,
person-centered clinical considerations, specific prescription dosages and durations are
generally  not  included  in  the  summary  recommendation  statements,  which  highlight
general principles. Greater specificity is provided in implementation considerations and
supporting rationales, which can offer more flexibility to help clinicians weigh benefits
and  risks  of  different  therapeutic  courses  for  specific  patients.  Recommendation
statements  emphasize  that  opioids  should  be  used  only  when  benefits  for  pain  and
function  are  expected  to  outweigh  risks.  Before  initiating  opioid  therapy  for  patients
with pain, clinicians should discuss with patients the realistic benefits and known risks

of opioid therapy. Before starting ongoing opioid therapy for patients with subacute or
chronic pain, clinicians should work with patients to establish treatment goals for pain
and  function  and  consider  how  opioid  therapy  will  be  discontinued  if  benefits  do  not
outweigh  risks.  When  opioids  are  initiated,  clinicians  should  prescribe  the  lowest
effective  dosage  of  immediate-release  opioids  for  no  longer  than  needed  for  the
expected  duration  of  pain  severe  enough  to  require  opioids.  During  ongoing  opioid
therapy,  clinicians  should  collaborate  with  patients  to  evaluate  and  carefully  weigh
benefits  and  risks  of  continuing  opioid  therapy  and  exercise  care  when  increasing,
continuing,  or  reducing  opioid  dosage.  Before  starting  and  periodically  during
continuation of opioid therapy, clinicians should evaluate risk for opioid-related harms
and  should  work  with  patients  to  incorporate  relevant  strategies  to  mitigate  risk,
including  offering  naloxone  and  reviewing  potential  interactions  with  any  other
prescribed medications or substances used. Clinicians should offer or arrange treatment
with  evidence-based  medications  to  treat  patients  with  opioid  use  disorder.  CDC
recommends  that  persons  with  pain  receive  appropriate  pain  treatment  with  careful
consideration  of  the  benefits  and  risks  of  all  treatment  options  in  the  context  of  the
patient’s  circumstances.  Clinicians  should  collaborate  with  patients  when  making
treatment  decisions  and  designing  a  treatment  plan,  including  when  initiating  or
changing  pain  management  strategies  and  particularly  when  considering  initiating,
increasing,  tapering,  or  discontinuing  opioids.  Clinicians  should  avoid  abrupt
discontinuation  of  opioids,  especially  for  patients  receiving  high  dosages  of  opioids,
should  avoid  dismissing  patients  from  care,  and  should  ensure  (provide  or  arrange)
appropriate care for patients with pain and patients with complications from opioid use
(e.g., opioid use disorder). Quality and equitable care across sociodemographic groups
requires  attention  to  mitigation  of  potential  barriers  to  care,  such  as  through
linguistically  tailored  care  and  cost-assistance  programs  to  ensure  access  to
appropriate pharmacotherapy, psychological support, and physical therapy as needed.

This  voluntary  clinical  practice  guideline  provides  recommendations  only  and  is
intended to support, not supplant, clinical judgment and individualized, person-centered
decision-making.  This  clinical  practice  guideline  should  not  be  applied  as  inflexible
standards  of  care  across  patient  populations  by  health  care  professionals;  health
systems;  pharmacies;  third-party  payers;  or  state,  local,  or  federal  organizations  or
entities. This clinical practice guideline is intended to improve communication between
clinicians and patients about the benefits and risks of pain treatment, including opioid
therapy for pain; improve the safety and effectiveness of pain treatment; mitigate pain;
improve function and quality of life for patients with pain; and reduce risks associated
with opioid pain therapy, including opioid use disorder, overdose, and death. Top This
clinical  practice  guideline  is  This  clinical  practice  guideline  is  not  Top  Determining
Whether  or  Not  to  Initiate  Opioids  for  Pain  (Recommendations  1  and  2)  Selecting
Opioids  and  Determining  Opioid  Dosages  (Recommendations  3,  4,  and  5)  Deciding
Duration  of  Initial  Opioid  Prescription  and  Conducting  Follow-Up  (Recommendations  6
and 7) Assessing Risk and Addressing Potential Harms of Opioid Use (Recommendations
8, 9, 10, 11, and 12) Recommendation categories (on basis of evidence type, balance
between  desirable  and  undesirable  effects,  values  and  preferences,  and  resource
allocation  [cost]).  Evidence  types  (on  basis  of  study  design  and  as  a  function  of
limitations  in  study  design  or  implementation,  imprecision  of  estimates,  variability  in
findings,  indirectness  of  evidence,  publication  bias,  magnitude  of  treatment  effects,
dose-response  gradient,  and  constellation  of  plausible  biases  that  could  change
effects). Top Top Sources: Adapted from Von Korff M, Saunders K, Ray GT, et al. Clin J
Pain
 2008;24:521–7
 and
 Nielsen
 S,
 Degenhardt
 L,
 Hoban
 B,
 Gisev
 N.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2016;25:733–7.
Abbreviations:  mcg/hr  =  microgram  per  hour;  mg  =  milligram;  MME  =  morphine
milligram equivalent.
* Multiply the dose for each opioid by the conversion factor to determine the dose in

MMEs. For example, tablets containing hydrocodone 5 mg and acetaminophen 325 mg
taken four times a day would contain a total of 20 mg of hydrocodone daily, equivalent
to 20 MME daily; extended-release tablets containing oxycodone 10 mg and taken twice
a day would contain a total of 20 mg of oxycodone daily, equivalent to 30 MME daily.
The following cautions should be noted: 1) All doses are in mg/day except for fentanyl,
which  is  mcg/hr.  2)  Equianalgesic  dose  conversions  are  only  estimates  and  cannot
account for individual variability in genetics and pharmacokinetics. 3) Do not use the
calculated dose in MMEs to determine the doses to use when converting one opioid to
another; when converting opioids, the new opioid is typically dosed at a substantially
lower  dose  than  the  calculated  MME  dose  to  avoid  overdose  because  of  incomplete
cross-tolerance and individual variability in opioid pharmacokinetics. 4) Use particular
caution with methadone dose conversions because methadone has a long and variable
half-life, and peak respiratory depressant effect occurs later and lasts longer than peak
analgesic effect. 5) Use particular caution with transdermal fentanyl because it is dosed
in mcg/hr instead of mg/day, and its absorption is affected by heat and other factors. 6)
Buprenorphine  products  approved  for  the  treatment  of  pain  are  not  included  in  the
table  because  of  their  partial  µ-receptor  agonist  activity  and  resultant  ceiling  effects
compared  with  full  µ-receptor  agonists.  7)  These  conversion  factors  should  not  be
applied to dosage decisions related to the management of opioid use disorder.
† Tapentadol is a µ-receptor agonist and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. MMEs are
based  on  degree  of  µ-receptor  agonist  activity;  however,  it  is  unknown  whether
tapentadol  is  associated  with  overdose  in  the  same  dose-dependent  manner  as
observed with medications that are solely µ-receptor agonists.
§ Tramadol is a µ-receptor agonist and norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
MMEs  are  based  on  degree  of  µ-receptor  agonist  activity;  however,  it  is  unknown
whether tramadol is associated with overdose in the same dose-dependent manner as
observed with medications that are solely µ-receptor agonists. Top Top Top Suggested

citation for this article: Dowell D, Ragan KR, Jones CM, Baldwin GT, Chou R. CDC Clinical
Practice  Guideline  for  Prescribing  Opioids  for  Pain  —  United  States,  2022.  MMWR
Recomm Rep 2022;71(No. RR-3):1–95. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7103a1.
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/rr/rr7103a1.htm
