Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  This  timeline  provides  information  about  select  moments  in
the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States and around the world beginning from its
known origins to today. Late 2019 | Early 2020 | Mid 2020 | Late 2020 | Early 2021 |
Mid-2021  |  Late-2021  |  Early  2022  |  Mid  2022  A  cluster  of  patients  in  China’s  Hubei
Province,  in  the  city  of  Wuhan,  begin  to  experience  the  symptoms  of  an  atypical
pneumonia-like  illness  that  does  not  respond  well  to  standard  treatments.  The  World
Health  Organization  (WHO)  Country  Office  in  China  is  informed  of  several  cases  of  a
pneumonia of unknown etiology (cause) with symptoms including shortness of breath
and fever occurring in Wuhan, China. All initial cases seem connected to the Huanan
Seafood Wholesale Market. The Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan is closed
amid worries in China of a reprise of the 2002–2004 SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome  Coronavirus  or  SARS-CoV-1)  outbreak.  WHO  activates  its  Incident
Management Support Team (IMST) across all three organizational levels: Country Office,
Regional Office, and Headquarters. China informs WHO that they have identified over
40 cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology. CDC’s National Center for Immunization
and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD) activates a center-level response to investigate this
novel  pneumonia  of  unknown  etiology.  The  genetic  sequence  for  the  atypical
pneumonia virus, Wuhan-Hu-1, is submitted to the Department of Zoonoses, National
Institute of Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease
Control  and  Prevention,  in  Beijing,  China  by  Yong-Zhen  Zhang  of  Fudan  University,
Shanghai. The complete genetic sequence of the virus remains unavailable to the rest
of  the  world  as  the  virus  spreads.  Public  health  officials  in  China  identify  a  novel
coronavirus  as  the  causative  agent  of  the  outbreak.  CDC  establishes  an  incident
management structure to guide their response to the novel coronavirus by following the

preparedness  plan  for  developing  tests  and  managing  cases  made  for  Middle  East
Respiratory  Syndrome  Coronavirus  (MERS-CoV).  WHO  begins  using  the  phrase  “2019
Novel Coronavirus” or “2019-nCoV” to refer to disease causing the outbreak in Wuhan,
China.  CDC  publishes  information  about  the  2019  Novel  Coronavirus  (2019-nCoV)
outbreak  caused  by  the  SARS  CoV-2  virus  on  its  website.  Edward  C.  Holmes  of  the
University  of  Sydney,  Australia  posts  online  that  the  viral  genome  sequence  of  the
unknown pneumonia causing the outbreak in Wuhan has been uploaded to GenBank as
“Wuhan-Hu-1”  (MN908947)  and  will  be  released  shortly.  He  does  so  on  behalf  of
Yong-Zhen  Zhang  of  Fudan  University,  Shanghai  in  collaboration  with  the  Shanghai
School of Public Health, the Central Hospital of Wuhan, Huazhong University of Science
and  Technology,  the  Wuhan  Center  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  the  National
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease
Control,  and  the  University  of  Sydney.  Hours  later,  Holmes  and  Zhang  publish  the
sequence.  WHO  tweets  that  it  has  received  the  genetic  sequences  of  the  novel
coronavirus from China and expects that the information will shortly become publicly
available. CDC updates its Travel Health Notice (THN) system for persons traveling to
Wuhan, China to Level 1 or “practice usual precautions.” China reports the first death
from  the  novel  coronavirus  and  publishes  a  draft  genome  of  the  newly  discovered
coronavirus  suspected  of  causing  the  outbreak.  By  January  12,  2020,  four  other
genomes  have  been  uploaded  to  the  viral  sequence  database  curated  by  the  Global
Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID). The Thailand Ministry of Public Health
confirms the first laboratory-confirmed case of the SARS-CoV-2 virus outside of China.
WHO finds evidence of possible human-to-human transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
but WHO scientists say that human-to-human transmission is not surprising given our
knowledge  of  respiratory  pathogens.  The  Japanese  Ministry  of  Health,  Labor  and
Welfare  reports  an  additional  laboratory-confirmed  case  of  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus
outside  of  China.  CDC  begins  screening  passengers  for  symptoms  of  the  2019  Novel

Coronavirus  on  direct  and  connecting  flights  from  Wuhan,  China  to  San  Francisco,
California, New York City, New York, and Los Angeles, California and plans to expand
screenings  to  other  major  airports  in  the  U.S.  Worldwide,  282  laboratory-confirmed
cases of the 2019 Novel Coronavirus have been reported in four countries: China (278
cases),  Thailand  (2  cases),  Japan  (1  case)  and  the  Republic  of  Korea  (1  case).  CDC
reports  the  first  laboratory-confirmed  case  of  the  2019  Novel  Coronavirus  in  the  U.S.
from samples taken on January 18 in Washington state and on the same day activates
its  Emergency  Operations  Center  (EOC)  to  respond  to  the  emerging  outbreak.  CDC
artists Alissa Eckert and Dan Higgins create “an identity” for the SARS-CoV-2 virus by
designing  the  red  and  white  virus  image.  Chinese  government  officials  confirm  that
human-to-human transmission is driving the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in China.
WHO’s International Health Regulation Emergency Committee meets and decides to not
declare the 2019 Novel Coronavirus a Public Health Emergency of International Concern
(PHEIC). Instead, the committee decides to monitor the situation and reconvene in 10
days  to  re-evaluate.  Wuhan,  China—  a  city  of  11  million  people—  is  placed  under
lockdown due to the 2019 Novel Coronavirus outbreak. CDC confirms a travel-related
infection of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in Illinois, bringing the total number of cases in the
U.S. to two. CDC confirms additional travel-related infections of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in
Arizona and California, bringing the total number of cases in the U.S. to five. The U.S.
Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  announces  that  it  will  take  “critical  actions  to
advance development of novel coronavirus medical countermeasures” with interagency
partners, including CDC. CDC issues a Level 3 Travel Health Notice— advising travelers
to avoid all non-essential travel to China due to the 2019 Novel Coronavirus outbreak.
The U.S. government relocates U.S. citizens from Wuhan, China back to the U.S. due to
the  2019  Novel  Coronavirus  (2019-nCoV).  A  team  of  CDC  medical  officers  meets  the
flight carrying the repatriated U.S. citizens from Wuhan, China at the March Air Reserve
Base in California to screen the passengers for symptoms of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. CDC

confirms that the SARS-CoV-2 virus has now spread between two people in Illinois with
no history of recent travel. This is the first recorded instance of person-to-person spread
of the 2019 Novel Coronavirus in the U.S and brings the total number of cases up to
seven. CDC issues 14-day federal quarantine orders to all 195 U.S. citizens who were
repatriated  back  to  the  U.S.  on  January  29,  2020,  from  Wuhan,  China.  WHO’s
International Health Regulation Emergency Committee reconvenes early to declare the
2019 Novel Coronavirus outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern
(PHEIC).  The  Secretary  of  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS),  Alex
Azar,  declares  the  2019  Novel  Coronavirus  (2019-nCoV)  outbreak  a  public  health
emergency. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) directs all flights from China
and  all  passengers  who  have  traveled  to  China  within  the  last  14  days  to  be  routed
through  one  of  eleven  airports  in  the  U.S.  for  enhanced  screening  procedures  and
possible quarantine. U.S. citizens who have been in Hubei province within 14 days of
their return are subject to up to 14 days of mandatory quarantine;, U.S. citizens who
have been in other areas of mainland China within 14 days of their return are subject to
14  days  of  self-quarantine  with  health  monitoring;,  and  foreign  nationals  (other  than
immediate  family  of  U.S.  citizens,  permanent  residents,  and  flight  crew)  who  have
traveled in China (excluding Hong Kong and Macau) within 14 days of their arrival, will
be  denied  entry  into  the  U.S.  CDC  submits  an  emergency  use  authorization  (EUA)  to
FDA  to  expedite  approval  for  a  CDC  developed  SARS-CoV-2  diagnostic  test.  FDA
approves the EUA for the CDC developed SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic test kit. CDC begins
shipping  its laboratory  test kit to  detect the SARS-CoV-2 virus, “CDC 2019-nCoV Real
Time  RT-PCR,”  to  select  domestic  and  international  laboratories.  CDC  medical  officer
teams  meet  additional  planes  carrying  passengers  from  Wuhan,  China  at  Travis  Air
Force  Base  in  Sacramento,  CA,  Marine  Corps  Air  Station  Miramar  in  San  Diego,  CA,
Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, TX, and Eppley Airfield in Omaha, NE to screen
the  passengers  for  the  symptoms  of  the  2019  Novel  Coronavirus  (2019-nCoV).  All

passengers  are  placed  under  mandatory  14-day  quarantine  orders.  Some  of  the  first
CDC test kits for detecting the SARS-CoV-2 virus arrive at a public health laboratory in
east  Manhattan,  New  York  City,  N.Y.  The  laboratory  reports  that  the  tests  produce
“untrustworthy  results.”  Worldwide  deaths  from  the  2019  Novel  Coronavirus  reach
1,013.  The  SARS-CoV-2  virus  has  now  killed  more  people  than  the  severe  acute
respiratory  syndrome  (SARS-CoV-1)  outbreak,  which  claimed  774  lives  globally  from
November 2002 to July 2003. WHO announces the official name for the disease that is
causing  the  2019  Novel  Coronavirus  outbreak:  “COVID-19.”  The  new  name  of  this
disease  is  an  abbreviated  version  of  “Coronavirus  Disease  2019.”  CDC  confirms  the
15th  case  of  COVID-19  in  the  U.S.  Due  to  the  high  case  load  and  numbers  of
asymptomatic individuals testing positive for COVID-19, all passengers and crew of the
Diamond  Princess  cruise  ship  are  quarantined  off  the  coast  of  Japan,  placed  under
travel  restrictions,  and  are  prevented  from  returning  to  the  U.S.  for  at  least  14  days
after they have left the Diamond Princess. As Italy becomes a global COVID-19 hotspot,
the Italian government issues Decree-Law No. 6, containing urgent measures to contain
and  manage  the  epidemiological  emergency  caused  by  COVID-19,  effectively  locking
down the country. CDC’s Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the incident manager for the COVID-19
response,  holds  a  telebriefing  and  braces  the  nation  to  expect  mitigation  efforts  to
contain the SARS-CoV-2 virus in the U.S. that may include school closings, workplace
shutdowns,  and  the  canceling  of  large  gatherings  and  public  events,  stating  that  the
“disruption to everyday life may be severe.” CDC reports four additional presumptive
positive  cases  of  COVID-19  in  California,  Oregon,  and  Washington:  one  case  is  likely
travel-related, but three are likely due to community spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in
the  U.S.  CDC  updates  its  Criteria  to  Guide  Evaluation  and  Testing  of  Patients  Under
Investigation (PUI) for COVID-19 to any patients with a severe respiratory illness even in
the absence of travel history to affected areas or known exposure to another case to
prepare for possible widespread person-to-person transmission. FDA announces a “new

policy…for  certain  laboratories  that  develop  and  begin  to  use  validated  COVID-19
diagnostics  before  FDA  has  completed  review  of  their  emergency  use  authorization
(EUA)  requests,”  allowing  laboratories  to  create  tests  to  address  testing  shortages  in
the U.S. CDC and the Washington Department of Public Health report the first death in
an individual with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 in the U.S. The patient was a male in
his 50s who was hospitalized with a pneumonia of unknown cause and later died of his
illness.  CDC  creates  a  hospitalization  surveillance  network  for  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus
called  “COVID-NET”  to  track  the  numbers  and  rates  of  COVID-19  hospitalizations  by
modifying
 existing
 respiratory
 virus
 surveillance
 networks
 that
 monitor
 for
hospitalizations  associated  with  influenza  and  Respiratory  Syncytial  Virus  (RSV).  CDC
reports  60  cases  of  COVID-19  across  Arizona,  California,  Florida,  Georgia,  Illinois,
Massachusetts,  New  Hampshire,  New  York,  Oregon,  Rhode  Island,  Washington,  and
Wisconsin. Of the 60 COVID-19 infections detected, 21 are travel-related, 11 are from
person-to-person  spread,  and  27  are  unknown.  The  Grand  Princess  cruise  ship  is
stranded  off  the  California  coast  after  officials  learn  that  a  California  man  who  had
traveled  on  the  ship  last  month  contracted  COIVID-19  and  died.  The  California  Air
National Guard drops off a limited supply of testing kits by helicopter; more than 3,500
people  are  aboard  the  ship,  but  only  46  are  able  to  be  tested  and  21  (mostly  crew
members)  test  positive.  After  more  than  118,000  cases  in  114  countries  and  4,291
deaths,  the  WHO  declares  COVID-19  a  pandemic.  FDA  no  longer  requires  CDC  to
perform  confirmatory  testing  for  a  positive  COVID-19  diagnosis.  The  Trump
Administration declares a nationwide emergency and issues an additional travel ban on
non-U.S. citizens traveling from 26 European countries due to COVID-19. CDC issues a
“no sail order” for all cruise ships— calling for them to cease activity in all waters that
the  U.S.  holds  jurisdiction  over.  States  begin  to  implement  shutdowns  in  order  to
prevent the spread of COVID-19. The New York City public school system— the largest
school system in the U.S., with 1.1 million students— shuts down, while Ohio calls for

restaurants and bars to close. CDC launches “Clara-Bot,” a COVID-19 symptom checker,
on  its  website.  New  and  old  guidelines  begin  circulating  among  state  health
departments  for  who  gets  critical  care  in  the  event  of  ventilator  shortages:
Massachusetts and Pennsylvania use a point system prioritizing patients by likelihood of
benefitting from ICU care, while New York’s 2015 plan relies on “exclusion criteria”— a
list  of  medical  conditions  that  would  make  a  patient  ineligible,  like  traumatic  brain
injury,  severe  burns,  or  cardiac  arrest.  Alabama’s  exclusion  criteria  list,  released  in
2010  and  since  removed  from  publication,  included  both  “severe  or  profound  mental
retardation” and “moderate to severe dementia.” Moderna Therapeutics begin the first
human trials of a vaccine to protect against COVID-19 at a research facility in Seattle,
Washington.
 The
 University
 of
 Minnesota
 launches
 a
 clinical
 trial
 testing
hydroxychloroquine,  an  FDA-approved  drug  for  the  prevention  and  treatment  of
malaria,  for  the  treatment  of  COVID-19.  The  Centers  for  Medicare  &  Medicaid  (CMS)
temporarily expands telehealth benefits, enabling beneficiaries to receive a wider range
of  healthcare  services  from  their  doctors  without  having  to  travel  to  a  healthcare
facility.  CDC  asks  healthy  people  to  donate  blood  if  they  are  able  amid  a  national
shortage  of  blood  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  California  governor  Gavin  Newsom
issues  a  statewide  stay-at-home  order  to  slow  the  spread  of  COVID-19  instructing
residents to only leave their homes when necessary and shutting down all but essential
businesses. The Trump Administration signs the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security  (CARES)  Act  into  law.  The  act  includes  funding  for  $1,200  per  adult  (with
expanded  payments  for  families  with  children),  expanded  unemployment  benefits,
forgivable  small  business  loans,  loans  to  major  industries  and  corporations,  and
expanded  funding  to  state  and  local  governments  in  response  to  the  economic  crisis
caused  by  COVID-19.  Apple,  in  partnership  with  HHS,  CDC,  and  the  White  House
Coronavirus  Task  Force,  releases  an  app  with  a  COVID-19  symptom  and  exposure
questionnaire  telling  people  how  to  isolate  and  monitor  symptoms  and  giving

recommendations  on  testing  and  when  to  contact  a  medical  provider  if  they  believe
they have contracted or have been exposed to the SARS-CoV-2 virus. To prevent the
spread  of  COVID-19,  the  White  House  extends  all  social  distancing  measures  until
through the end of April 2020. FDA issues an EUA to allow hydroxychloroquine sulfate
and  chloroquine  phosphate  products  to  be  added  the  Strategic  National  Stockpile  for
the  treatment  of  COVID-19.  CDC  distributes  a  Health  Alert  Network  (HAN)  warning
against  using  chloroquine  phosphate  without  the  recommendation  of  a  doctor  or
pharmacy  after  one  person  is  made  seriously  ill  and  a  second  dies  from  ingesting
non-pharmaceutical  chloroquine  phosphate  (a  chemical  aquariums  use  that  is
commercially available for purchase at stores or online) to prevent or treat COVID-19.
CDC issues a domestic travel advisory for New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut due
to high community transmission of COVID-19 in those states, urging residents to refrain
from all non-essential domestic travel for at least 14 days, effective immediately. At a
White  House  Press  Briefing,  Dr.  Anthony  Fauci  and  Dr.  Deborah  Brix  announce  that
between  100,000  and  240,000  deaths  in  the  U.S.  are  expected—  even  if  social
distancing  and  public  health  measures  are  perfectly  enacted.  The  Journal  of  the
American Medical Association Ophthalmology reports that COVID-19 can be transmitted
through the eye. One of the first warnings of the emergence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
came  late  in  2019  from  a  Chinese  ophthalmologist  treating  patients  in  Wuhan,  Li
Wenliang, MD, who died at age 34 from COVID-19. At a White House press briefing, CDC
announces new mask wearing guidelines and recommends that all people wear a mask
when  outside  of  the  home.  CDC  warns  the  public  about  phone  scams  and  phishing
attacks that appear to originate from CDC and ask for donations from individuals. This
is government impersonation fraud— federal agencies do not request donations from
the public. Using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act,  CDC  announces  $631  million  to  fund  and  expand  the  existing  Epidemiology  and
Laboratory Capacity for Prevention and Control of Emerging Infectious Diseases (ELC),

allowing  state  health  departments  to  expand  their  capacity  for  the  testing,  contact
tracing, and containment of COVID-19. CDC launches a new weekly SARS-CoV-2 virus
surveillance  report  called  “COVIDView”  summarizing  weekly  data  on  COVID-19
hospitalizations, deaths, and testing. More than 1 million cases of COVID-19 had been
confirmed worldwide, a more than ten-fold increase in less than a month. Hundreds of
doctors and civil rights groups urge CDC and the U.S. government to release race and
ethnicity data on COVID-19 case-numbers in order to reveal the true impact of the virus
on communities of color. Data from the Chicago Department of Public Health reported
by  the  Chicago  Tribune  shows  that  despite  being  about  30%  of  the  total  population,
Black people account for 68% of the COVID-19 related deaths in Chicago and are dying
of  COVID-19  at  a  rate  nearly  six-times  greater  than  that  of  White  Chicagoans,  who
account about 33% of the population and approximately 14% of deaths. These numbers
illuminate  for  many  the  racial  disparities  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  in  the  U.S.  HHS
announces  $186  million  in  additional  funding  to  state  and  local  jurisdictions  for  the
COVID-19  response.  HHS  announces  first  contract  for  ventilator  production  under  the
Defense  Production  Act  with  General  Motors.  CDC  modifies  and  extends  the  no  sail
order for all cruise ships. With over 18,600 confirmed deaths and more than 500,000
confirmed cases in under four months, the U.S. is the country with the most reported
COVID-19  cases  and  deaths,  surpassing  Italy  and  Spain  as  a  global  hot-spot  for  the
virus. With 159,937 confirmed cases, New York State now has more reported cases of
COVID-19  than  Spain  (153,000),  Italy  (143,000),  or  China  (82,000).  Amid  critical
hospital bed and ventilator shortages, aerial images emerge of workers in hazmat suits
burying coffins in mass graves at Hart Island off the Bronx, an area used for over 150
years by New York City officials as a mass burial site for those with no next-of-kin or
who  cannot  afford  funerals.  Most  states  in  the  U.S.  report  widespread  cases  of
COVID-19. At a White House press briefing, President Trump announces that the U.S.
will  cease  contributing  funding  to  the  WHO,  shaking  the  global  public  health

community.  The  Trump  Administration  releases  a  plan  outlining  how  states  should
reopen,  calling  for  states  or  metropolitan  areas  to  meet  benchmarks  like  reducing
COVID-19  cases  or  deaths  before  reopening  or  stopping  mitigation  strategies  (like
required masking), also known as “gating As the COVID-19 pandemic grows, shortages
of personal protective equipment (PPE) like gowns, eye shields, masks, and even body
bags, become dire– particularly in New York After two pet cats in separate areas of New
York state test positive for the SARS-CoV-2 virus, CDC recommends that people restrict
their pets’ interactions with other people or animals outside their household to prevent
the spread of COVID-19. Georgia, Alaska, and Oklahoma begin to partially reopen their
states despite concerns from health experts saying it was too early to reopen. Clinicians
in the U.S. and U.K. report clusters of children and adolescents requiring admission to
intensive care units (ICUs) with a multisystem inflammatory condition that can lead to
multiorgan  failure—  similar  to  Kawasaki  disease  and  toxic  shock  syndrome.  This
condition  will  become  known  as  Multisystem  Inflammatory  Syndrome  in  Children
(MIS-C),  a  serious  inflammatory  condition  that  affects  children  with  current  or  recent
COVID-19 infections. Polls show that many people in the U.S., particularly those ages
under  30  years  or  making  less  than  $40,000  per  year,  plan  to  defer  medical  care
because of the cost of treatment due to the lack of insurance or being under-insured,
potentially  leading  to  the  further  spread  of  COVID-19,  the  under-reporting  of  case
numbers,  and  excess  deaths  from  COVID-19  and  other  preventable  diseases.  The
Trump  Administration  launches  Operation  Warp  Speed,  an  initiative  to  produce  a
vaccine against the SARS-CoV-2 virus as quickly as possible. The operation funds the
development of six promising vaccine candidates while they are still in the clinical trial
phase,  including  the  Pfizer-BioNTech  and  Moderna  mRNA  vaccines.  Since  mid-March
2020,  more  than  26.5  million  people  in  the  U.S.  have  filed  for  unemployment,
increasing the number of people without health insurance amid a pandemic. FDA issues
an emergency use authorization (EUA) for the use of the antiviral drug Remdesivir for

the treatment of suspected or confirmed COVID-19 in people who are hospitalized with
severe  disease.  CDC  develops  the  “PPE  Burn  Rate  Calculator,”  a  spreadsheet-based
model  made  to  help  healthcare  facilities  plan  and  optimize  the  use  of  personal
protective equipment or PPE for the COVID-19 response and publishes it on the Apple
and  Android  App  stores.  CDC  launches  the  SARS-CoV-2  Sequencing  for  Public  Health
Emergency Response, Epidemiology and Surveillance (SPHERES), a national network to
provide  real-time  genomic  sequencing  data  to  public  health  response  teams
investigating  COVID-19  cases,  allowing  them  to  track  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus  as  it
evolves. As some countries discuss re-opening, WHO convenes the International Health
Regulation  Emergency  Committee  for  a  third  time  and  declares  that  the  global
COVID-19  pandemic  remains  a  Public  Health  Emergency  of  International  Concern
(PHEIC).  The  Associated  Press  reports  that  top  White  House  officials  blocked  a  CDC
document “Guidance for Implementing the Opening Up America Again Framework” that
included detailed advice on how to safely reopen the country. FDA authorizes the first
COVID-19  test  with  the  option  of  using  home-collected  saliva  samples.  The
unemployment rate in the U.S. is 14.7%— the highest since the Great Depression. With
20.5 million people out of work, the hospitality, leisure, and healthcare industries take
the  greatest  hits  overall,  affecting  essential  workers,  people  with  lower  incomes,  and
racial and ethnic minority workers disproportionally. President Trump holds a briefing in
the White House Rose Garden to claim that anyone who wants to get a coronavirus test
can  get  one  and  encourages  businesses  around  the  country  to  reopen.  He  does  not
wear  a  mask.  Dr.  Anthony  Fauci,  the  Director  of  the  National  Institute  of  Allergy  and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), testifies before the U.S. Senate that experts believe more
people have died from COVID-19 than have been officially reported and warns against
“re-opening” too quickly. New estimates from a University of Michigan study revise the
survival rate for people with COVID-19 who are put on a ventilator from as low as 10% –
12%  to  between  25%  –  50%.  CDC’s  Chief  Health  Equity  Officer  officially  joins  CDC’s

COVID-19  response.  This  is  the  first  time  in  the  agency’s  history  that  a  senior  leader
within  the  incident  management  structure  has  the  sole  purpose  of  advocating  for
greater health equity across an entire emergency response. CDC distributes a warning
for  clinicians  through  the  Health  Alert  Network  describing  Multisystem  Inflammatory
Syndrome  in  Children  (MIS-C),  a  serious  inflammatory  condition  that  affects  children
with  current  or  recent  COVID-19  infections.  HHS  awards  states,  territories,  and  local
jurisdictions $11 billion in new funding to support testing for COVID-19: CDC will provide
$10.25 billion to states, territories, and local jurisdictions through CDC’s Epidemiology
and  Laboratory  Capacity  for  Prevention  and  Control  of  Emerging  Infectious  Diseases
(ELC)  and  the  Indian  Health  Service  (IHS)  will  provide  $750  million  to  IHS,  tribal,  and
urban Indian Health programs to expand testing capacity. Navajo Nation now has the
highest COVID-19 infection rate per capita in the U.S. AstraZeneca receives more than
$1  billion  from  the  U.S.  government  in  funding  for  the  development  of  the
AstraZeneca/Oxford University COVID-19 vaccine, with the first doses due to arrive in
September 2020. The Lancet publishes a large study showing that COVID-19 patients
who  received  the  anti-malaria  drug  hydroxychloroquine  die  at  higher  rates  and
experience more cardiac complications than COVID-19 patients who do not receive the
drug. This study will shortly be retracted due to data misuse, but multiple other studies
have  since  shown  that  hydroxychloroquine  is  neither  harmful  nor  beneficial  in  the
treatment  of  COVID-19.  Navajo  officials  implement  a  series  of  mitigation  efforts
including  extended  weekend  lockdowns,  curfews,  stay-at-home  orders,  masking,  and
checkpoints, as younger generations of Navajo begin to launch grassroots social media
campaigns like “Protect the Sacred” to provide health information and help defend their
people  and  cultural  heritage  from  COVID-19—  the  Navajo  become  a  model  for
implementing a unified pandemic response. The recorded death toll from COVID-19 in
the U.S. surpasses 100,000. HHS announces new laboratory date reporting guidance for
COVID-19  testing  to  include  demographic  data  on  race,  ethnicity,  age,  and  sex.  The

Lancet and the New England Journal of Medicine retract the two publications that halted
global trials of the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19
after investigations found inconsistencies in the data. The World Bank states that the
COVID-19  pandemic  will  plunge  the  global  economy  into  the  worst  recession  since
World War II. The number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the U.S. surpasses 2 million.
CDC  releases  consolidated  guidelines  for  COVID-19  testing—  including  for  nursing
homes, long-term care facilities, and high-density critical infrastructure workplaces, like
food production facilities. FDA rescinds the EUA that allowed hydroxychloroquine sulfate
and chloroquine phosphate products to be donated to the Strategic National Stockpile
for the treatment of COVID-19. HHS announces that COVID-19 vaccines will be provided
free of charge to older adults and other groups experiencing disproportionate impacts
from the COVID-19 pandemic. WHO halts its trial of hydroxychloroquine after a large,
randomized study conducted in the U.K. found that the drug had no apparent effect on
mortality when treating COVID-19. The journal Science Translational Medicine releases
a study suggesting that as many as 80% of the Americans who sought care for flu-like
illnesses  in  March  2020  were  likely  infected  with  undetected  COVID-19.  Three  weeks
after Black Lives Matter protests broke out across the country in the wake of the deaths
of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor, data from 300 of the largest U.S. cities found no
evidence  of  a  COVID-19  spike  in  the  weeks  following  the  beginning  of  the  protests—
researchers  determined  that  social  distancing  behaviors  went  up  as  people  tried  to
avoid the protests. CDC expands the list of people at increased risk for severe COVID-19
illness by removing the specific age threshold, instead noting that risk increases with
age.  CDC  also  includes  people  experiencing  chronic  kidney  disease,  COPD,  obesity,
serious  heart  conditions,  sickle  cell  disease,  and  type  2  diabetes,  and  those  who  are
immunocompromised from solid organ transplants. Despite its development and clinical
trials being supported by as much as $6.5 billion in public funds, Gilead Sciences sets
the price of Remdesivir, an anti-viral used to treat COVID-19 that can shorten hospital

stays  and  reduce  the  need  for  mechanical  ventilation,  at  $3,120  for  one  typical
treatment  course  ($520  per  vial)  for  insured  patients  in  the  U.S.  Dr.  Anthony  Fauci
warns a Senate committee that the number of new COVID-19 cases in the U.S. could
soon  rise  from  40,000  to  100,000  new  infections  every  day,  likely  overwhelming  an
already  burdened  healthcare  system.  More  than  200  scientists  sign  an  open  letter
asking  WHO  to  update  its  COVID-19  guidelines  to  include  warnings  about  airborne
transmission. The number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the U.S. surpasses 3 million.
The  U.S.  begins  the  process  of  withdrawing  from  WHO.  WHO  announces  that  the
SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 can be transmitted through the air and is likely
being spread by asymptomatic individuals. CDC again calls on all people to wear cloth
face masks when leaving their homes to prevent the spread of COVID-19, calling masks
“a  critical  tool  in  the  fight  against  COVID-19.”  Florida,  Texas,  Oklahoma,  Mississippi,
North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  and  Georgia  have  both  the  greatest  percentage  of
adults who are currently uninsured and the highest numbers of new COVID-19 cases. A
mandate  from  the  Trump  Administration  directs  hospitals  nationwide  to  stop  sending
critical information about COVID-19 hospitalization rates and equipment availability to
CDC  and  instead  report  this  data  to  a  new  system  set  up  by  HHS  using  a  private
contractor, raising concerns over the politicization of public health, data, and privacy.
Many states, including California, Michigan, and Indiana postpone re-opening plans as
COVID-19 case numbers rise. The U.S. reports a record number of COVID-19 infections
in a single day, with 75,600 new cases reported. CDC extends the no sail order for all
cruise ships through September 30, 2020. The Department of Defense (DOD) and HHS
reach a deal with Pfizer BioNTech for the delivery and distribution of 100 million doses
of  the  Pfizer  BioNTech  COVID-19  vaccine  candidate  in  December  2020,  upon
confirmation  that  the  vaccine  is  safe  and  effective.  Antibody  data  examined  by  CDC
shows that there were about 10 times more SARS-CoV-2 infections than first reported in
March 2020 – May 2020 (depending on the region, there were 6 to 24 times more cases

than  were  initially  reported).  CDC  releases  resources  for  school  administrators,
teachers,  parents,  guardians,  and  caregivers  to  help  build  appropriate  public  health
strategies to slow the spread of COVID-19 in a school environment. A study finds that
more than 50% of all people living in rural areas in the U.S. have no intensive care unit
(ICU)  beds  available  (only  3%  of  the  communities  with  higher  incomes  had  no  ICU
beds). High rates of COVID-19 infections, chronic health conditions, limited testing, and
inadequate access to healthcare could all lead to significant COVID-19 mortality among
people living in rural communities. The Trump Administration agrees to pay $1.5 billion,
or  $15  per-dose,  to  Moderna  for  100  million  doses  of  COVID-19  vaccine.  Obesity  is
found to increase the risk of mortality from COVID-19 disease, especially among men
and  younger  people–  even  when  isolated  from  racial,  ethnic,  or  socioeconomic
disparities.  CDC  reports  results  from  a  representative  panel  survey  on  mental  health
conducted among adults across the U.S. in June of 2020: 41% of responders reported
struggling  with  mental  health  and  11%  had  seriously  considered  suicide  recently.
Essential  workers,  unpaid  caregivers,  young  adults,  and  racial  and  ethnic  minority
groups were found to be at higher risk for experiencing mental health struggles, with
31%  of  unpaid  caregivers  reporting  considering  suicide.  CDC  releases  data  indicating
that  most  COVID-19  positive  people  are  infectious  to  others  for  up  to  10  days  after
symptoms  first  appear,  but  that  individuals  with  severe  illness  or  who  are
immunocompromised may be infectious for up to 20 days. FDA issues an EUA to the
Yale School of Public Health for its rapid diagnostic test for COVID-19 SalivaDirect. The
test uses a new and more flexible method of containing and processing saliva samples
when testing for COVID-19, allowing laboratories to increase capacity and efficiency in
testing.  COVID-19  becomes  the  3rd  leading  cause  of  death  in  the  U.S.  Deaths  from
COVID-19  now  exceed  1,000  per  day  and  nationwide  cases  exceed  5.4  million.  After
CDC studies show that American Indians and Alaska Natives are among the racial and
ethnic minority group at higher risk for severe COVID-19 outcomes, CDC provides more

that  $200  million  in  COVID-19  funding  to  Indian  Country.  A  study  published  by  the
Journal of the American Medical Association calls into question the clinical benefits of
the anti-viral drug Remdesivir being used to treat patients hospitalized with COVID-19.
FDA issues an EUA for use of convalescent plasma (the liquid component of blood that,
when taken from someone who has recently recovered from an infection, can contain
antibodies to that illness) to treat people hospitalized with severe COVID-19. The first
documented case of COVID-19 reinfection is confirmed by the University of Hong Kong.
FDA issues an EUA for Abbott’s BinaxNOW Covid-19 Test Kit— a rapid antigen test that
can detect a COVID-19 infection in 15 minutes using the same technology as a flu test.
The  first  documented  case  of  COVID-19  reinfection  in  the  U.S.  is  confirmed  by  the
Nevada State Public Health Laboratory. The U.S. and China decline to join the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access Facility, or COVAX, a global program spearheaded by WHO that
aims  to  develop  and  distribute  COVID-19  vaccines  worldwide—  more  than  170  other
nations  sign  on.  The  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  and  WHO  now
recommend  the  use  of  steroids  for  the  treatment  of  severe  COVID-19  disease  after
multiple
 studies
 find
 that
 steroids
 like
 dexamethasone,
 hydrocortisone,
 and
methylprednisolone—  a  group  of  cheap  and  widely  available  drugs  that  reduce
inflammation  and  immune  response—  can  reduce  mortality  in  severe  cases  of
COVID-19 by up to 36%. CDC releases data in a Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
(MMWR) showing that because of concerns about COVID-19, an estimated 41% of U.S.
adults  had  delayed  or  avoided  seeking  medical  care,  including  urgent  or  emergency
care.  Unpaid  caregivers  for  adults,  people  with  underlying  medical  conditions,  Black
adults,  non-White  Hispanic  adults,  young  adults,  and  people  with  disabilities  are  the
most affected. CDC ends the symptom-based COVID-19 screenings of air travelers from
China  (including  Hong  Kong  and  Macau),  Iran,  the  Schengen  area  of  Europe  (26
European  countries  that  have  officially  abolished  all  passport  and  all  other  types  of
border control at their mutual borders), and the U.K., citing limited effectiveness due to

asymptomatic spread. Pfizer BioNTech expands phase 3 clinical trials of its COVID-19
vaccine  to  44,000  participants—  increasing  the  trial  population  diversity  to  include
adolescents as young as 16 years and people with chronic, stable HIV, hepatitis C, or
hepatitis  B  infections.  The  Pfizer/BioNTech  vaccine  is  a  2-shot  series  given  3  weeks
apart  and  must  be  stored  at  a  temperature  of  –70  degrees  Celsius  (or  –94  degrees
Fahrenheit).  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR  from  a  study  showing  that  people  who
recently tested positive for the SAR-CoV-2 virus were more than twice as likely to have
recently dined out and more than four times as likely to have recently visited a bar or
café. CDC releases an infographic guide to help schools mitigate COVID-19 transmission
in schools. HHS announces a plan to make COVID-19 vaccines free in the U.S. Johnson &
Johnson begins phase 3 clinical trials of its COVID-19 vaccine with 60,000 participants.
The J&J vaccine does not need to be frozen and may require just one shot. The reported
death toll in the U.S from COVID-19 surpasses 200,000. HHS and CDC awards states,
territories,  and  local  jurisdictions  $200  million  from  the  Coronavirus  Aid,  Relief,  and
Economic  Security  (CARES)  Act  in  new  funding  to  support  vaccine  distribution  for
COVID-19.  The  reported  death  toll  from  COVID-19  reaches  more  than  1  million
worldwide—  in  just  10  months.  CDC  extends  the  no  sail  order  for  all  cruise  ships
through October 31, 2020. President Trump tests positive for the SARS CoV-2 virus and
is treated at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center with antiviral drugs, including
Remdesivir. More staff at the White House, including the press secretary, test positive
for  COVID-19.  CDC  updates  its  “How  COVID-19  is  Spread”  guidelines  to  acknowledge
the potential for the airborne spread of the COVID-19 virus— even when 6 feet of social
distance is maintained if the area is poorly ventilated or enclosed and activities occur
that  require  heavy  breathing,  like  singing  or  exercise.  Food  insecurity  in  the  U.S.
reaches 52 million people due to the COVID-19 pandemic— 17 million more people than
pre-pandemic numbers. New Zealand lifts restrictions and declares COVID-19 “beaten”
after  a  cluster  of  179  cases  in  Auckland  (the  country’s  largest  outbreak  yet)  is  fully

contained.  CDC  announces  the  end  of  the  no  sail  order  for  cruise  ship  companies,
replacing it with a conditional sail order that requires companies to meet testing and
safety  requirements  and  to  test  those  rules  on  simulated  voyages  before  cruises
resume. One day after the presidential election, the U.S. reports 100,000 new cases of
COVID-19  in  24  hours.  FDA  issues  an  EUA  for  Eli  Lilly’s  drug  Bamlanivimab,  a
monoclonal antibody treatment that mimics the immune system’s response to infection
with  SARS-CoV-2  and  appears  to  protect  patients  at  increased  risk  from  a  COVID-19
infection  progressing  to  more  severe  forms  of  disease.  The  journal  Nature  releases  a
study showing that most COVID-19 cases originate at indoor gathering spaces— places
of worship, restaurants, gyms, and grocery stores. Areas of lower socioeconomic status
were found to be at much greater risk: many residents are essential workers or cannot
work from home and public spaces in these areas tend to be scarcer and more densely
populated. The study’s model suggested that a trip to a grocery store would be about
twice  as  risky  in  a  neighborhood  of  lower  incomes  as  in  one  of  higher  incomes.  Two
weeks after large groups gathered for Halloween celebrations, COVID-19 case numbers
spike across the U.S. Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine is found to be 95.4% effective in its
clinical  trial.  Dr.  Anthony  Fauci  discusses  the  need  to  understand  the  “long  COVID”
symptoms like persistent fatigue, shortness of breath, muscle aches, sporadic fevers,
and concentration issues, that as many as one-third of patients experience for weeks or
months after contracting COVID-19. Pfizer-BioNTech’s COVID-19 vaccine is found to be
95% effective in their 44,000-person trial. As COVID-19 case numbers in the U.S. surge
past  11  million,  CDC  recommends  that  Americans  stay  home  for  Thanksgiving  and
avoid  contact  with  all  people  not  living  in  their  household  for  the  last  14  days.  CDC
revises the Travel Health Notice system for COVID-19; adding a fourth alert level (low,
moderate,  high,  and  very  high)  and  recommending  that  all  travelers  test  1-3  days
before and 3-5 days after all international air travel in addition to staying home for 7-14
days after travel to avoid transmitting the SARS-CoV-2 virus. FDA grants an EUA for a

COVID-19  antibody  treatment  manufactured  by  Regeneron.  In  a  clinical  trial  of  800
people, the drug significantly reduced virus levels within days. ACIP recommends that
healthcare professionals and older people living in long-term care facilities be offered a
vaccine first in the initial phases of the COVID-19 vaccination program. CDC also notes
that people ages 70 years and older who live in multi-generational households should
be given priority as soon as more vaccine doses are available FDA issues an EUA for the
Pfizer-BioNTech  COVID-19  vaccine.  ACIP  recommends  the  Pfizer-BioNTech  COVID-19
vaccine  for  all  people  ages  16  years  or  older  for  the  prevention  of  COVID-19  The
recorded  death  toll  from  COVID-19  in  the  U.S  surpasses  300,000.  Sandra  Lindsay,  a
nurse  in  New  York,  becomes  the  first  American  outside  of  clinical  trials  to  receive  a
COVID-19  vaccine.  The  U.K.  announces  the  detection  of  a  new  and  more  contagious
COVID-19  variant,  B.1.1.7.  CDC  records  the  highest  number  of  drug  overdose  deaths
ever in a 12-month period ending in May 2020 in the U.S.—more than 81,000. Overdose
deaths  involving  synthetic  opioids  (primarily  illicitly  manufactured  fentanyl)  increased
by  38%,  methamphetamines  by  35%,  and  cocaine  (likely  linked  to  co-use  or
contamination  of  cocaine  with  illicitly  manufactured  fentanyl  or  heroin)  by  27%.  FDA
issues  an  EUA  for  the  Moderna  COVID-19  vaccine.  ACIP  recommends  the  Moderna
COVID-19  vaccine  in  persons  ages  18  years  or  older  for  the  prevention  of  COVID-19.
CDC releases a report in MMWR outlining the ACIP’s recommendations for the “phases”
of COVID-19 vaccination allocation while supply is still limited in the U.S. The suggested
model  for  efficient  and  equitable  vaccination  distribution:  phase  1a  –  healthcare
personnel and residents of long-term care facilities; phase 1b – essential workers and
all persons ages 75 years and older; phase 1c – all persons ages 65–74 and all persons
ages  16–64  with  a  medical  condition  that  increases  their  risk  of  severe  disease  from
COVID-19; phase 2 – all persons ages 16 years and older not already recommended in
phase 1. The Trump Administration announces the purchase of 100 million additional
doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine. More than 1 million COVID-19 vaccine

doses have been administered in the U.S. in just 10 days: healthcare workers and older
adults living in long-term care facilities are the first to be vaccinated with the goal of
vaccinating  every  person  as  soon  as  enough  vaccine  doses  are  available  The  Trump
Administration signs the second COVID Relief Act into law. The bill includes $900 billion
in  funding  for  enhanced  unemployment  benefits,  business  loans,  the  purchase  and
distribution of COVID-19 vaccines and testing kits, and direct cash payments of $600.
Proof of a negative COVID-19 test taken within 72 hours of departure is mandated for
all  foreign  national  travelers  entering  the  U.S.  from  the  U.K.  due  to  the  highly
transmissible COVID-19 B.1.1.7 / “Alpha” variant circulating in the U.K. The first case of
the  COVID-19  B.1.1.7  /  “Alpha”  variant  is  detected  in  the  U.S.  by  the  Colorado
Department  of  Health.  The  Oxford  University  /  AstraZeneca  COVID-19  vaccine  is
authorized for emergency use in the U.K. Within a week, 530,000 doses are available
for care-home residents, adults ages 80 years and older, and healthcare workers. One
year anniversary of the first reported case of COVID-19 to WHO. 2.8 million people in
the U.S. have received a COVID-19 vaccine dose— far short of the nation’s goal of 20
million.  HHS  and  CDC  announce  plans  to  provide  $22  billion  in  funding  for  states,
localities, and territories to support expanded COVID-19 testing and vaccine distribution
from  the  Coronavirus  Response  and  Relief  Supplemental  Appropriations  Act.  Amid
vaccine shortages, scientists at Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, and the National Institutes of
Health  (NIH),  look  for  ways  to  double  the  supply  to  prevent  future  shortages.  CDC
expands the COVID-19 negative test requirement to include all air passengers entering
the U.S. CDC continues to recommend that people test again 3-5 days after arrival and
stay home for 7 days after traveling to help slow the spread of COVID-19. The reported
death toll from COVID-19 in the U.S. surpasses 400,000. Dr. Rochelle Walensky begins
her  term  as  the  director  of  the  CDC  with  the  goal  of  rapidly  accelerating  COVID-19
testing,  surveillance,  and  vaccination,  while  confronting  the  public  health  challenges
posed by suicide, substance use disorder and overdose, chronic diseases and the tolls

caused  by  social  and  racial  injustice  and  inequity.  First  anniversary  of  the  first
laboratory-confirmed  case  of  COVID-19  in  the  U.S.  from  samples  taken  in  Snohomish
County,  Washington  and  of  CDC  activating  its  Emergency  Response  Center  (EOC)  to
respond  to  the  novel  coronavirus.  The  Biden  Administration  announces  the  National
Strategy for the COVID-19 Response, an outline of 7 goals to restore trust, vaccinate,
test, and treat COVID-19 while protecting schools, businesses, and workers in addition
to  advancing  health  equity  and  building  the  nation’s  preparedness  for  future
pandemics, calling it “a wartime undertaking.” The Biden Administration reverses the
Trump Administration’s attempt to withdraw from WHO and joins the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global  Access  Facility  “COVAX”,  a  program  aimed  at  vaccinating  people  in  low-  and
middle-income  countries  against  COVID-19.  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR  on  the
emerging and more transmissible COVID-19 B.1.1.7 / “Alpha” variant— now detected in
more  than  30  countries  and  in  12  U.S.  states.  CDC  recommends  universal  and
increased compliance with mitigation strategies, like social distancing and masking, and
higher vaccination coverage to protect the public. The first case of the COVID-19 P.1 /
“Gamma” variant, first identified by scientists in Brazil, is detected in Minnesota. More
than  23  million  COVID-19  vaccine  doses  have  been  administered  in  the  U.S.  The
number of recorded COVID-19 cases worldwide surpasses 100 million. The first case of
the COVID-19 B 1.351 / “Beta” variant, first identified by scientists in South Africa, is
detected in South Carolina. CDC Director Dr. Rochelle Walensky signs an extension of
the eviction moratorium through March 31, 2021, in an effort to help slow the spread of
COVID-19.  As  part  of  the  Biden  Administration’s  Executive  Order  on  Promoting
COVID-19 Safety in Domestic and International Travel, CDC requires face masks to be
worn  by  all  travelers  while  on  public  transportation  and  inside  transportation  hubs  to
prevent the spread of COVID-19 effective February 2, 2021. The Biden Administration,
with the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), HHS, and CDC, reach a $231.8 million deal
with the Australian company Ellume to supply rapid at-home COVID-19 tests in the U.S.,

committing  to  ship  100,000  test  kits  per  month  February  through  July.  Vaccine
distribution is disrupted in several states, including Texas, Missouri, Alabama, and New
Hampshire,  due  to  severe  winter  storms.  An  estimated  2.5  million  women  and  1.8
million  men  have  left  the  workforce  since  the  start  of  the  pandemic  in  the  U.S.  The
recorded  COVID-19  death  toll  in  the  U.S.  surpasses  500,000.  FDA  approves  an
emergency use authorization (EUA) for Johnson & Johnson’s one-shot COVID-19 vaccine
for  all  people  ages  18  years  and  older.  ACIP  recommends  Johnson  &  Johnson’s
COVID-19  vaccine  for  all  people  ages  18  years  and  older.  The  Biden  Administration
directs all states to make pre-K-12 teachers, school staff, and childcare workers eligible
for COVID-19 vaccinations and to prioritize this group during the month of March within
the Federal Retail Pharmacy Program. After this directive, the number of states where
these essential workers are eligible to be vaccinated increases by more than 50%. CDC
recommends that people who are fully vaccinated against COVID-19 can safely gather
with  other  fully  vaccinated  people  indoors  without  masks  and  without  socially
distancing. First anniversary of WHO declaring COVID-19 a global pandemic. The Biden
Administration  announces  plans  for  all  adult  Americans  to  be  eligible  and  able  to
receive  a  COVID-19  vaccine  by  May  1,  2021.  They  plan  to  make  COVID-19  vaccines
accessible by delivering vaccines to 700 community health centers in under-resourced
communities, doubling the number of pharmacies providing COVID-19 vaccines and the
number  of  federally  run  mass  vaccination  centers,  deploying  more  than  4,000
active-duty  troops  to  support  these  efforts,  and  by  launching  the  “Find  a  Vaccination
Website”  and  a  1-800  Number.  The  Biden  Administration  signs  the  $1.9  trillion
American  Rescue  Plan  into  law.  The  stimulus  bill  includes  funding  for  expanded
unemployment  benefits,  rental  assistance,  and  COVID-19  vaccinations,  as  well  as
extending the child tax credit for one year and providing direct cash payments of up to
$1,400 per person. The Biden Administration announces a $1.75 billion investment in
expanding  genomic  sequencing  to  identity  and  track  new  variants  and  $50  billion  to

expand the nation’s testing capabilities. More than 100 million COVID-19 vaccine doses
have  been  administered  in  the  U.S.  Ireland,  Iceland,  Denmark,  and  Norway  suspend
distribution of AstaZeneca’s COVID-19 vaccine as the European Union (EU) investigates
if  the  shot  may  be  linked  to  reports  of  blood  clots.  CDC  announces  $2.25  billion  in
spending over two years to address COVID-19 related health disparities for people living
in rural areas and racial and ethnic minority groups. The U.S. announces it will send 4
million  unused  doses  of  AstraZeneca’s  COVID-19  vaccine  from  its  stockpile  to  Mexico
and Canada. After 13 European countries halt distribution of the AstraZeneca COVID-19
vaccine pending review, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) announces that they did
not find any evidence that the vaccine causes blood clots, and while they were unable
to  definitively  rule  out  a  link  between  rare  blood  clots  events  and  the  vaccine,  the
AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine is still considered safe, is effective, and the benefits of
this  vaccine  still  outweigh  its  risks.  CDC  updates  its  guidance  on  social  distancing  in
K-12 schools: most elementary students can safely socially distance from at least 3 feet
instead  of  6  feet  inside  the  classroom  with  universal  masking,  but  middle  and  high
school  students  should  still  maintain  at  least  6  feet  apart  in  communities  where  the
transmission level is high. CDC announces $300 million in funding for states, localities,
territories, tribes, and tribal organizations for community health worker (CHW) services
to  address:  1)  disparities  in  access  to  COVID-19  related  services,  such  as  testing,
contact  tracing,  and  immunization;  2)  factors  that  increase  risk  of  severe  COVID-19
illness,  such  as  chronic  diseases,  smoking,  and  pregnancy;  and  3)  community  public
health  needs  that  have  been  exacerbated  by  COVID-19,  such  as  health  and  mental
health care access and food insecurity. CDC announces a plan to provide the patients
and staff of dialysis clinics easy access to COVID-19 vaccinations on-site. People with
chronic kidney disease on dialysis who contract COVID-19 are at higher risk of severe
adverse health outcomes— half require hospitalization and 20% – 30% die. Additionally,
advanced  stage  chronic  kidney  disease  disproportionately  affects  African  Americans,

Non-White Hispanics, and American Indians and Alaska Natives. To date, only 35% of
healthcare  workers  in  U.S.  dialysis  centers  have  been  vaccinated.  A  CDC  study  finds
that  mRNA  COVID-19  vaccines,  Pfizer-BioNTech  and  Moderna,  are  highly  effective  at
preventing  infection  with  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus  in  real-world  conditions  among
healthcare  personnel,  first  responders,  and  other  essential  workers  (groups  that  are
more  likely  than  the  general  population  to  be  exposed  to  the  virus  because  of  their
occupations),  reducing  their  risk  of  infection  by  90%.  CDC  Director  Dr.  Rochelle
Walensky extends the eviction moratorium through June 30, 2021, in an effort to help
slow the spread of COVID-19. CDC, in collaboration with the National Institutes of Health
(NIH), launches the community health testing program called “Say Yes! COVID Test” in
Pitt  County,  North  Carolina  and  Chattanooga/Hamilton  County,  Tennessee,  providing
160,000 residents with access to free, at-home COVID-19 tests to use up to three times
a  week  for  one  month  in  an  effort  determine  if  frequent  self-testing  can  reduce
community spread of COVID-19. CDC recommends that people who are fully vaccinated
against  COVID-19  can  safely  travel  at  lower-risk  to  themselves.  CDC  announces  $3
billion  in  additional  funding  for  expanded  COVID-19  vaccination  programs.  CDC
estimates that nearly 80% of pre-K-12 teachers, school staff, and childcare workers in
the U.S. have received at least their first shot of COVID-19 vaccine. CDC Director Dr.
Rochelle  Walensky  releases  a  statement  on  racism  and  health  amid  the  COVID-19
pandemic,  writing:  “Yet,  the  disparities  seen  over  the  past  year  were  not  a  result  of
COVID-19.  Instead,  the  pandemic  illuminated  inequities  that  have  existed  for
generations and revealed for all of America a known, but often unaddressed, epidemic
impacting public health: racism.” CDC and FDA issue a joint statement recommending
pausing the use of the Johnson & Johnson’s COVID-19 vaccine while six cases of a rare
and  serious  blood  clot  in  people  who  received  the  J&J  COVID-19  vaccine  are
investigated. More than 200 million COVID-19 vaccine doses have been administered in
the U.S. ACIP and FDA recommend the continued use of Johnson & Johnson’s COVID-19

vaccine for all people ages 18 years and older in the U.S., following a thorough safety
review after the use of the vaccine was paused when 6 cases of rare and severe type of
blood clots were reported. In March 2021, according to data from the Census Bureau,
18 million adults (16% of Black adults, 16% of Latino adults, and 6% of White adults)
and  up  to  8.8  million  children,  over  one-fifth  of  Black  and  Latino  children,  lived  in  a
household  without  enough  food  sometime  in  the  last  seven  days.  CDC  finds  that  the
Pfizer-BioNTech
 and
 Moderna
 mRNA
 COVID-19
 vaccines
 reduce
 the
 risk
 of
hospitalization  with  SARS-CoV-2  in  people  ages  65  years  and  older  by  94%.  FDA
expands  the  emergency  use  authorization  (EUA)  for  the  Pfizer-BioNTech  COVID-19
vaccine  to  include  all  adolescents  ages  12–15  years.  ACIP  recommends  the
Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for all adolescents ages 12–15 years. CDC finds that
mRNA  COVID-19  vaccines,  Pfizer-BioNTech  and  Moderna,  reduce  the  risk  of  infection
with the SARS-CoV-2 virus by approximately 94%. An estimated 5.1 million women left
the workforce when COVID-19 closed schools and child-care centers in 2020. Today, 1.3
million remain out of the workforce and only 56% of women in the U.S. are working for
a salary– the lowest percentage since 1986. The COVID-19 B.1.617.2 / “Delta” variant,
first identified in India, becomes the dominant variant in the U.S. The variant begins a
third wave of infections during the summer of 2021. CDC finds that the Pfizer-BioNTech
and Moderna mRNA COVID-19 vaccines reduce the risk of infection with the SARS-CoV-2
virus  by  91%  and  protect  against  severe  illness  and  hospitalization  if  a  breakthrough
infection  does  occur.  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR  showing  that  while  most
COVID-19–associated  hospitalizations  occur  in  older  adults,  severe  disease  requiring
hospitalization  can  occur  in  all  age  groups  –  including  adolescents  ages  12–17  years.
CDC Director Dr. Rochelle Walensky extends the eviction moratorium through July 31,
2021,  in  an  effort  to  help  slow  the  spread  of  COVID-19.  CDC’s  National  Breast  and
Cervical  Cancer  Early  Detection  Program  reports  that  the  total  number  of  cancer
screenings  decreased  by  an  average  of  87%  for  breast  cancer  and  84%  for  cervical

cancer during early 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, putting individuals at risk for
delayed diagnoses and poorer health outcomes. Access to medical care among racial
and  ethnic  minority  groups  and  people  with  lower  incomes  declined  the  most  during
this period: breast cancer screenings declined 98% among American Indian and Alaskan
Native women. American Indian and Alaska Natives had some of the highest rates of
hospitalization  and  death  in  the U.S.  early  in  the pandemic,  but American  Indian  and
Alaskan  Native  vaccination  campaigns  are  succeeding:  CDC’s  COVID-19  data  tracker
shows  that  American  Indians  and  Alaskan  Natives  have  the  highest  COVID-19
vaccination rate of any racial or ethnic group in the U.S. CDC and FDA release a joint
statement assuring the public that Americans who have been fully vaccinated do not
need  a  booster  shot  at  this  time.  CDC  issues  an  exception  for  unaccompanied
non-citizen  children  under  Title  42,  the  order  suspending  the  right  to  introduce
non-citizen persons into the U.S. due to the increased risk from COVID-19. The Lancet
reports  that  more  than  1.5  million  children  worldwide  have  lost  their  primary  or
secondary caregiver due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Amid a Delta variant surge, CDC
releases  updated  masking  guidance  recommending  that  everyone  in  areas  with
substantial  or  high  transmission  wear  a  mask  indoors.  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR
showing  an  increase  in  breakthrough  infections  of  COVID-19  in  Barnstable  County,
Massachusetts  in  July  of  2021.  The  early  data  showing  high  viral  loads  in  people
infected with the Delta variant of COVID-19 suggest a concern that, unlike with other
variants,  vaccinated  people  infected  with  Delta  can  transmit  the  virus  to  others.  This
MMWR becomes the most wildly circulated report in the agency’s history. CDC extends
Title 42, the order suspending the right to introduce non-citizen persons into the U.S. at
the  nation’s  southern  and  northern  land  borders,  except  for  the  unaccompanied
non-citizen children covered under the July 16, 2021, order, due to the increased risk
from  COVID-19.  CDC  reports  that  the  Indian  Health  Service  (IHIS)  has  administered
1,497,047  COVID-19  vaccine  doses—  more  than  70,000  shots  given  daily.  Amid  a

growing  surge  of  the  Delta  variant,  CDC  Director  Dr.  Rochelle  Walensky  signs  an
eviction  moratorium  in  areas  of  substantial  and  high  COVID-19  transmission  in
recognition that eviction moratoria, like quarantine, isolation, and social distancing, can
be  effective  public  health  measures  taken  to  prevent  the  spread  of  a  communicable
disease  like  COVID-19.  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR  showing  that  unvaccinated
individuals are more than twice as likely to be reinfected with COVID-19 than those who
were  fully  vaccinated  after  initially  contracting  the  virus  –  in  other  words,  COVID-19
vaccines  offer  stronger  protection  than  natural  immunity  alone  CDC  releases  a
statement  assuring  the  public  that  COVID-19  vaccination  is  safe  for  pregnant  and
breastfeeding people. CDC studies have found that an infection with COVID-19 during
pregnancy increases the risk of developing severe illness from COVID-19 and that there
is  no  evidence  that  any  vaccines,  including  the  COVID-19  vaccines,  cause  fertility
problems in women or men. ACIP recommends an additional dose of COVID-19 vaccine
after  the  two-dose  vaccine  series  for  all  people  with  moderately  to  severely
compromised  immune  systems.  CDC  announces  a  new  center,  the  Center  for
Forecasting and Outbreak Analytics (CFA), which aims to improve the nation’s ability to
forecast and model emerging health threats, including pandemics like COVID-19, using
data analytics. HHS, CDC, and FDA release a statement concluding that booster shots of
the  Pfizer-BioNTech,  Moderna,  and  Johnson  &  Johnson  COVID-19  vaccines  will  be
needed  to  protect  against  severe  disease,  hospitalization,  and  death  in  the  coming
months. FDA fully approves the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for all people ages
18  years  and  older.  Full  FDA  approval  further  reinforces  that  the  Pfizer-BioNTech
COVID-19  vaccine  has  been  shown  to  meet  the  agency’s  high  standards  for  safety,
effectiveness,
 and
 consistent
 quality
 in
 manufacturing.
 ACIP
 recommends
Pfizer-BioNTech’s  COVID-19  vaccine  for  all  people  ages  16  years  and  older.  CDC
releases a digital toolkit for individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
(IDD)  and  their  caregivers  to  navigate  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  with  communication

resources  like  videos,  stories,  posters,  and  interactive  activities  about  getting  tested,
vaccinated, masking, and social distancing. To date, CDC has also released more than
40 videos and 25 web resources in American Sign Language (ASL) on COVID-19. CDC
announces an additional $300 million in funding for community health worker services
to support COVID-19 prevention and control. The Biden Administration, working through
CDC,  invests  $2.1  billion  in  funding  for  state,  local,  and  territorial  public  health
departments  to  give  them  the  resources  needed  to  prevent  infections  in  healthcare
settings,  detect  and  contain  infectious  organisms,  enhance  laboratory  capacity,  and
combat
 infectious
 disease
 threats,
 including
 COVID-19.
 ACIP
 recommends
Pfizer-BioNTech’s  COVID-19  vaccine  boosters  for  all  people  ages  65  years  and  older,
residents of long-term care settings, people ages 50–64 years with underlying medical
conditions,  and  people  ages  18–49  years  with  underlying  medical  conditions  and  /  or
who live or work in high-risk settings to be given at least 6 months after their primary
vaccination  series.  CDC  releases  three  studies  in  MMWR  looking  at  the  COVID-19
pandemic’s effect on education. Despite school closures in some areas, around 96% of
K-12 schools have remained open for in-person learning and schools without universal
indoor  mask  mandates  were  more  than  three  times  more  likely  to  have  COVID-19
outbreaks  than  the  K-12  schools  that  required  universal  masking  from  day  one.  CDC
issues an urgent health advisory to increase COVID-19 vaccination rates among people
who  are  pregnant,  breastfeeding,  or  who  are  trying  to  become  pregnant.  More  than
22,000  pregnant  people  have  been  hospitalized  with  COVID-19  and  161  have  died.
COVID-19  in  pregnant  people  carries  a  two-fold  risk  of  admission  to  intensive  care,  a
70%  increased  risk  of  death,  and  adverse  pregnancy  outcomes  that  can  include
preterm  birth,  stillbirth,  and  the  admission  of  a  newborn  into  the  ICU  with  COVID-19
WHO  publishes  a  clinical  case  definition  of  “post  COVID-19  condition”  or  long  COVID.
The  symptoms  of  long  COVID  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  fatigue,  shortness  of
breath, and / or cognitive dysfunction that persists for at least two months and impacts

everyday life, three months from the onset of an initial COVID-19 infection. More than
140,000  children  in  the  U.S.  have  lost  their  primary  or  secondary  caregiver  to  the
COVID-19 pandemic. One of every 168 American Indian and Alaska Native children, 1 of
every 310 Black children, 1 of every 412 non-White Hispanic children, 1 of every 612
Asian children, and 1 of every 753 White children have now experienced orphanhood or
the  death  of  caregivers.  CDC  adds  mental  health  conditions  to  the  list  of  risk  factors
associated  with  severe  illness  from  COVID-19.  ACIP  recommends  Moderna  or
Pfizer-BioNTech’s COVID-19 vaccine boosters for all people ages 65 years and older and
all people ages 18 years and older who are residents of long-term care settings, have
underlying medical conditions, and who live or work high-risk settings to be given least
6 months after their primary vaccination series. ACIP also recommends booster shots
for  everyone  who  received  Johnson  &  Johnson’s  COVID-19  vaccine  more  than  two
months  ago.  CDC  announces  $26  million  in  funding  for  CDC’s  new  Center  for
Forecasting  and  Outbreak  Analytics  (CFA).  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR  showing  that
unvaccinated individuals who had been recently infected with COVID-19 were about 5
times  more  likely  to  be  re-infected  with  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus  than  fully  vaccinated
individuals  with  no  prior  COVID-19  infections.  ACIP  recommends  the  Pfizer-BioNTech
pediatric COVID-19 vaccine for all children ages 5–11 years. On the sixth annual One
Health Day, a global campaign that highlights the interconnected relationship between
people,  animals,  and  their  environment,  CDC  releases  a  statement  on  the  COVID-19
pandemic, noting that more than 400 different animals have been found to be infected
with  COVID-19  and,  as  a  zoonotic  virus,  SARS-CoV-2  can  spread  between  people  and
animals. All non-citizens who are traveling to the U.S. will now be required to be fully
vaccinated and provide proof of their vaccination status to fly to the U.S. All travelers
will continue to be required to show a negative pre-departure COVID-19 test taken no
more than three days before they board their flights. CDC and WHO report that more
than 22 million infants missed their first dose of the measles vaccine in 2020. This is

the largest global increase of unvaccinated children in two decades and is due in-part to
the disruptions the COVID-19 pandemic has had on health care and immunization Amid
worries  of  an  upcoming  Omicron  surge,  CDC  strengthens  its  recommendation  urging
that  everyone  ages  18  years  and  older  who  received  a  Johnson  &  Johnson,
Pfizer-BioNTech, or Moderna COVID-19 vaccine should receive a booster after they are
fully  vaccinated.  WHO  designates  the  COVID-19  “Omicron”  variant,  first  identified  by
scientists in South Africa, as a “variant of concern.” Changes in the spike protein of the
Omicron  variant  of  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus,  concern  scientists  around  the  world  due  to
the  potential  for  increased  transmissibility  and  decreased  vaccine  protection.  CDC
recommends that everyone ages 18 years and older who received a Johnson & Johnson
COVID-19 vaccine should receive a booster shot 2 months after their initial J&J vaccine.
The first case of the Omicron variant in the U.S. is detected by the California and San
Francisco Departments of Public Health. A second case of the Omicron variant in the
U.S. is detected by the Minnesota and the New York City Departments of Health. FDA
revises the emergency use authorization (EUA) for Eli Lilly’s two monoclonal antibodies,
Bamlanivimab  and  Etesevimab,  to  allow  the  drugs  to  be  used  together  for  the
treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in all pediatric patients, including newborns,
who  have  a  positive  COVID-19  test  and  are  at  high  risk  for  progression  to  severe
COVID-19. CDC introduces a new one-day testing policy requiring international travelers
to show a negative pre-departure COVID-19 test taken 24 hours before they board their
flights to the U.S. FDA issues an EUA for AstraZeneca’s Evusheld, a treatment of two
monoclonal  antibodies  for  the  pre-exposure  prevention  of  COVID-19  in  adults  and
children ages 12 years and older who weigh at least 88 pounds and have moderate to
severely  compromised  immune  function  or  a  history  of  severe  adverse  reactions  to
COVID-19  vaccines.  CDC  and  FDA  expand  COVID-19  booster  recommendations  to
include  everyone  ages  16  years  and  older.  The  recorded  death  toll  from  COVID-19
surpasses 800,000 in the U.S. One in every 100 people ages 65 years and older in the

U.S.  has  died.  ACIP  updates  its  recommendations  to  express  a  clinical  preference  for
individuals to receive, when possible, an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine, Pfizer-BioNTech or
Moderna,  over  Johnson  &  Johnson’s  COVID-19  vaccine.  CDC  releases  two  reports  in
MMWR  highlighting  the  use  of  test-to-stay  practices  to  help  keep  students  in  school
during the COVID-19 pandemic. CDC releases data estimating that the Omicron variant
is around 1.6 times more transmissible than the Delta variant. FDA authorizes Pfizer’s
anti-viral pill Paxlovid to treat COVID-19 under an EUA for adults and children ages 12
years and older who weigh at least 88 pounds who test positive and are at high risk for
progression to severe disease. It is the first treatment for COVID-19 that is taken orally
and  can  be  used  at  home.  FDA  authorizes  Merck’s  anti-viral  pill  Molnupiravir  to  treat
COVID-19 under an EUA for all adults and children ages 18 years and older who test
positive  and  are  at  high  risk  for  progression  to  severe  disease.  It  is  the  second
treatment  for  COVID-19  that  is  taken  orally  and  can  be  used  at  home  but,  despite
supply concerns, Paxlovid remains the preferred oral anti-viral treatment for COVID-19.
CDC  updates  its  recommendations  for  the  isolation  and  quarantine  periods  for
healthcare  workers,  decreasing  their  isolation  time  after  infection  with  COVID-19.
Asymptomatic healthcare workers can now return to work after 7 days with a negative
test  and  healthcare  workers  who  have  received  all  recommended  COVID-19  vaccines
doses, including a booster, do not need to quarantine after a high-risk exposure. CDC
shortens  the  recommended  isolation  period  for  people  with  COVID-19  to  5  days,
followed by 5 days of wearing a mask around others if they are asymptomatic or if their
symptoms  are  resolving  (resolving  is  defined  as  without  a  fever  for  24  hours).  CDC
updates  the  recommended  quarantine  period  for  people  exposed  to  someone  with
COVID-19  to  wear  a  mask  around  others  for  10  days  and  get  tested  on  day  5  if  you
have been boosted or vaccinated within the last 6 months. If the exposed individual is
unvaccinated, CDC now recommends a quarantine period of 5 days, followed by strict
mask  use  for  an  additional  5  days.  As  Delta  and  Omicron  spread,  New  York  state

records its highest number of new COVID-19 cases in a single day since the pandemic
began  –  with  114,082  new  confirmed  cases.  The  U.S.  reports  nearly  1  million  new
COVID-19 infections– the highest daily total of any country in the world. The number of
hospitalized COVID-19 patients has risen nearly 50% in just one week. FDA amends the
emergency use authorization (EUA) for the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine to allow a
single  booster  dose  for  all  individuals  ages  12–15  years;  shortens  the  time-period
between the completion of primary vaccination series of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19
vaccine and a booster dose to at least five months; and allows for a third primary series
dose  for  certain  immunocompromised  children  ages  5–11  years.  ACIP  shortens  the
recommended time between the primary vaccination series and a booster shot for the
Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine from 6 months to 5 months. ACIP recommends that
moderately  or  severely  immunocompromised  children  ages  5–11  years  receive  an
additional  primary  dose  of  the  Pfizer-BioNTech  COVID-19  vaccine  28  days  after  their
second shot. ACIP recommends that all adolescents ages 12–17 years receive a booster
shot  5  months  after  their  initial  Pfizer-BioNTech  vaccination  series.  FDA  amends  the
EUA for the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine to shorten the time between the primary series
of the vaccine and a booster dose from at least 5 months to 6 months for individuals
ages 18 years and older. The same day, CDC endorses the FDA’s recommendation. The
Biden Administration purchases 600,000 doses of GSK and Vir Biotechnology’s antibody
treatment Sotrovimab, after the drug was found to be effective against both the Delta
and Omicron variants. CDC updates guidelines on masks to emphasize fit, comfort, and
consistent wear. In one month, the daily average of new COVID-19 infections reported
in the U.S. spikes from 119,215 to 805,062. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)
sues an Arkansas jail on behalf of detainees who reported COVID-19 like symptoms and
say  they  were  unknowingly  given  ivermectin  and  hydroxychloroquine,  two  drugs  that
CDC does not recommend for the treatment of COVID-19. To help meet the demand for
testing  during  the  Omicron  surge,  the  Biden  Administration  purchases  1  billion

COVID-19 tests and creates an online portal where people can order free at-home rapid
antigen  COVID-19  tests  through  the  U.S.  Postal  Service  (USPS).  CDC  releases  data  in
MMWR showing that during the Delta surge, both COVID-19 vaccination and surviving a
prior infection provided protection against infection and hospitalization from COVID-19.
A  study  published  in  the  American  Journal  of  Epidemiology  finds  that  COVID-19
vaccination  has  no  impact  on  male  or  female  fertility,  but  that  a  COVID-19  infection
may be associated with a short-term decline in male fertility. FDA further revises the
EUA  for  Eli  Lilly’s  two  monoclonal  antibodies,  Bamlanivimab  and  Etesevimab,  to  limit
their  use  after  the  treatment  is  shown  to  be  ineffective  against  the  Omicron  variant.
FDA revises the EUA for Regeneron’s monoclonal antibody, Regen-cov, to limit its use
after the treatment is shown to be ineffective against the Omicron variant. The Omicron
variant now accounts for approximately 99% of all current COVID-19 cases in the U.S.
FDA  fully  approves  the  Moderna  COVID-19  vaccine  for  all  people  ages  18  years  and
older. Full FDA approval further reinforces that the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine has been
shown  to  meet  the  agency’s  high  standards  for  safety,  effectiveness,  and  consistent
quality in manufacturing. To date, COVID-19 vaccines are estimated to have saved at
least  a  quarter  of  a  million  lives  and  prevented  more  than  1  million  hospitalizations.
ACIP recommends the use of Moderna’s vaccine for all people ages 18 years and older.
The death rate from COVID-19 climbs 30% in two weeks amid an Omicron surge, with
more  than  2,600  people  dying  from  COVID-19  each  day.  The  number  of  recorded
deaths in the U.S. due to COVID-19 surpasses 900,000. A study is published in Nature
showing  that  even  a  mild  case  of  COVID-19  appears  to  increase  the  risk  of  heart
problems for one year after infection. The study’s authors suggest that COVID-19 might
be  as  much  of  a  risk  factor  for  heart  disease  as  high  blood  pressure,  diabetes,  or
smoking. CDC releases data showing that COVID-19 vaccine boosters remain safe and
were  highly  effective  against  severe  disease  during  the  Omicron  and  Delta  variant
surges for everyone ages 5 years and older. CDC releases data in MMWR showing that

the Omicron variant rose from 1% of all infections in the U.S. to 99% of all infections in
just 6 weeks (compared to 18 weeks for Delta). CDC releases data in MMWR showing
that  maternal  COVID-19  vaccination  during  pregnancy  with  an  mRNA  vaccine,
Pfizer-BioNTech  or  Moderna,  reduces  the  risk  of  COVID-19  hospitalization  in  infants
(babies  under  6  months)  by  around  60%.  CDC  releases  two  reports  in  MMWR  on
pediatric
 emergency
 department
 visits
 during
 the
 COVID-19
 pandemic
 and
recommends  increased  awareness  of  the  health  concerns  among  children  and
adolescents  that  could  arise  due  to  delayed  medical  care  and  heightened  emotional
distress, especially for adolescent girls (ages 12–17 years). The Wisconsin Department
of  Health  Services  confirms  that  a  child  in  Wisconsin  has  died  from  multisystem
inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), a rare but serious condition associated with
COVID-19  infection  in  children.  WHO  releases  data  showing  that  the  COVID-19
pandemic triggered a 25% increase in anxiety and depression worldwide, with young
people and women at the highest risk. CDC updates the “COVID-19 Community Level,”
showing that more than 90% of the U.S. population is in a location with either low or
medium COVID-19 community transmission level. The U.S. has now donated more than
480  million  COVID-19  vaccine  doses  to  110  countries.  While  access  to  COVID-19
vaccines has expanded, the gap in COVID-19 vaccination rates between urban and rural
areas in the U.S. has more than doubled since April 2021. More than 10 billion people
have received a COVID-19 vaccine, with WHO reporting that 10,704,043,684 COVID-19
vaccine doses have been administered worldwide. About 56% of the world is now fully
vaccinated,  but  many  regions  still  lack  access,  especially  on  the  African  continent
where  less  than  20%  of  the  total  population  is  currently  vaccinated.  Hawaii  becomes
the last state to announce an end to its universal indoor mask mandate, scheduled for
March 26, 2022. On CDC’s recommendation, the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA)  extends  the  mask  requirement  for  all  public  transportation  and  transportation
hubs  through  April  18,  2022.  The  number  of  recorded  deaths  due  to  COVID-19

surpasses  6  million  worldwide,  with  WHO  reporting  6,019,085  confirmed  deaths.  The
true number is likely much higher. The number of recorded COVID-19 cases surpasses
450 million worldwide, with WHO reporting 450,229,635 confirmed infections. The true
number  is  likely  much  higher.  Two-year  anniversary  of  WHO  declaring  COVID-19  a
global  pandemic.  CDC  updates  the  “COVID-19  Community  Level,”  showing  that  more
than 98% of the U.S. population is in a location with either a low or medium COVID-19
community transmission levels. In the U.S., 92% of all children ages 5–11 years now live
within 5 miles of a vaccine provider. CDC releases data in MMWR showing that school
districts  in  Arkansas  with  universal  mask  requirements  had  a  23%  lower  incidence  of
COVID-19 among staff and students compared to districts without mask requirements
during  August  –  October  2021.  CDC  estimates  that  23%  of  all  current  COVID-19
infections  in  the  U.S.  are  caused  by  the  Omicron  BA.2  subvariant,  with  initial  data
suggesting that BA.2 appears to be more transmissible than the Omicron BA.1 variant.
Several  regions  in  China  face  new  lockdowns  under  the  “COVID  Zero”  policy  when
cases of the Omicron variant are found. Tens of millions of people are required to stay
inside  their  homes,  key  technology  manufacturers  like  Foxconn  and  Unimicron  close
factories,  and  the  production  and  distribution  of  goods  is  disrupted  throughout  the
world.  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR  showing  that  the  COVID-19  hospitalization  rate
among infants and children ages 4 years and younger was 5 times higher during the
peak of the Omicron variant surge when compared to the Delta variant– 63% of those
children  hospitalized  had  no  underlying  medical  conditions.  After  officially  recording
more than 43 million COVID-19 cases, India begins vaccinating adolescents ages 12–14
years  with  the  COVID-19  vaccine  Corbevax  and  schools  reopen  after  two  years  of
closures.  CDC  outlines  its  goals  for  the  third  year  of  a  global  COVID-19  response:  to
increase  vaccination  levels  around  the  world,  reduce  spread  of  COVID-19  and  its
impact,  expand  scientific  knowledge  of  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus,  and  strengthen  public
health  leadership  while  improving  long-term  health  security  worldwide.  At  the  World

Trade  Organization  (WTO)  meeting  the  U.S.,  the  European  Union,  India,  and  South
Africa forge a preliminary agreement on a COVID-19 vaccine intellectual property (IP)
waiver,  hoping  to  expand  access  to  vaccines  around  the  world.  CDC  releases  data  in
two  MMWRs  showing  that  adults  who  received  3  doses  of  a  COVID-19  mRNA  vaccine
were 94% less likely to be put on a ventilator or die from COVID-19 during the Omicron
surge compared to non-vaccinated adults in the U.S. and that Black adults are currently
4 times more likely to be hospitalized than White adults. Data from the Census Bureau
shows that deaths in the U.S. between 2019 – 2020 increased by approximately 19%
after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. That is the largest spike in
mortality  in  the  U.S.  in  100  years.  CDC  estimates  that  about  55%  of  all  current
COVID-19 cases in the U.S. are caused by the Omicron BA.2 subvariant. CDC and FDA
both recommend a second mRNA COVID-19 vaccine booster for immunocompromised
individuals and all adults ages 50 and older 4 months after their last booster dose. CDC
recommends that all adults who received a primary vaccine series and booster dose of
Johnson  &  Johnson’s  COVID-19  vaccine  receive  a  second  booster  dose  with  an  mRNA
COVID-19  vaccine.  CDC  recommends  that  all  adults  who  received  a  primary  vaccine
series  and  booster  dose  of  Johnson  &  Johnson’s  COVID-19  vaccine  receive  a  second
booster dose with an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. The number of recorded deaths due to
COVID-19 reaches 976,229, with more than 79,853,683 total reported cases of the virus
in the U.S. CDC releases data from the Adolescent Behaviors and Experiences Survey
(ABES)  showing  that  from  January  2021  –  June  2021  among  high-school  aged
adolescents:  44%  report  feeling  persistently  sad  or  hopeless;  55%  report  emotional
abuse in the home; 11% report physical abuse in the home; and 29% report job loss by
an  adult  in  the  home.  Lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  and  female  youth  reported  the  poorest
overall  mental  health,  the  most  emotional  abuse  by  a  parent  or  caregiver,  and
attempted suicide more their peers during the COVID-19 pandemic. CDC announces the
termination of Title 42, an Order that suspended the right to introduce migrants into the

U.S. due to the public health risk of COVID-19, effective May 23, 2022. CDC releases
data  in  MMWR  showing  that  the  risk  for  cardiac  complications  in  all  age  groups  was
significantly higher after COVID-19 infection when compared to after mRNA COVID-19
vaccination.  The  Omicron  subvariant  BA.2  now  makes  up  more  than  85%  of  all  new
COVID-19 infections in the U.S. CDC’s mask mandate for indoor public transportation is
struck  down  by  a  judge  in  Florida.  CDC  releases  data  in  MMWR  showing  that  of  the
children  ages  5–11  years  who  were  hospitalized  with  COVID-19  during  the  first  few
months  of  the  Omicron  surge,  3  in  10  had  no  underlying  medical  conditions,  9  in  10
were  unvaccinated,  and  2  in  10  required  ICU  care.  The  Department  of  Homeland
Security (DHS) extends the COVID-19 vaccine requirement for all non-citizens entering
the U.S.– in addition to the requirement that all travelers show a negative antigen test
taken  within  one  day  of  departure.  For  the  second  year  in  a  row,  COVID-19  was  the
third  leading  cause  of  death  in  the  U.S.–  after  heart  disease  and  cancer.  The  Biden
Administration  purchases  20  million  doses  of  Pfizer’s  oral  anti-viral  drug  Paxlovid  as
part  of  the  Test-to-Treat  initiative–  2,200  locations  where  Americans  can  receive  free
COVID-19 testing and, if needed, treatment. These doses will also be used to double the
number of pharmacies with Paxlovid stocked from 20,000 to 40,000. It is estimated that
during  2000–2018,  measles  vaccines  prevented  23.2  million  deaths,  but  delays  in
routine vaccinations caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and crises in Ukraine, Ethiopia,
Somalia, and Afghanistan have led to a nearly 80% worldwide rise in measles cases in
2022.  Data  from  CDC’s  National  Commercial  Laboratory  Seroprevalence  Study
estimates  that,  as  of  February  2022,  approximately  75%  of  children  and  adolescents
showed  infection-induced  antibodies  to  SARS-CoV-2  (evidence  of  a  previous  infection
with  SARS-CoV-2  –  also  called  seroprevalence)  and  that,  since  December  2021,
approximately one third have become newly seropositive. The current proportion of the
U.S. population fully vaccinated against COVID-19 broken down by age group is: 5–11,
28%;  12–17,  59%;  18–49,  69%;  50–64,  80%;  and  ≥65  years,  90%.  CDC  recommends

that everyone continue to wear a mask while in indoor transportation hubs to prevent
the spread of COVID-19 – but this is no longer legally enforceable. WHO estimates that
there have been approximately 15 million direct or indirect deaths (also called “excess
mortality”)  globally  from  January  2020  –  December  2021  that  were  caused  by  the
COVID-19 pandemic. South-East Asia, Europe, and the Americas accounted for 84% of
the excess deaths. During the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a 35% increase in
the firearm homicide rate, resulting in the highest firearm homicide rate in more than
25  years.  Firearm  homicide  rates  are  the  highest  among  males,  adolescents,  young
adults,  and  non-Hispanic  Black  and  non-Hispanic  American  Indian  and  Alaska  Native
people.  Rates  of  firearm  suicide  remained  high,  increasing  most  notably  among
American Indian and Alaska Native males ages 10–44, and are highest in rural areas.
The  number  of  recorded  deaths  due  to  COVID-19  in  the  U.S.  reaches  1  million
(1,000,000). Initial research suggests that between 4% and 36% of all people infected
with COVID-19 will experience symptoms lasting at least six-months, potentially leading
to  between  5  and  25  million  people  in  the  U.S.  experiencing  a  long-term  disability
(approximately 200 million people worldwide). Experts and disability advocates worry
that the long-term consequences of this virus are underappreciated. Researchers from
Brown University School of Public Health, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Harvard
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, estimate that approximately 50% of COVID-19 deaths
in  the  U.S.  were  vaccine-preventable  deaths.  ACIP  recommends  Pfizer-BioNTech’s
COVID-19 vaccine boosters for everyone ages 5–11 years to be given at least 5 months
after their primary vaccination series. ACIP also recommends everyone ages 12 years
and  older  who  is  immunocompromised  and  those  ages  50  years  and  older  should
receive  a  second  booster  dose  at  least  4  months  after  their  first  to  prevent  severe
disease, hospitalization, and death. CDC releases data in MMWR showing that COVID-19
survivors are twice as likely to develop a pulmonary embolism or respiratory condition
and that approximately 1 in 5 adults now have at least one health condition that may

be  attributable  to  a  previous  COVID-19  infection.  CDC  updates  the  “COVID-19
Community Level,” showing that 71.52% of the U.S. population is in a location with low
COVID-19 community transmission levels; 20.73% have medium levels and 7.76% have
high  COVID-19  community  levels.  North  Korea  reports  a  total  of  3.27  million  “fever
patients.” The weekly average of new COVID-19 infections in the U.S. is now six times
higher  than  it  was  in  2021.  Currently,  there  are  119,725  new  cases  reported  each
week–  a  number  that  is  “grossly  underreported”  according  to  experts–  compared  to
May  28,  2021,  when  there  were  17,887.  The  U.S.  Department  of  Justice  (DOJ)  asks  a
federal  appeals  court  to  overturn  the  order  that  declared  CDC’s  mandate  requiring
individuals  to  wear  masks  on  public  transportation  unlawful.  Authorities  in  Shanghai
announce that they are partially reopening China’s largest city after two months of a
COVID-19  lockdown  that  has  kept  millions  of  people  strictly  in  their  homes  and
employed  both  mass  testing  and  isolation  of  anyone  infected  with  COVID-19  in
centralized facilities. The U.S. has recorded a total of 84,145,569 COVID-19 infections
and 1,003,571 (more than 1 million) deaths from COVID-19. A Kaiser Foundation study
tested three widespread false statements about COVID-19 vaccines: “pregnant women
should not get the COVID-19 vaccine; it is unsafe for women who are breastfeeding to
get  a  COVID-19  vaccine;  and  the  COVID-19  vaccines  have  been  shown  to  cause
infertility.” Vaccine misinformation is so pervasive that about six in ten U.S. adults and
seven in ten women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant either believed
or were unsure about at least one of these false statements. The global market for N95
masks  is  predicted  to  reach  $11.8  billion  by  2026.  ACIP  recommends  Moderna  and
Pfizer-BioNTech’s COVID-19 vaccines for everyone ages 6 months – 5 years, expanding
vaccine  eligibility  to  over  20  million  additional  children  in  the  U.S.  All  people  ages  6
months  and  older  are  now  eligible  for  COVID-19  vaccination  in  the  U.S.  ACIP
recommends Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine for everyone ages 6–17 years. As COVID-19
case numbers rise across the U.S. due to the highly transmissible omicron subvariants

BA.4 and  BA.5.,  FDA calls for Omicron-specific  updates to  COVID-19 vaccine boosters
from  Pfizer-BioNTech  and  Moderna  in  fall  2022.  CDC  data  shows  that  Omicron
subvariants BA.4 and BA.5 are now dominant in the U.S., making up over 70% of new
COVID-19  infections.  New  York  Department  of  Health  recommends  that  all  people
should  wear  N95,  KN95,  or  KF94  masks  in  all  public  indoor  settings  and  when  in
crowded  outdoor  areas  due  to  high  community  transmission  of  COVID-19.  FDA  fully
approves Pfizer-BioNTech’s COVID-19 vaccine for everyone ages 12–15 years. Full FDA
approval further reinforces that Pfizer-BioNTech’s COVID-19 vaccine has been shown to
meet  the  agency’s  high  standards  for  safety,  effectiveness,  and  consistent  quality  in
manufacturing.     To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/museum/timeline/covid19.html
