Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. May 28, 2020 Statement of John Howard, M.D., J.D.,
Director,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Centers  for  Disease
Control and Prevention
U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  House  Education  and  Labor
Subcommittee  on  Workforce  Protections  Good  morning,  Chairwoman  Adams,  Ranking
Member Byrne, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Foxx, and distinguished members of
the  Subcommittee.  My  name  is  John  Howard  and  I  am  the  Director  of  the  National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, or NIOSH, which is part of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) within the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services  (HHS).  I  am  here  today  to  provide  the  Subcommittee  information  about  the
risks that workers face from coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and the actions taken by
the  CDC  to  protect  workers.  COVID-19  is  a  new  disease,  caused  by  a  novel  (or  new)
coronavirus that has not previously been seen in humans. This new disease, officially
named Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) by the World Health Organization (WHO),
is  caused  by  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus.  There  are  many  types  of  human  coronaviruses
including
 some
 that
 commonly
 cause
 mild
 upper-respiratory
 tract
 illnesses.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses. Some cause illness in people, and others,
such as canine and feline coronaviruses, only infect animals. Rarely, coronaviruses that
infect animals have emerged to infect people and can spread between people. This is
suspected  to  have  occurred  for  the  virus  that  causes  COVID-19.   Middle  East
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) are two
other examples of coronaviruses that originated in animals and then spread to people.
CDC  is  America’s  health  protection  agency  and  works  24/7  to  save  lives  and  protect
America from health, safety and security threats, both foreign and in the United States.

Addressing infectious diseases like COVID-19 is fundamental to our mission and is our
highest  priority.  CDC  is  building  upon  decades  of  experience  and  leadership  in
responding to prior infectious disease emergencies, including SARS, MERS, Ebola, Zika,
and  pandemic  influenza  to  meet  new  challenges  presented  by  COVID-19.  These
challenges are many, and they are historic. Every single American is affected by this
pandemic, and CDC is leaning into this public health crisis with every applicable asset
we have. CDC is drawing on its emergency response capacity and its relationships with
state,  tribal,  local,  and  territorial  (STLT),  global,  and  private  sector  partners;  and  is
leveraging  our  workforce’s  strengths  in  public  health  surveillance,  and  laboratory
capacity,  to  address  this  public  health  emergency.  CDC  is  developing  guidance  for
healthcare  professionals  and  the  public  to  encourage  safer  practices,  improve  health
outcomes, and save lives.  CDC is also working with partners to develop guidance and
decision  tools  to  assist  state  and  local  officials  and  other  stakeholders  in  adjusting
mitigation strategies. Importantly, CDC is preparing the nation’s public health system
and the private sector for a vaccine when one is available. Abroad, CDC is leveraging
investments  in  global  health  security,  pandemic  influenza  preparedness  and  public
health  infrastructures  and  capacities  built  through  programs  like  the  President’s
Emergency  Plan  for  AIDS  Relief  to  support  countries  in  mitigating  and  containing
COVID-19.  The  emergence  and  rapid  spread  of  COVID-19  confirms  that  an  infectious
disease threat anywhere is a threat to Americans everywhere, including here at home.
As  of  May  21,  2020,  there  have  been  1,551,095  total  cases  of  COVID-19  reported  to
CDC. Many of these cases are in “working-age” adults with over 900,000 cases in those
aged 18-64. In this age group, over 57,000 are cases known to be among healthcare
workers.   It  is  not  known  how  many  of  these  infections  occurred  as  a  result  of  their
work.  Several  states  are  reporting  numbers  of  cases  among  healthcare  personnel  on
their  websites.  CDC  is  working  to  better  understand  the  full  scope  of  cases  among
workers in non-healthcare settings. The new CDC case report form, released on May 5,

added  questions  about  categories  of  healthcare  workers  and  about  workplace
exposures  in  critical  infrastructure  industries.   States  have  been  asked  to  start  using
this new form by May 15, 2020.  CDC is actively trying to learn more about the burden
of COVID-19 among various industries and occupations through other data collected by
CDC, state and local health departments, and other organizations.   The Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970 established the National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH) as a research agency focused on the study of worker safety and
health.  NIOSH  is  a  part  of  the  CDC  and  has  the  mandate  “to  assure  every  man  and
woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions and to preserve our human
resources.” The actions taken by NIOSH as part of CDC’s response to COVID-19 fall into
three  main  categories.  First,  NIOSH  has  taken  actions  to  increase  and  augment  the
supply  of  respiratory  protective  devices,  a  key  component  of  personal  protective
equipment (PPE) that workers use as the last line of defense against exposure to toxic
and infectious agents. Second, NIOSH staff, with an expertise in workplace safety and
health and trained in industrial hygiene, engineering, medicine, and epidemiology, are
among members of CDC field teams deployed to carry out site visits at meat processing
plants.  These  teams  are  responding  to  requests  from  state  and  local  health
departments,  factories,  and  plants  engaged  in  critical  infrastructure  activities.  Third,
NIOSH works in close partnership with our colleagues at the CDC, as well as those in the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the U.S. Department of Labor’s Occupational
Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA),  and  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture’s
Food  Safety  and  Inspection  Service  (FSIS),  to  develop  information  and  guidelines  for
employers and employees to work safely and reduce their risk of workplace exposure to
the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 disease.  I will now address these activities
in  some  detail.    Through  its  National  Personal  Protective  Technology  Laboratory
(NPPTL), NIOSH is responsible for establishing criteria, testing, and certifying approval
of respiratory protective equipment, including filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), also

known  popularly  as  “N95”  masks.  This  is  a  key  part  of  the  personal  protective
equipment
 (PPE)
 ensemble
 in
 many
 workplaces,
 and
 particularly
 within
healthcare settings. During this COVID-19 pandemic, NIOSH has taken aggressive steps
to increase the supply of available certified FFRs. The focus for the respirator approval
program  at  NPPTL  during  the  COVID-19  outbreak  includes:  (1)  supporting  existing
NIOSH  respirator  approval  holders  to  increase  their  ongoing  production;  (2)  quickly
evaluating  new  domestic  respirator  applications  for  approval;  and  (3)  providing
up-to-date  PPE  guidance.   According  to  the  NIOSH  Certified  Equipment  list,  there  are
currently  535  active  filtering  facepiece  respirator  approvals.  These  include  the  N95
respirator, the most commonly used respirator in healthcare. In April 2020, NIOSH more
than tripled the rate of respirator approval and denial decisions, from 30 to over 100
decisions  per  month.  This  was  accomplished  by  having  NPPTL  staff  scientists,
engineers, and technicians working longer shifts, 7-days a week, to help increase the
availability  of  respirators  for  the  workers  who  need  them.  To  expand  the  range  of
respirators  available  to  healthcare  workers,  NIOSH  worked  with  the  FDA  who  had
developed Emergency Use Authorizations (EUA) to significantly expand the inventory of
respirators  available  for  use  in  healthcare  settings.  The  FDA  issued  these  EUAs:  (1)
permitting  use  of  Powered  Air  Purifying  Respirators  (PAPRs),  elastomeric  respirators,
and other NIOSH-approved FFRs that had not been previously cleared for use in health
care  settings  by  the  FDA;  (2)  permitting  the  use  of  stockpiled  respirators  that  had
exceeded  their  rated  shelf-life;  (3)  permitting  use  of  certain  respirators  from  seven
foreign countries approved under the standards in those countries; and (4) permitting
use  of  certain  decontaminated  FFRs.  CDC  recognizes  that  more  needs  to  be  done
during  this  COVID-19  pandemic  to  ensure  health  and  safety  products  entering  the
United  States  from  other  countries  provide  the  protection  our  workers  have  come  to
expect from NIOSH-approved equipment. To ensure this level of confidence, NIOSH has
developed an assessment to evaluate the filter efficiency of respirators approved under

standards used in other countries that are similar to NIOSH-approved N95 respirators.
Likewise,  NIOSH  has  set  up  a  limited  evaluation  program  to  examine  samples  from
stockpiled  respirators  and  from  respirators  that  have  been  decontaminated  for  reuse
under  FDA  EUAs.   NPPTL  is  conducting  these  tests  at  our  laboratory  in  Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania,  and  Morgantown,  West  Virginia.  The  international  assessments  have
resulted in the evaluation of over 130 international respirator models in the past two
months. More than 50 percent of the models tested were substandard, providing data
needed  to  support  the  FDA’s  EUA  decisions  and  other  Federal  agency  decisions  to
remove  substandard  and  counterfeit  products  from  the  market,  and  data  to  support
state  and  hospital  purchasing  decisions.  To  further  expand  the  types  of  devices
available for the COVID-19 response, on April 14, 2020, NIOSH promulgated an interim
final rule that created a new class of Powered Air-Purifying Respirator (PAPR).  The PAPR
is a type of respirator that includes a battery-powered blower that pulls air through an
N95  or  high  efficiency  particulate  air  (HEPA)  filter  and  delivers  clean  air  across  the
worker’s face into either a tight-fitting face mask or a loose-fitting hood. They provide
protection  that  is  at  least  2.5-times  better  than  a  N95  filtering  facepiece  respirator.
With this rulemaking, parallel performance standards were added to existing regulatory
requirements for PAPR, to allow for the approval of a new class known as the PAPR100.
The  performance  requirements  for  the  PAPR100  allow  it  to  be  lighter  in  weight  and
better suited to the needs of workers in the healthcare and public safety sectors. The
previous existing PAPR standard resulted in a heavier unit since it needed to pass tests
designed  for  heavy  dust  loads  found  in  industry,  such  as  exposures  to  mineral  dusts
and welding fumes. Over the past 20 years, PAPRs have played an increasing role in
respiratory protection programs in the United States in the healthcare sector. As seen
during the 2003 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), the 2009 H1N1 influenza,
and the 2014-15 Ebola virus outbreaks, PAPRs are often used in high-hazard procedures
in  the  healthcare  setting  because  they  are  designed  to  filter  chemicals,  blood-borne

pathogens,  and  aerosol-  transmissible  pathogens.   Current  shortages  of  non-powered
particulate respirators underscore the need for approval of PAPRs more suitable for use
by  the  healthcare  workers  and  first  responders  dealing  with  the  disease.  New,
non-traditional manufacturers have entered the market to produce the new PAPR100,
thus increasing the supply of reusable PPE for health care workers against COVID-19.
With  this  expanding  supply  of  PPE,  this  last  line  of  defense  against  infection  is  also
available  for  use  in  non-healthcare  workplaces  where  high  dust-loading  is  not
anticipated.  For  example,  a  PAPR100  might  be  used  by  transit  and  delivery  drivers,
grocery and retail store workers, and other non-dusty factory workers.   The food and
agriculture  sector  is  a  part  of  the  U.S.  critical  infrastructure.  Public  health  strategies
need  to  be  implemented  to  protect  workers  filling  essential  roles  within  the  food
system, including the meat and poultry industry, to preserve essential functions, and
maintain  the  nation’s  food  supply.  Employers  in  the  meat  and  poultry  processing
industry can help prevent and slow the spread of COVID-19 by reducing the spread of
disease  among  employees  and  maintaining  healthy  business  operations  and  work
environments.  Since  April  2020,  NIOSH  has  deployed  staff  or  assisted  virtually  to  36
sites in 12 states, covering 5 pork facilities, 19 poultry and 11 beef processing factories
representing  18  separate  companies.  NIOSH  scientists  and  engineers  reviewed  plant
facilities,  processes  and  operational  plans.  The  CDC’s  epidemiologists  and  partners
from  state  and  local  health  departments  evaluated  plant  and  community  infection
control plans and infection rates through screening, testing and tracing for dealing with
COVID- 19 outbreaks.  Together, these agencies are committed to protecting the health
of workers, the health of communities, and collaborating to provide a secure supply of
food. A typical site visit would examine multiple features of the plant’s operations. For
example,  the  team  examined  the  company’s  plans  for  employee  screening  prior  to
entering the plants. They observed the areas where arriving employees would be asked
about  their  current  symptom  status  and  where  and  how  they  would  be  screened  for

fever and the criteria for following up if positive symptoms were reported or observed.
The  teams  also  examined  supplementary  infection  control  measures  used  by  the
facilities.  For  example,  the  availability  and  use  of  hand  sanitizer  dispensers,  surface
cleaning  and  disinfection  procedures  for  high-touch  areas,  and  the  use  of  facemasks
and other face coverings including face shields. The plant’s procedures for maintaining
physical distancing of employees were also reviewed within the operational areas of the
plant  and  in  locker  rooms,  bathrooms,  lunchrooms,  break  areas,  and  other  locations
where  employees  may  congregate.  Teams  noted  engineering  controls,  such  as
locations  where  physical  barriers  were  installed  between  workstations  at  which
maintaining  the  six-foot  physical  distancing  requirements  was  not  feasible.  
Additionally,  the  teams  examined  administrative  controls  such  as  company  policies
offering  paid  sick  leave  to  encourage  and  incentivize  symptomatic  workers  to  stay
home;
 or
 providing
 training
 and
 communications
 software
 to
 enable
 plant
communications  while  maintaining  distance.  The  team  examined  the  plant’s  own
policies  for  using  PPE,  including  training  and  demonstrations  to  determine  whether
workers  knew  how  to  follow  proper  donning  and  doffing  procedures  to  avoid
contamination,  and  to  understand  when  PPE  could  be  either  disposed  of  or  properly
disinfected and stored in a clean location for later reuse. PPE could include respirators,
face  shields,  helmets,  gloves,  and  other  protective  garments.  NIOSH  and  CDC  staff
typically  provide  recommendations  based  on  their  observations  and  on  the  best
available  science,  and  after  examining  the  company’s  written  plans  and  policies.  The
recommendations  follow  the  hierarchy  of  controls,  wherever  feasible.  Hierarchy  of
controls is an approach to hazard intervention that starts with the controls perceived to
be most effective and moves down to those considered least effective. In most cases,
the  preferred  approach  is  to  eliminate  a  hazard  or  exposures,  install  engineering
controls,  and  implement  appropriate  sanitation  and  cleaning  to  shield  or  reduce
employees’ exposure to the hazard. Until such controls are in place, or if they are not

adequately  effective  or  feasible,  administrative  measures  and  personal  protective
equipment  (PPE)  may  be  recommended.  COVID-19  is  a  new  challenge  for  our  food
system partners; there are many unknowns. There is no formal reporting or surveillance
system indicating to health authorities when COVID-19 affects food facility operations.
The  number  of  outbreak  reports  likely  underestimates  the  number  of  food  system
workers affected by COVID-19. Employers need to be innovative in finding solutions to
complex  problems;  there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  approach  when  implementing
recommendations.  Additional  education  and  training  are  needed  regarding  measures
workplaces can take to protect workers. Workers are also members of the community;
thus,  when  there  are  ongoing  outbreaks  in  the  community,  illness  can  be  introduced
into  the  workplace.  Outbreaks  of  illness  in  workplaces  can  also  result  in  increased
illness  in  communities.  Culturally  appropriate  community-based  interventions  are
needed to protect health of workers with large or extended families living in the same
household.    The  American  people,  communities,  public  health  professionals,  medical
providers, businesses, and schools look to CDC for trusted guidance on responding to
COVID-19. CDC develops and disseminates guidance for individuals and communities.
These  recommendations  include  actions  that  every  American  should  take,  such  as
following good personal hygiene practices, staying at home when sick, and practicing
social  distancing  to  lower  the  risk  of  disease  spread.  CDC  guidance  is  available  here
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick-prevention.html.  First
responder  and  healthcare  guidance  documents  cover  a  range  of  topics  –  from
addressing  potential  work-related  exposures,  implementing  infection  prevention  and
control measures in health facilities, and optimizing the supply of personal protective
equipment  to  clinical  evaluation,  testing,  and  clinical  care.  CDC  is  providing  these
recommendations to support communities’ efforts, while recognizing that each sector
and  community  is  unique  and  will  need  to  consider  these  in  the  context  of  their
community-level data and circumstances. CDC teams on the ground and those aiding

from  Atlanta  are  and  will  continue  working  with  state  and  local  officials  to  integrate
these recommendations into COVID-19 plans. Mitigation and containment of COVID-19
are the key to public health strategies and CDC is committed to using our expertise and
partnering with others on the frontlines. NIOSH and other centers at CDC have worked
with  our  partner  agencies  including  OSHA,  USDA,  and  the  Department  of
Transportation,  to  produce  guidance  documents  and  fact  sheets  for  workers.  For
example,  NIOSH  developed  8  fact  sheets  geared  for  airport  workers  including
information  for  gate  agents,  baggage  and  cargo  handlers,  maintenance  workers,
catering  kitchen  workers  and  airport  retail  and  service  workers  across  the  country.
NIOSH also developed 11 fact sheets covering the millions of people working in small
business,  schools,  and  as  transit  and  delivery  drivers,  first  responders,  and  food  and
grocery workers. As a joint publication, we developed Interim Guidance from CDC and
the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  for  the  Meat  and  Poultry
Packing Industry, and Interim Guidance from CDC and OSHA for Manufacturing Workers
and  Employers.    In  summary,  NIOSH  and  other  CDC  centers  have  been  working
tirelessly to protect workers from exposures to the SARS-CoV-2 virus in the course of
their  employment.   We  have  responded  to  the  unique  challenges  of  this  COVID-19
pandemic in multiple areas that impact workers. We continue to assist manufacturers of
personal protective equipment and innovators ability to increase the supply of reliable
personal  protective  equipment  that  workers  depend  on  every  day.  We  are  deploying
scientists  and  engineers  on  field  investigations  to  critical  infrastructure  plants,
particularly those in meat and poultry processing, examining how best to protect critical
infrastructure  workers.  Finally,  we  are  developing  and  disseminating  through  fact
sheets, guidance, and videos the scientific information we have learned from our field
efforts and from our experience and expertise in worker protection. 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/washington/testimony/2020/t20200528.htm
