A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Hand  hygiene  protects  both  healthcare
personnel and patients. Hand hygiene means cleaning your hands with: Cleaning your
hands reduces: Some healthcare personnel may need to clean their hands as often as
100 times during a work shift to keep themselves, patients and staff safe. A common
challenge  is  keeping  the  skin  on  your  hands  healthy  and  clean.  CDC  provides  the
following recommendations for hand hygiene in healthcare settings. Unless hands are
visibly soiled, ABHS is preferred over soap and water in most clinical situations because
it12: Note: Other entities recommend cleaning hands with soap and water for at least
20 seconds. Either time is acceptable. The focus should be on cleaning your hands at
the right times and scrubbing hands and fingers with soap. ABHS is an FDA-regulated
over-the-counter product that should be stored and dispensed in an effective and safe
manner.   The  safety  of  refilling  or  "topping  off"  containers  of  ABHS  such  as  pump
bottles, pocket-sized dispenser bottles and single-use wall-mounted dispensers of ABHS
is not well studied. Safety risks associated with refilling or "topping off" containers of
ABHS  include:  Therefore,  refilling  or  "topping  off"  ABHS  dispensers  should  only  be
considered in accordance with manufacturer's guidance and FDA regulations. Refilling
or  "topping  off"  containers  of  liquid  soap  has  been  associated  with  outbreaks  of
pathogenic  bacteria.  Soap  should  not  be  added  to  partially  empty  soap  dispensers.2
Gloves are not a substitute for hand hygiene. C. difficile is a spore-forming bacterium
that  can  lead  to  a  common  healthcare-associated  infection  causing  severe  diarrhea.
Spores are an inactive form of the germ and have a protective coating allowing them to
live on surfaces for months. The bacteria can be transferred to patients via the hands of
healthcare  providers  who  have  touched  a  contaminated  surface  or  item.  This  is
recommended due to the theoretical increased efficacy of soap and water for removing
spores from hands, although evidence for this recommendation is limited. Proper use of

gloves (in addition to a gown) to reduce bioburden on the hands should be emphasized.
Access to ABHS should not be restricted. Bacteria on the hands of surgeons can cause
wound infections if present in the operative field during surgery. Bacterial growth slows
after  preoperative  scrubbing  with  an  antiseptic  agent.   Before  donning  sterile  gloves
and  performing  surgery,  perform  surgical  hand  antisepsis  using  the  following  steps:
Other  recommended  steps:  ABHS  contains  ethyl  alcohol,  which  evaporates  at  room
temperature  into  an  ignitable  vapor,  and  is  considered  a  flammable  liquid.  Although
ABHS-related fires are rare it is vital that ABHS is stored safely and bulk dispensers are
installed and maintained correctly. Building officers and fire marshals work together to
enforce fire safety rules to protect patients and residents.  Fire safety activities help to:
Building officers and local fire marshals also work together to ensure ABHS dispensers
are accessible and in locations that do not increase the risk of igniting or spreading a
fire. Adherence to the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code 101
was adopted by CMS. This code is a minimum fire safety requirement for facilities that
receive  Medicaid  or  Medicare  reimbursement.  The  Life  Safety  Code  contains  national
standards  for  the  storage  of  ABHS,  as  well  as  placement  and  function  of  dispensers.
When facilities use ABHS  the criteria listed in Table 1 must be met. Healthcare facilities
may  contact  their  local  fire  officials  to  ensure  they  meet  all  requirements  for  the
installation of ABHS. Local fire officials often inspect commercial buildings and may be
required to do so.  Tours from local fire officials can help healthcare facilities: There are
several benefits to the healthcare facilities requesting a tour such as: Table 1. NFPA 101
Life Safety Code Requirements for the use of ABHS Dispensers CDC provides resources
and training on hand hygiene for healthcare providers. Having clean hands is one of the
best ways to avoid getting sick and prevent the spread of germs to others. Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/clean-hands/hcp/clinical-safety/index.html
