A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 No  evidence  currently  exists  to  suggest  that  people  who  are  pregnant  are  more
susceptible  to  infection  from  Ebola  virus  (EBOV)  than  the  general  population.  Earlier
reports suggested that pregnant people are more likely to be at increased risk of severe
illness  and  death  when  infected  with  EBOV  during  pregnancy.1  More  recent  reviews,
however, have suggested that pregnancy is not associated with increased mortality or
disease  severity  in  people  with  EVD23.  People  who  are  pregnant  with  EVD  are  at  an
increased
 risk
 of
 adverse
 pregnancy
 outcomes,
 including
 fetal
 loss
 and
pregnancy-associated  hemorrhage1234.  In  previous  outbreaks  in  Africa,  almost  all
infants born to people with EVD have not survived, but whether EBOV was the cause of
death  has  not  always  been  known234.  EBOV  can  cross  the  placenta,  and  pregnant
people infected with the virus will likely transmit it to the fetus. Placental tissues from
patients  with  EVD  have  demonstrated  EBOV  antigen  throughout  numerous  different
types of placental cells on pathological exams.5 EBOV RNA has also been detected in
amniotic fluid, placental tissue, fetal meconium, vaginal secretions, umbilical cord, and
buccal swab samples from neonates. 26789Importantly, it should be noted that EBOV
RNA can remain detectable in amniotic fluid, breast milk, and fetal tissue after maternal
recovery from EVD.2 EBOV RNA has been found in pregnancy-related body fluids and
tissues  up  to  32  days  after  maternal  clearance  of  viremia26789.  Therefore,  proper
infection  control  precautions  should  be  taken  when  managing  convalescent  pregnant
people.7  Learn  about  Ebola  disease,  caused  by  an  infection  with  one  of  a  group  of
viruses,  known  as  ebolaviruses,  that  are  found  primarily  in  sub-Saharan  Africa.

Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/ebola/hcp/clinical-guidance/clinical-guidance-for-ebola-in-people-who-are-pregnant.h
tml
