Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Abbigail J. Tumpey, David Daigle, and Glen Nowak Before an
outbreak is recognized and an investigation begins, limited numbers of persons might
be  exposed  to  health  risks  without  experiencing  illness.  As  increasing  numbers  of
persons are exposed to the risk or become ill, healthcare providers and others might
become aware of the higher than expected number of illnesses and begin reporting the
unusually high occurrences to local and state health authorities. This situation is often
what prompts an outbreak investigation, and as that outbreak evolves, communications
about  it  must  evolve  as  well  (1,2).  In  today’s  24-hour  news  and  digital  media
environment, people constantly receive information from many sources, ranging from
print  media  to  television  to  alerts  and  social  media  on  mobile  devices.  Immediately
after  the  news  media  or  community  learns  of  a  public  health–related  outbreak
investigation,  they  want  to  know  what  is  happening  and  who  is  affected.  When  the
cause is rare but might cause substantial harm, news outlets often treat the event as
breaking  news  and  begin  sustained  coverage.  From  the  beginning  of  an  event  to  its
resolution  and  follow-up,  public  health  authorities  are  expected  to  provide  the  news
media  with  timely,  accurate  information  and  answers  about  the  outbreak’s  effects.
Because the ways in which receipt of news is evolving, the ways in which public health
authorities communicate with the media and public needs to adapt in similar ways. In
2016,  the  Pew  Research  Center  reported  that  approximately  4  in  10  US  residents
received their news from online sources, and 6 in 10 received their news through social
media  channels  (3).  Today,  communications  strategies  during  an  outbreak  response
should include a mix of media outreach, partner and stakeholder outreach, and social
media  engagement  (2).  Knowing  how  the  public  or  members  of  affected  groups
perceive a risk affects what you, as a field investigator, might communicate and how

you frame the key messages. Many times, persons most affected by a disease outbreak
or health threat perceive the risk differently from the experts who mitigate or prevent
the  risk.  Additionally,  persons  perceive  their  own  risks  differently,  depending  on  how
likely  they  think  the  actual  hazard  will  affect  them  personally  and  their  beliefs  about
how severe the harm might be. Perceptions of health risks also are tied to the degree to
which persons feel alarmed or outraged—when the event causes a high level of worry
or anxiety, the risk is perceived to be at a similarly high level (4). Persons are usually
more accepting of risks or feel less outrage when the risks are voluntary, under their
control,  have  clear  benefits,  are  naturally  occurring,  are  generated  from  a  trusted
source, or are familiar (Table 12.1). Conversely, persons are less accepting of risks or
have  greater  concern  or  anxiety  when  risks  are  imposed  or  created  by  others,
controlled by others, have no clear benefit, are human-made, come from an untrusted
source, or seem exotic. For example, many persons are more worried about flying in an
airplane than driving a car, despite the fact that more car crashes than airplane crashes
occur  each  year  in  the  United  States.  Flying  in  an  airplane  is  an  event  controlled  by
others  and  aligns  with  a  risk  perceived  as  less  acceptable.  The  same  is  true  for
outbreaks  and  public  health  crises.  Before  communicating  during  an  outbreak,  think
through how risk perceptions might influence the affected populations and, therefore,
how  you  communicate  about  those  risks.  Also,  keep  in  mind  that  persons  will  view
public health recommendations and advice through a risk–benefit lens, with the same
factors affecting whether they adopt a public health recommendation. Source: Adapted
from References 4, 5. Trust and credibility can greatly influence your ability to persuade
affected  persons  to  follow  public  health  authorities’  recommendations  during  an
outbreak or public health response. The ability to contain and stop the outbreak might
hinge on established relationships and coordination with key partners and stakeholders.
Risk  communication  literature  identifies  four  factors  that  determine  whether  an
audience,  including  journalists,  will  perceive  a  messenger  as  trusted  and  credible,

including  Organizations  and  spokespersons  who  issue  messages  and  information  that
convey  these  four  factors  are  more  likely  to  maintain  and  even  build  trust  during  a
crisis. Examples of messages used in outbreak responses or public health investigations
are provided in Box 12.1. These quotations encompass the four factors that foster trust
and credibility. We realize that you turn to our medical facility to get better. This event
is intolerable to us as well, and we want to work with you to resolve the situation and
ensure your safety and well-being. We are taking steps to ensure that this event never
occurs again in our facility. — Broward Health Medical Center Patient Notification Letter
(October 2009) (8) We want to ensure that every patient who might be at risk is tested.
Thanks to the diligent work of our team [. . . . ], we are confident that we are at a point
where we’ve identified the vast majority of patients who were put at risk. Mayo Clinic
will  do  whatever  is  necessary  to  support  the  needs  of  its  patients.  Patient  safety  is
central to the trust the organization shares with its patients. Mayo Clinic is working to
ensure  that  this  doesn’t  happen  again.  —  Media  quotation  from  Mayo  Clinic’s  chief
executive  officer  (Jacksonville,  FL,  September  2010)  (9)  I  want  to  acknowledge  the
importance  of  uncertainty.  At  the  early  stages  of  an  outbreak,  there’s  much
uncertainty,  and  probably  more  than  everyone  would  like.  Our  guidelines  and  advice
are likely to be interim and fluid, subject to change as we learn more. We’re moving
quickly  to  learn  as  much  as  possible  and  working  with  many  local,  state,  and
international  partners  to  do  so.  I  want  to  recognize  that  while  we’re  moving  fast,  it’s
very likely that this will be more of a marathon than a sprint. I want to acknowledge
change. Our recommendations, advice, and approaches will likely change as we learn
more about the virus and we learn more about its transmission. I want to acknowledge
that  we’re  likely  to  see  local  approaches  to  controlling  the  spread  of  this  virus,  and
that’s important; that can be beneficial; that can teach us things that we want to use in
other  parts  of  the  country  and  that  other  people  in  other  places  may  find  useful.
Because things are changing, because flu viruses are unpredictable, and because there

will  be  local  adaptation,  it’s  likely  that  [at]  any  given  moment  there  will  be
confusing—or  may  be  confusing  or  conflicting  information  available.  We  are  very
committed to minimizing where we find that, clearing up any of that misconception. —
Press  briefing  by  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention’s  Acting  Director
Richard  Besser,  MD,  during  the  early  stages  of  the  influenza  A(H1N1)  outbreak  (April
2009)  (10)  The  early  stages  of  an  outbreak  investigation  can  be  a  seemingly
overwhelming  challenge  of  tasks,  long  hours,  and  concerns.  Will  the  situation  evolve
into  a  broader  public  health  crisis?  Will  the  outbreak  be  short  or  long  term?  Which
population  groups  will  be  most  at  risk?  To  communicate  effectively  in  this  time  of
uncertainty,  multiple  components  need  to  be  in  place.  Early  in  a  public  health
investigation,  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  persons  and  organizations  involved
should  be  defined  clearly;  it  is  particularly  important  to  determine  who  has  primary
responsibility  and  authority  for  communicating  each  aspect  of  the  investigation  to
healthcare  providers,  the  media,  and  the  general  public.  Each  entity’s  domain  of
expertise should be stipulated, including who will speak with the public and news media
about  each  topic.  If  the  outbreak  response  is  domestic,  the  roles  and  responsibilities
among  the  entities  involved  (e.g.,  federal,  state,  or  local)  should  be  clarified.  If  the
response
 is
 international,
 that
 country’s
 ministry
 of
 health
 will
 determine
communication plans and responsibilities and serve as the communication lead within
that  country.  The  field  investigator  and,  if  part  of  the  investigation  team,  the  health
communication specialist should foster effective collaboration and coordination among
all of the agencies and organizations involved. At the start of an investigation, you will
need  to  assess  the  situation  (11).  The  following  steps  will  help  you  perform  this  task
quickly: During an outbreak response, you might work with a team of communications
experts,  possibly  including  public  affairs  (media)  specialists,  risk  communication
experts,  digital  or  social  media  experts,  and  other  health  communication  staff.  The
communications  team  will  solidify  the  communications  strategy  and  develop

communication  resources  aimed  at  reaching  the  affected  (target)  populations  and
partners who might influence them (e.g., healthcare providers or community leaders).
These health-related messages should focus on behaviors that can contain or stop the
outbreak.  Box  12.2  lists  communication  resources  often  used  during  outbreak
responses.  Depending  on  where  the  outbreak  is  located  and  what  populations  are
affected,  the  communications  team  might  tailor  additional  resources  to  the
investigation needs (e.g., posters for low-literacy readers or text-messaging alerts). The
communication strategy most likely will evolve and adapt as the situation evolves and
more  is  learned  about  the  perceptions  of  your  targeted  audience  and  scope  of  the
outbreak  (1).  Source:  Adapted  from  Reference  13.  Messages  must  resonate  with
affected populations before those persons will follow prevention recommendations. Box
12.3  outlines  these  key  messaging  development  components  in  seven  steps.
Emphasize a commitment to the situation. Convey a sense of urgency for bringing the
situation under control. Let the audience know where it can access more information
(e.g., an Internet site or call center) and when more information will be provided; for
example, “Our next update will be tomorrow at noon.” Source: Adapted from Reference
14. Remember to follow risk communication best practices as outlined previously (e.g.,
recognize the affected populations are worried, concerned, and seeking guidance). Box
12.4  provides  examples  of  how  to  convey  risk  communications  messaging  when
speaking  with  an  audience  about  an  outbreak.  box12-4  Source:  Adapted  from
Reference 14. Being a spokesperson is challenging, especially during investigations or a
response  that  involves  considerable  media  attention.  If  you  are  asked  to  be  a
spokesperson,  take  time  to  prepare  and  practice.  Media  interviews  are  the  principal
way in which reporters obtain their information from subject-matter experts and other
sources. Learning how to navigate an interview is crucial. You often can determine the
overall communication objectives by answering the following two questions: For most
news reports, you will have only one direct quotation; therefore, make it count. Write

down  your  primary  message  point,  often  called  the  Single  Overriding  Health
Communication Objective, or SOHCO (pronounced sock-O). You want your audience to
remember this one key point because it is the most important message about the topic.
A communications expert can help you refine the SOHCO and make sure it resonates.
Say  the  SOHCO  at  the  beginning  of  the  interview.  At  the  end  of  the  interview,  the
reporter most likely will ask you if you have anything else that you have not covered.
Take  that  opportunity  to  repeat  the  SOHCO;  say,  for  example,  “Thank  you  for  your
interest  in  this  topic.  The  most  important  thing  for  your  audience  to  remember  is
[repeat  the  SOHCO].”  Never  provide  an  interview  when  first  contacted  by  the  media.
When a reporter calls you directly, ask him or her for five pieces of information—name,
contact  information,  a  list  of  topics  planned  for  discussion,  how  the  interview  will  be
conducted,  and  the  deadline.  Tell  the  reporter  you  will  call  back  within  a  specific
timeframe. Even if the reporter says the information is needed urgently, tell him or her
you will call back promptly (e.g., in 5– 10 minutes). A 5-or 10-minute delay will give you
time  to  gather  your  thoughts,  locate  helpful  or  needed  information,  and  identify  key
messages. Reviewing the common questions asked during a media interview will help
you prepare your response (14,15). You will need permission from the health authorities
in the jurisdiction where the outbreak is occurring before you speak directly with any
media.  Unless  you  have  that  permission,  you  should  direct  anyone  requesting  an
interview to the health authority in charge. Also, ensure you know your organization’s
policies  regarding  communications  with  the  media  (e.g.,  how  to  frame  statements
related to your organization’s policies or official recommendations) and stay within the
scope  of  your  responsibilities  when  talking  with  reporters.  Consult  a  communications
expert  assigned  to  the  outbreak  investigation  about  policies  and  prior  clearances
needed. Know your boundaries. If questions come up during an interview that fall under
the purview or responsibility of other agencies or authorities, refer reporters to those
entities  or  their  spokespersons.  Including  a  member  of  the  communications  team

during  the  interview  can  help  with  obtaining  follow-up  information  for  the  media.
Challenging  situations  and  questions  often  occur  during  interactions  with  the  news
media or the public about an outbreak response or a public health investigation. Table
12.2 provides Do’s and Don’ts for being a media spokesperson and avoiding possible
communication traps. Source: Adapted from References 1, 6. Multiple techniques can
help  you  handle  difficult  questions.  The  two  that  most  likely  will  be  most  helpful  are
bridging  and  hooking  and  flagging.  When  you  flag  messaging,  you  verbally  cue  the
reporter and audience to the key public health information they need to remember; for
example, Additional tips are included here for managing media interviews; these tips
can vary on the basis of the type of media and format of the interview (Table 12.3). Tips
for mastering media interviews  a Bridging: Acknowledge the reporter’s question and
then use a bridging phrase to transition to the crucial information you need to convey.
Hooking and flagging: A hook provides the messaging in bite-sized chunks that help the
audience retain more information, and a flag verbally cues the reporter and audience to
the  key  public  health  information  they  need  to  remember.  SOHCO,  Single  Overriding
Health Communication Objective. Source: Adapted from References 1, 6. To the extent
possible, try to assess the effectiveness of media interactions. Review news stories and
media coverage to learn how reporters are using the information you provided. Assess
whether  the  key  messages  (SOHCO)  are  being  used  and  how—and  whether  the
headlines approximate the ones that you were striving to convey. Each interview is an
opportunity to learn and improve. If a reporter publishes inaccurate information, or the
information you provided to reporters changes, work with a communications or media
specialist  to  call  the  reporters  back  and  update  them  with  the  new  or  corrected
information. In an ideal situation, the story will be published, and you will be satisfied
with the headline and messages conveyed. As technology and media evolve, the public
will  continue  to  adapt  and  get  information  in  new  ways.  Public  health  officials
communicating about risks must evolve as well so that they can reach target audiences

with important and timely health-related information by using the audience’s preferred
communication  mechanisms.  The  communication  strategies  outlined  in  this  chapter
have proved effective during outbreak responses and risk communication events and
can be tailored and adapted to fit any public health event. During an outbreak, public
health  officials  must  quickly  determine  the  communication  purpose,  the  persons  and
populations  most  in  need  of  information  and  guidance,  ways  to  engage  with  news
media  and  the  public,  and  ways  to  gauge  the  effects  of  messages  and  materials.
Knowledge of how the news media and journalists operate, as well as the ability to use
risk  communication  principles  and  best  practices,  increases  the  likelihood  of  success
during  public  health  events.  Katherine  Lyon-Daniel  and  Sue  Swenson,  Centers  for
Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  provided  assistance  and  technical  review  of  the
chapter.  <  Previous  Chapter  11:  Developing  Interventions  Next  Chapter  13:  Legal
Considerations > The fellowship application period and host site application period are
closed.  For  questions  about  the  EIS  program,  please  contact  us  directly  at
EISApplication@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/eis/field-epi-manual/chapters/Communicating-Investigation.html
