Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Surveillance  Summaries  /  January  21,  2022  /  71(2);1–21
Christina  R.  Phares,  PhD1;  Yecai  Liu,  MS1;  Zanju  Wang,  MS1;  Drew  L.  Posey,  MD1;
Deborah Lee, MPH1; Emily S. Jentes, PhD1; Michelle Weinberg, MD1; Tarissa Mitchell,
MD1;  William  Stauffer,  MD1,2;  Julie  L.  Self,  PhD3;  Nina  Marano,  DVM1  (View  author
affiliations) Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Box 1 Box 2 Figure 1 Figure 2
Figure  3  Figure  4  Table  1  Table  2  Table  3  Table  4  Problem/Condition:  Each  year,
approximately  500,000  immigrants  and  tens  of  thousands  of  refugees  (range:
12,000–85,000  during  2001–2020)  move  to  the  United  States.  While  still  abroad,
immigrants,  refugees,  and  others  who  apply  for  admission  to  live  permanently  in  the
United States must undergo a medical examination. This examination identifies persons
with  class  A  or  B  conditions.  Applicants  with  class  A  conditions  are  inadmissible.
Infectious  conditions  that  cause  an  applicant  to  be  inadmissible  include  infectious
tuberculosis  (TB)  disease  (class  A  TB),  infectious  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  infectious
Hansen’s disease. Applicants with class B conditions are admissible but might require
treatment  or  follow-up.  Class  B  TB  includes  persons  who  completed  successful
treatment overseas for TB disease (class B0), those with signs or symptoms suggestive
of TB but whose overseas laboratory tests and clinical examinations ruled out current
infectious  TB  disease  (class  B1),  those  with  a  diagnosis  of  latent  TB  infection  (LTBI)
(class  B2),  and  the  close  contacts  of  persons  known  to  have  TB  disease  (class  B3).
Voluntary  public  health  interventions  might  also  be  offered  during  the  overseas
examination.  After  arriving  in  the  United  States,  a  follow-up  TB  examination  is
recommended  for  persons  with  class  B  TB.  Period  Covered:  This  report  summarizes
health  information  that  was  reported  to  CDC’s  Electronic  Disease  Notification  (EDN)
system for refugees, immigrants, and eligible others who arrived in the United States

during 2014–2019. Eligible others are persons who although not classified as refugees
(e.g.,  certain  parolees,  special  immigrant  visa  holders,  and  follow-to-join  asylees)  are
eligible for the same services and benefits as refugees. Description of System: The EDN
system  has  both  surveillance  and  programmatic  components.  The  surveillance
component  is  a  centralized  database  that  collects  1)  health-related  data  from  the
overseas medical examination for immigrants with class A or B conditions and for all
refugees  and  eligible  others  and  2)  TB-related  data  from  the  postarrival  TB
examination.  The  programmatic  component  is  a  reporting  system  that  sends  arrival
notifications to state and local health agencies in the jurisdiction where newly arriving
persons  have  reported  intending  to  live  and  provides  state  and  local  health  agencies
and  other  authorized  users  with  medical  data  from  overseas  examinations.  Results:
During 2014–2019, approximately 3.5 million persons moved to the United States from
abroad, including 3.2 million immigrants, 313,890 refugees, and 95,993 eligible others.
Among these, the overseas examination identified 139,683 persons (3,903 per 100,000
persons  examined)  with  class  B  TB,  54  with  primary  or  secondary  syphilis  (30  per
100,000  persons  tested),  761  with  latent  syphilis  (415  per  100,000  persons  tested),
and,  after  laboratory  testing  for  gonorrhea  was  added  in  2016,  a  total  of  131  with
gonorrhea  (374  per  100,000  persons  tested).  Refugees  were  offered  additional,
voluntary  interventions,  including  vaccinations  and  presumptive  treatment  for
parasites.  By  2019,  first-  and  second-dose  coverage  with  measles-containing  vaccine
were  96%  and  80%,  respectively.  In  refugee  populations  for  whom  presumptive
treatment is recommended, up to 96% of refugees, depending on the specific regimen,
were offered and accepted treatment. For the 139,683 persons identified overseas with
class B TB, EDN sent arrival notifications and overseas medical data to the appropriate
state or local health agency to facilitate postarrival TB examinations. Among 101,119
persons  identified  overseas  as  having  class  B0  TB  (6,586)  or  class  B1  TB  (94,533),  a
total of 67,432 (67%) had a complete postarrival examination reported to EDN. Among

35,814  children  aged  2–14  years  identified  overseas  with  class  B2  TB,  20,758  (58%)
had  a  complete  postarrival  examination  reported  to  EDN.  (Adults  are  not  routinely
tested  for  immune  reactivity  to  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  during  the  overseas
medical examination.) Among those with a complete postarrival examination reported
to EDN, the number with a diagnosis of culture-positive TB disease within the first year
of arrival was 464 (688 cases per 100,000 persons examined) for those with class B0 or
B1 TB and was 11 (53 cases per 100,000 persons examined) for children with class B2
TB.  Interpretation:  During  2014–2019,  the  overseas  medical  examination  system
prevented importation of 6,586 cases of infectious TB, 815 cases of syphilis, and 131
cases of gonorrhea. When the examination is used to offer public health interventions,
most refugees (up to 96%) accept the intervention. Postarrival follow-up examinations,
which were completed for 88,190 persons and identified 475 cases of culture-positive
TB,  represent  an  important  opportunity  to  further  limit  spread  of  TB  disease  in  the
United  States  by  identifying  and  providing,  if  needed,  preventive  care  for  those  with
LTBI or treatment for those with disease. Public Health Action: Federal, state, and local
health  departments  and  agencies  should  continue  to  use  EDN  data  to  monitor,
evaluate,  and  improve  health-related  programs  and  policies  aimed  at  U.S.-bound  or
recently  arrived  immigrants,  refugees,  and  eligible  others.  Additional  public  health
interventions that could be offered during the overseas medical examination should be
considered  (e.g.,  treatment  for  LTBI).  Finally,  for  persons  with  class  B  TB,  measures
should be taken to identify and remove barriers to completing postarrival examinations
to  reduce  risk  for  TB  disease  and  community  transmission,  along  with  measures  to
encourage reporting of completed examinations for better data-driven decision-making.
Top Each year, approximately 500,000 immigrants and tens of thousands of refugees
and  eligible  others  move  to  the  United  States  after  applying  for  admission  while
overseas (any country other than the United States and its territories). Eligible others
are  persons  who  although  not  classified  as  refugees  (e.g.,  certain  parolees,  special

immigrant  visa  holders,  and  follow-to-join  asylees)  are  eligible  for  the  same  services
and benefits as refugees. As part of the admission process, these immigrants, refugees,
and  eligible  others  undergo  an  overseas  medical  examination  to  determine  medical
admissibility.  The  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (HHS)  has  the
regulatory authority to require this examination (1–4) and describes these requirements
in technical instructions issued by CDC. As of 2019, the examinations were conducted
by approximately 600 licensed panel physicians appointed by the U.S. Department of
State (DOS), working in 350 clinics in 160 countries. The overseas medical examination
identifies  applicants  with  class  A  and  class  B  conditions  (Box  1).  An  applicant  with  a
class  A  communicable  disease  cannot  be  admitted  to  the  United  States  until  the
disease  has  been  successfully  treated  or  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland  Security
(DHS) grants a waiver. When a class A condition resolves, the applicant is reclassified
as  having  a  class  B  condition  and  is  allowed  to  travel  to  the  United  States.  The  U.S.
Code  of  Federal  Regulations  specifies  four  class  A  communicable  diseases  of  public
health  significance:  tuberculosis  (TB)  disease,  infectious  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and
infectious Hansen’s disease. Persons with class B conditions can be admitted; however,
the  condition  might  require  treatment  or  follow-up.  Persons  with  class  B  TB  include
those who have successfully completed treatment overseas for TB disease (class B0),
those with signs or symptoms suggestive of TB disease but whose overseas laboratory
tests and clinical examinations ruled out current infectious TB disease (class B1), those
with  a  diagnosis  of  latent  TB  infection  (LTBI)  (class  B2),  and  the  close  contacts  of
persons  known  to  have  TB  disease  (class  B3).  In  addition  to  the  four  specified
conditions, other class A communicable diseases include quarantinable communicable
diseases;  these  diseases  are  designated  by  a  presidential  executive  order  and  are,
currently,  infectious  TB,  cholera,  diphtheria,  measles,  plague,  smallpox,  yellow  fever,
viral  hemorrhagic  fevers,  severe  acute  respiratory  syndromes  (COVID-19,  Middle  East
respiratory  syndrome,  and  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  [SARS],  and  influenza

caused  by  novel  or  reemergent  influenza)  (5),  and  communicable  diseases  posing  a
public  health  emergency  of  international  concern  (PHEIC)  (6)  that  could  be  imported
into  the  United  States  and  affect  U.S.  residents.  With  the  exception  of  infectious  TB,
data about quarantinable and PHEIC conditions are not systematically captured by the
routine  overseas  medical  examination  data  collection  process;  when  such  conditions
are present, routine processes give way to emergency response measures, which might
include  requirements  for  predeparture  vaccinations,  additional  testing,  isolation  and
quarantine, or suspension of processing and travel. This report focuses on TB, syphilis,
gonorrhea, and Hansen’s disease. The overseas examinations are used as opportunities
to offer additional, voluntary public health interventions. Major interventions offered to
refugees  include  a  vaccination  program  for  most  vaccine-preventable  diseases  and  a
presumptive  treatment  program  for  soil-transmitted  helminthiasis,  strongyloidiasis,
schistosomiasis,  and  malaria  infection.  A  postarrival  TB  examination  is  recommended
by CDC for immigrants who have class A TB (and are admitted with a waiver) or class B
TB.  A  comprehensive  postarrival  examination  that  includes  a  TB  examination  is
recommended  by  CDC  for  all  refugees  and  eligible  others.  In  accordance  with  CDC
Technical Instructions for Panel Physicians (7), the overseas medical examination for all
applicants must include a medical history and physical examination. Additional required
procedures and tests to further screen for TB, syphilis, gonorrhea, and Hansen’s disease
depend on age and location (Box 2). Panel physicians document their findings on the
following DOS forms: DS-2054 Medical Examination for Immigrant or Refugee Applicant,
DS-3030 TB Worksheet, DS-3025 Vaccination Documentation Worksheet, and DS-3026
Medical  History  and  Physical  Examination  Worksheet.  Medical  examinations  are  valid
for  no  more  than  6  months.  CDC  ensures  that  these  examinations  fulfill  the
requirements  through  a  robust  quality  assurance  program  that  includes  site  visits,
evaluations,  and  trainings.  Unlike  immigrants,  refugees  are  not  required  to  receive
vaccinations  for  admission  to  the  United  States,  and  many  refugees  might  be

undervaccinated when they receive their overseas medical examination, leaving them
at  risk  for  vaccine-preventable  diseases.  Refugees  are  required  to  demonstrate
documentation  of  vaccinations  when  they  adjust  their  status  from  refugee  to
immigrant,  and  they  are  required  to  apply  for  immigrant  status  after  1  year  in  the
United States. To address this gap, CDC launched a voluntary vaccination program for
U.S.-bound refugees in 2012 (8). The vaccination program is cofunded by CDC and DOS;
the  major  implementing  partner  is  the  International  Organization  for  Migration  (IOM).
The  program  provides  refugees  with  the  following  vaccines,  depending  on  age  and
eligibility:  measles;  mumps;  rubella;  hepatitis  B;  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  B;
pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine;  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  with  protection
against serogroups A, C, W, and Y; diphtheria; tetanus; pertussis; and polio. Refugees
typically  receive  these  scheduled  or  catch-up  vaccinations  as  recommended  by  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  at  their  initial  overseas  examination
and, when logistically feasible, receive additional doses in each vaccine series before
departure for the United States (8). Except when contraindicated, refugees who receive
their  overseas  examination  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  are  offered  albendazole  for
soil-transmitted helminth infections, ivermectin for Strongyloides stercoralis infection in
countries  where  Loa  loa  is  not  endemic,  praziquantel  for  schistosomiasis,  and
artemether-lumefantrine for Plasmodium falciparum in areas where malaria is endemic.
In  countries  where  L.  loa  is  endemic,  management  of  S.  stercoralis  is  deferred  until
after arrival in the United States because of the risk for encephalopathy that might be
associated  with  ivermectin  treatment  when  L.  loa  infection  is  present.  Refugees  who
receive their examinations in the Middle East, Asia, North Africa, Latin America, and the
Caribbean are offered albendazole (for soil-transmitted helminths) and ivermectin (for
strongyloidiasis)  only.  Refugees  outside  these  areas,  such  as  European  countries  and
countries formerly in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or those in areas with high
infection  rates  for  other  parasitic  infections  (e.g.,  Plasmodium  vivax),  are  offered

specific  treatment  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  CDC  recommends  a  TB  examination  for
immigrants  who  have  class  A  or  B  TB  according  to  the  overseas  examination  and
recommends  a  comprehensive  assessment  that  includes  a  TB  examination  for  all
refugees  and  eligible  others  (9).  Appropriate  follow-up  care  in  the  United  States  can
prevent progression from infection to disease or, if the disease has already developed
or  recurred  since  the  overseas  examination,  allow  rapid  diagnosis  and  treatment,
ultimately  limiting  spread  within  the  United  States.  To  facilitate  outreach  for  the
postarrival  examination,  CDC  notifies  state  and  local  health  departments  whenever
such  persons  arrive  in  the  United  States,  typically  within  1–9  days.  U.S.  clinicians
affiliated with health departments conduct the postarrival examination, typically within
30–90  days.  These  voluntary  follow-up  examinations  for  newly  arrived  immigrants,
refugees,  and  eligible  others  should  not  be  confused  with  the  required  examination
conducted by civil surgeons for adjustment-of-status immigrants who apply for lawful
permanent  residence  status  from  within  the  United  States.  This  report  summarizes
health information reported to CDC’s Electronic Disease Notification (EDN) system from
overseas  medical  examinations  conducted  by  panel  physicians  and  postarrival  TB
examinations  overseen  by  U.S.  health  departments  and  describes  the  number  and
demographics  of  immigrants,  refugees,  and  eligible  others  who  arrived  in  the  United
States  during  2014–2019.  The  health-related  findings  from  medical  examinations
conducted  overseas  and  domestically  are  summarized,  with  a  focus  on  TB,  syphilis,
gonorrhea, and Hansen’s disease. Public health interventions among refugees also are
described.  These  findings  will  help  federal,  state,  and  local  health  departments  and
other  agencies  that  serve  U.S.-bound  or  recently  arrived  immigrants,  refugees,  and
eligible others to guide health-related priorities, programming, and policies. Top EDN,
which  has  been  described  previously  (10),  has  both  surveillance  and  programmatic
components. The surveillance component is the systematic collection of data from 1)
the overseas medical examination as documented by panel physicians for immigrants

with  class  A  or  B  conditions  and  for  all  refugees  and  eligible  others  and  2)  the
recommended postarrival TB examination as reported by U.S. health departments for
immigrants,  refugees,  and  eligible  others  with  class  A  or  B  TB  (Figure  1).  The
programmatic component of EDN is a centralized reporting system. When an immigrant
with class A or B TB, a refugee, or an eligible other arrives in the United States, EDN
notifies the U.S. health department in the jurisdiction where the newly arriving person
reports  intending  to  live.  EDN  provides  a  portal  for  health  authorities  and  other
authorized  users,  such  as  U.S.  clinicians  who  conduct  the  recommended  follow-up
examinations,  to  access  the  person’s  overseas  medical  examination  record.  Health
departments  can  update  individual  EDN  records  with  results  from  the  postarrival  TB
examination. This postarrival information is transmitted back to CDC and, if needed, to
other  health  departments  when  a  person  moves  from  one  jurisdiction  to  another.
Immigrants,  also  known  as  lawful  permanent  residents  or  green  card  holders,  are
persons who have been granted lawful permanent residence in the United States (11).
New-arrival immigrants complete the application process overseas and enter the United
States  as  lawful  permanent  residents,  whereas  adjustment-of-status  immigrants
complete the application process within the United States, having initially entered with
a  nonimmigrant  status  and  later  adjusting  to  an  immigrant  status.  Refugees  and
asylees are persons unable or unwilling to return to their country of nationality because
of persecution, or a well-founded fear of persecution, resulting from their race, religion,
nationality,  membership  in  a  particular  social  group,  or  political  opinion  (12,13).
Parolees are persons granted parole into the United States for humanitarian reasons or
substantial  public  benefit.  Refugees  and  certain  parolees  complete  the  admission
process  overseas.  Asylees  and  other  parolees  complete  the  admission  process  within
the United States. This report includes persons who completed the admission process
overseas  (new-arrival  immigrants,  refugees  and  follow-to-join  refugees,  and  eligible
others) and then entered the United States during 2014–2019. The analysis does not

include  persons  who  completed  the  admission  process  inside  the  United  States
(adjustment-of-status  immigrants,  asylees,  and  some  parolees)  and  persons  who  did
not  complete  the  admission  process  (irregular  migrants).  The  population  categories
used  for  this  analysis  included  the  following:  EDN  data  for  2014–2019  were  used  to
describe the number and demographics of newly arrived refugees and eligible others.
Because  EDN  does  not  collect  data  for  immigrants  who  do  not  have  a  class  A  or  B
condition identified overseas, publicly available DHS data were used to determine the
number and demographics of immigrants who arrived in the United States during the
study period (14). EDN also does not collect nationality data. For immigrants, country of
birth was used as a proxy for nationality. For refugees, country of birth is a poor proxy
for nationality. (Many refugees are born in a host country to refugee parents who fled
their  home  country.)  Instead,  nationality  data  extracted  from  the  DOS  Worldwide
Refugee Admissions Processing System (15) were used. For all groups, EDN data were
used  to  determine  the  number  and  type  of  class  A  or  B  TB,  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and
Hansen’s disease cases identified overseas (Box 2) and the number of notifications sent
to each U.S. state. Because refugees were offered additional, voluntary interventions,
including vaccinations and presumptive treatment for parasites, first- and second-dose
coverage  with  measles-containing  vaccine  among  refugees  were  determined;
pregnancy  status,  contraindications,  and  other  barriers  were  examined;  and  the
proportion  who  received  presumptive  treatment  for  parasites  was  calculated.  Top
During  2014–2019,  approximately  3.5  million  persons  entered  the  United  States  as
new-arrival immigrants, refugees, or eligible others (Figures 2 and 3). Most (3.2 million)
entered
 as
 new-arrival
 immigrants,
 averaging
 528,252
 annually
 (range:
457,930–619,100)  (Figure  2).  Each  year,  the  largest  proportions  of  immigrants  were
nationals  of  Mexico,  the  Dominican  Republic,  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  the
Philippines,  Vietnam,  India,  Bangladesh,  El  Salvador,  Haiti,  and  Pakistan,  and  the
distribution  of  nationalities  remained  relatively  constant  over  time  (Supplementary

Figure  1,  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/113063).  Among  all  immigrants,  56%  were
nationals of these 10 countries. During the same period, 313,890 persons entered as
refugees and 95,993 as eligible others (Figure 3). The number of refugees and eligible
others who arrived each year declined from an average of 95,715 during 2014–2016 to
an  average  of  40,912  during  2017–2019.  Among  refugees  and  eligible  others,  the
largest proportions were nationals of Democratic Republic of Congo, Burma, Iraq, Cuba,
Somalia,  Bhutan,  Syria,  Ukraine,  Iran,  and  Eritrea;  however,  the  distribution  of
nationalities
 shifted
 markedly
 over
 time
 (Supplementary
 Figure
 2,
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/113063).  Among  all  3.5  million  immigrants,  refugees,
and  eligible  others  who  arrived  in  the  United  States  during  2014–2019,  the  overseas
examination  identified  139,688  (3.9%)  persons  with  class  A  or  B  TB,  including  five
persons (0.0001% of entrants) with class A TB admitted with a waiver; 6,586 (0.2% of
entrants)  with  class  B0  TB,  pulmonary;  94,533  (2.6%  of  entrants)  with  class  B1  TB,
pulmonary;  and  38,023,  mostly  children,  with  class  B2  TB,  LTBI  evaluation  (Table  1).
(Because  testing  for  immune  reactivity  to  M.  tuberculosis  is  not  required  for  most
entrants, this report does not present the proportion of all entrants with class B2, LTBI
evaluation.) The proportion of entrants with class A or B TB ranged from 3.7% to 4.1%
by year and from 3.7% for immigrants, to 7.1% for refugees, to 1.4% for eligible others.
Notifications were sent for all 139,688 persons with class A or B TB to the relevant state
or  local  health  agency  (Figure  4).  This  process  facilitates  a  postarrival  domestic
follow-up  examination.  California  received  the most notifications (26.8%),  followed  by
New  York  (8.7%)  and  Texas  (8.3%).  Among  persons  with  class  B0  TB,  pulmonary,  or
with class B1 TB, pulmonary, the proportion with a complete postarrival TB examination
reported to EDN within 1 year of arrival and ever, respectively, were 65.2% (first year)
and 67.0% (ever) for immigrants, 74.8% and 75.7% for refugees, and 52.7% and 54.0%
for  eligible  others  (Table  2);  the  proportion  reporting  a  complete  postarrival
examination  within  1  year  of  arrival  varied  by  state,  with  an  overall  proportion  for

immigrants,  refugees,  and  eligible  others  ranging  from  23.0%  to  92.7%  (Table  2).
Among children aged 2–14 years with class B2, LTBI evaluation, the proportion with a
complete  postarrival  examination  reported  to  EDN  within  1  year  of  arrival  and  ever,
respectively,  were  55.9%  (first  year)  and  58.4%  (ever)  for  immigrants,  70.8%  and
72.0% for refugees, and 45.9% and 47.9% for eligible others. The overall proportion for
completion within 1 year of arrival by state ranged from 8.8% to 91.4% (Table 3). For all
persons with class B TB, the proportion with a complete postarrival TB examination in
EDN within 1 year of arrival was lowest in 2019 (Tables 2 and 3). Among persons with a
complete postarrival examination, culture-positive TB was diagnosed domestically in six
persons  (0.1%)  identified  overseas  with  class  B0  TB,  pulmonary,  and  for  458  (0.7%)
persons  identified  with  class  B1  TB,  pulmonary;  among  both  groups  together,  the
proportion  with  culture-positive  TB  diagnosed  domestically  remained  constant  over
time, ranging from 0.6% to 0.8% during 2014–2019 (Table 2). Among children who were
identified  overseas  with  class  B2,  LTBI  evaluation,  and  had  a  complete  postarrival
examination,  culture-positive  TB  was  diagnosed  domestically  among  11  children
(0.05%),  and  LTBI  was  diagnosed  among  10,223  (49.3%)  (Table  3).  During  the  study
period,  overseas  evaluations  for  syphilis  and  gonorrhea  were  required  for  all  persons
aged ≥15 years. For children aged <15 years, evaluations were required when infection
was suspected or a child had a history of infection. For syphilis, overseas laboratory test
results were recorded for 94.9% of the 260,345 refugees and eligible others aged ≥15
years who arrived during 2014–2019. The proportion with results increased over time,
reaching >99% among those examined in 2018–2019. A total of 1,025 syphilis cases
were  identified,  a  rate  of  414.9  per  100,000  persons  with  recorded  test  results.  A
reporting  requirement  for  syphilis  stage  was  introduced  in  2014.  For  refugees  and
eligible others who arrived after 2014, 54 primary or secondary syphilis cases (29.5 per
100,000  persons  with  test  results)  and  761  latent  syphilis  cases  (415.3  per  100,000
persons  with  test  results)  were  identified  overseas;  the  latter  included  248  cases  of

unknown  duration.  Rates  for  primary  and  secondary  syphilis  were  highest  among
persons  aged  ≥30  years,  and  rates  for  latent  syphilis  increased  with  each  age  group
(Table 4). For gonorrhea, a requirement for laboratory testing was introduced in 2016,
and reliable data are only available for those examined in 2018 or later. Among 35,653
refugees and eligible others aged ≥15 years examined in 2018–2019, a gonorrhea test
result was documented for 98.3%; 131 cases of gonorrhea were identified (373.7 per
100,000 persons with test results), and rates were highest among persons aged 15–34
years.  Persons  of  all  ages  are  screened  for  Hansen’s  disease  during  their  overseas
medical  examination;  among  all  409,883  refugees  and  eligible  others  who  arrived
during 2014–2019, a total of 25 had a diagnosis of Hansen’s disease (6.1 per 100,000
persons examined). CDC’s vaccination program for refugees began in December 2012
in  two  countries,  Thailand  and  Nepal.  By  2014,  the  program  operated  in  39  of  89
countries where overseas medical examinations for refugees were performed. Among
all  refugees  who  arrived  that  year,  EDN  data  showed  that  first-  and  second-dose
coverage with measles-containing vaccine for 66,727 eligible refugees (those born after
1956, who were aged at least 1 year before departing for the United States, and titers,
if available, do not indicate immunity) were 49% and 41%, respectively. By 2019, the
vaccination program had expanded to all 73 countries where examinations for 22,142
refugees  were  performed  and  for  that  calendar  year  achieved  first-dose  coverage  of
96%  and  second-dose  coverage  of  80%.  Among  846  eligible  refugees  who  did  not
receive a first dose overseas, 17% were pregnant, 15% had another contraindication,
31% were subject to local vaccine shortages, and 6% did not have enough time to get
vaccinated.  Live  virus  vaccines,  such  as  measles  vaccine,  are  not  routinely
administered  within  28  days  of  departure  for  the  United  States  to  avoid  interference
with any live vaccines or tests of immune response for M. tuberculosis antigen testing
administered  shortly  after  arrival  in  the  United  States  (16).  CDC’s  presumptive
treatment program for soil-transmitted helminthiasis, strongyloidiasis, schistosomiasis,

and  malaria  infection  varies  by  country.  In  populations  for  whom  treatment  was
recommended,  the  proportion  with  documented  treatment  was  96%  for  albendazole,
79%  for  ivermectin  (increasing  to  84%  when  countries  in  which  ivermectin  is  not
licensed were excluded), 87% for praziquantel, and 93% for artemether-lumefantrine.
Top During 2014–2019, approximately 3.5 million persons moved to the United States
as  an  immigrant,  a  refugee,  or  an  eligible  other.  Among  immigrants,  the  number  of
arrivals and distribution of nationalities changed little over time. Among refugees and
eligible  others,  both  the  number  of  arrivals  and  distribution  of  nationalities  changed
substantially  from  year  to  year;  this  variability  follows  U.S.  policy  decisions.  The
maximum  number  of  refugees  admitted  for  resettlement  is  determined  by  the  U.S.
president each year. Historically, the actual number of arrivals is equal to or just below
that maximum, with some recent exceptions. For fiscal year 2017, the maximum was
initially  set  at  110,000  by  President  Barack  Obama  (17)  and  was  then  decreased  to
50,000  by  a  presidential  executive  order  issued  by  President  Donald  Trump  (18);  the
actual  number  of  resettled  refugees  totaled  53,716  for  that  year  (15).  In  fiscal  year
2018,  although  the  maximum  was  set  at  45,000  (19),  approximately  one  half  this
number of refugees were resettled after security enhancements were enacted by DHS,
resulting  in  the  lowest  number  of  refugee  admissions  since  fiscal  year  1977  (15).
Among eligible others, such as parolees or special immigrant visa holders, numbers and
nationalities  increase  and  decrease  as  programs  start  and  stop.  For  example,  the
ending  in  2017  of  the  so-called  “wet-foot/dry-foot”  policy  (which  allowed  Cuban
migrants  who  arrived  in  the  United  States  [“dry  foot”]  without  a  visa  to  pursue
residency a year later, whereas those intercepted at sea [“wet foot”] were returned to
Cuba  or  resettled  in  a  third  country)  (20)  is  reflected  in  the  sharp  decrease  in  the
number of Cuban parolees in subsequent years. Because health profiles of refugees and
eligible  others  differ  by  country  of  origin,  country  of  residence,  and  local  conditions
before,  during,  and  after  leaving  their  home  country,  substantial  changes  in  number

and  nationality  can  result  in  considerable  changes  in  health  and  public  health  needs
from year to year, posing significant operational challenges for optimizing, or even just
preserving, public health programs and infrastructure for these populations, especially
at the local level. CDC provides health profiles for each of the largest refugee groups
resettling  to  the  United  States  that  describe  the  demographic,  cultural,  and  health
characteristics  for  each  population  and  are  intended  to  provide  clinicians  with
knowledge  needed  to  better  serve  these  refugees  (21).  Statutes  to  exclude
non–U.S.-born persons from admission to the United States have been in place for more
than a century. These statutes were codified to exclude those with “tuberculosis in any
form, or with leprosy, or any contagious disease” in the Immigration and Nationality Act
of 1952 and were recodified to exclude those with “a communicable disease of public
health significance” (4) in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary of
HHS  in  the  Immigration  of  Act  of  1990.  In  1991,  the  definition  of  a  communicable
disease  of  public  health  significance  was  limited  to  eight  specified  conditions:
chancroid, gonorrhea, granuloma inguinale, HIV infection, infectious Hansen’s disease,
lymphogranuloma venereum, infectious syphilis, and infectious TB (22). To allow for a
more  flexible,  risk-based,  and  responsive  approach  grounded  by  medical  and
epidemiologic  factors,  this  list  was  expanded  in  2009  to  include  quarantinable
communicable  diseases,  which  are  designated  by  a  presidential  executive  order,  and
communicable PHEIC diseases that could be imported into the United States and affect
U.S.  residents  (23).  Finally,  the  list  of  eight  specified  conditions  was  reduced  to  four
with the removal of HIV infection in 2010 (24), followed by the removal of chancroid,
granuloma  inguinale,  and  lymphogranuloma  venereum  in  2016  (25),  leaving  only
infectious  TB,  infectious  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  infectious  Hansen’s  disease  as  the
remaining  specified  conditions  and  the  subjects  of  this  report.  Eliminating  TB  in  the
United States, defined by the Advisory Committee for Elimination of Tuberculosis as a
case rate of <1 per 1 million population, remains a major public health objective (26).

Despite a historic low in U.S. TB incidence in 2019 of 2.7 cases per 100,000 population,
the  rate  of  decline  has  slowed  in  recent  years  (27).  Persons  not  born  in  the  United
States  account  for  more  than  two  thirds  of  U.S.  cases  (27),  and  this  proportion  is
increasing. Genotype studies suggest that most U.S. TB cases in non–U.S.-born persons
are  due  to  reactivation  of  LTBI,  likely  acquired  abroad  (28,29).  CDC’s  technical
instructions  are  designed  to  1)  prevent  importation  of  the  disease  by  detecting  and
treating  infectious  TB  disease  (class  A  TB)  before  persons  move  to  the  United  States
and  2)  reduce  community  transmission  in  the  general  U.S.  population  by  identifying
persons with conditions associated with increased risk for disease (class B TB) so that
they can quickly receive testing and, if needed, preventive or curative treatment after
moving.  EDN  data  are  critical  for  monitoring  implementation  of  the  technical
instructions  and  for  evaluating  the  impact  for  continuous  improvement.  Before  2007,
U.S.-bound  immigrants,  refugees,  and  eligible  others  were  screened  for  TB  by  an
algorithm  based  on  sputum  smear  results.  This  algorithm  was  unable  to  identify
persons entering the United States with TB disease with negative sputum smears but
positive  cultures,  and  a  large  proportion  (one  half  to  two  thirds)  of  cases  were  likely
being missed (30,31). To address this gap, CDC updated the technical instructions to
require  culture  in  addition  to  sputum  smears  and,  for  those  with  positive  smear  or
culture  test  results,  completion  of  a  course  of  treatment  administered  by  direct
observation
 supervised
 by
 a
 panel
 physician.
 Started
 in
 2007,
 full
 global
implementation was achieved in 2013. A previous analysis of EDN data found that the
annual number of smear-negative but culture-positive TB cases diagnosed during the
overseas medical examination increased monotonically from four cases in 2007 to 629
in  2012,  whereas  annual  TB  cases  detected  among  non–U.S.–born  persons  within  the
first year of arrival in the United States decreased from 1,511 to 940 cases, concurrent
with  overall  decreases  in  the  U.S.  TB  rates  (27,30).  In  other  words,  by  2012,
approximately  600  more  cases  were  detected  overseas  at  the  same  time  600  fewer

were  detected  in  the  United  States.  This  finding  suggests  that  the  culture-based
algorithm detects substantially more cases, resulting in subsequent treatment, during
the  overseas  medical  examination  process,  thus  reducing  importation.  However,  the
findings in this report indicate that during 2014–2019, among persons with an overseas
classification of class B0 TB, pulmonary, or class B1 TB, pulmonary, the proportion with
a  subsequent  postarrival  diagnosis  of  culture-positive  TB  disease  during  their  U.S.  TB
examination  remained  steady  over  time,  suggesting  that  new  gains  will  require  new
strategies. Finally, during this same period, the proportion of persons with class B TB for
whom a postarrival TB examination was reported to EDN as completed was lowest in
2019,  a  particularly  concerning  finding  because  of  the  subsequent  spread  of
SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, which diverted focus and resources away
from TB control and other routine public health measures at the local, state, and federal
levels  beginning  in  2020  (32).  In  October  2018,  updates  to  the  technical  instructions
introduced refinements to the TB classification schema for the overseas examination.
After  the  update,  persons  with  an  initial  diagnosis  of  TB  disease  who  subsequently
completed directly observed therapy under the supervision of a panel physician (class
B0 TB, pulmonary) are distinguished from those who, during their initial examination,
had signs, symptoms, or chest radiography suggestive of TB but negative results from
smear  and  culture  tests  (class  B1  TB,  pulmonary).  Before  the  change,  the  technical
instructions aggregated both groups together (previously class B1 TB, pulmonary, for
both). This report and others (33) show that persons who meet current criteria for class
B1 TB, pulmonary, are more likely to receive a diagnosis of culture-positive TB disease
at their postarrival follow-up examination than those meeting criteria for class B0 TB,
pulmonary.  Changes  to  the  classification  schema  to  reflect  this  risk  difference  might
help U.S. health departments better stratify risk for improved patient management. The
technical instructions mandate testing for immune reactivity to M. tuberculosis by an
interferon-gamma  release  assay  (IGRA)  or,  before  October  2018,  by  a  tuberculin  skin

test  (TST),  for  children  aged  2–14  years  in  countries  with  ≥20  TB  disease  cases  per
100,000  population  and  for  persons  (of  any  age  in  any  country)  known  to  have  had
contact for a prolonged period with a person with smear- or culture-positive TB disease.
A  person  who  has  a  positive  TST  or  IGRA  result  but  chest  radiographs  that  do  not
suggest TB disease and no other signs or symptoms of disease or known HIV infection
meets  criteria  for  class  B2  TB,  LTBI  evaluation.  As  such,  EDN  notifies  the  health
department in the jurisdiction where the newly arriving person reports intending to live
to  facilitate  a  postarrival  follow-up  evaluation.  A  previous  analysis  of  EDN  data
demonstrated that children who had a positive TST during their overseas examination
were frequently (64%) retested during their postarrival evaluations and often received
negative results; when retested by TST in the United States, 37% had a negative TST
result, and when retested by IGRA in the United States, 74% had a negative IGRA result
(Z Wang, MS, CDC, personal communication, November 2021). The high proportion of
negative  results  when  retested  by  IGRA  likely  reflects  cross-reactivity  to  bacille
Calmette-Guerin  (BCG)  vaccination  (common  in  many  immigrant  and  refugee
populations)  producing  false-positive  results  in  the  initial  overseas  TST.  That  analysis
also  showed  that  the  proportion  who  accepted  treatment  was  higher  after  a  positive
IGRA  retest  (76%)  than  a  positive  TST  retest  (61%)  (Z  Wang,  MS,  CDC,  personal
communication,  November  2021).  In  response,  the  2018  technical  instructions  were
changed from allowing testing by TST or IGRA overseas to allowing IGRA only (except in
countries  where  no  IGRAs  are  licensed).  This  report  shows  that,  among  children  who
met  criteria  for  class  B2  TB,  LTBI  evaluation,  and  completed  a  postarrival  domestic
evaluation,  the  proportion  who  received  a  domestic  diagnosis  of  LTBI  increased  from
53%  (or  lower)  for  each  of  the  previous  5  years  to  62%  in  2019,  consistent  with  the
change  to  IGRA  only  overseas.  This  change  is  expected  to  reduce  the  amount  of
unnecessary follow-up care required by state health departments while increasing the
number of persons treated. Syphilis remains a major public health threat, and infection

rates  are  increasing  in  the  United  States  (34).  Screening  overseas  has  remained
consistent since the early 1990s, requiring first a nontreponemal serologic test (either
the rapid plasma reagin or Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test) and, if positive,
a  treponemal  test  performed  on  the  same  blood  specimen  for  confirmation.  A  2014
update to the technical instructions required panel physicians to identify the stage of
disease, and a 2017 update expanded the available list of confirmatory tests that panel
physicians may use. Compared with primary and secondary syphilis rates reported by
age  group  for  the  U.S.  general  population  in  2018  (34),  the  findings  in  this  report
indicate that rates were lower for refugees and eligible others aged 15–19, 20–24, and
25–29 years, similar to rates among those aged 30–34 years; more than twice as high
as rates among those aged 35–39 and 40–44 years; and more than five times as high as
rates among those aged 45–54, 55–64, and ≥65 years. In other words, among younger
adults,  primary  and  secondary  syphilis  rates  were  lower  among  refugees  and  eligible
others than among similarly aged persons in the U.S. general population; among older
adults, the opposite was observed. This phenomenon could reflect a bias in the United
States  toward  selecting  for  testing  those  perceived  as  most  at  risk  (younger  adults),
leaving  older  adults  undertested,  whereas  all  refugees  and  eligible  others  are  tested
regardless  of  age.  However,  the  absolute  number  of  primary  and  secondary  syphilis
cases detected annually by universal overseas screening of refugees and eligible others
aged >14 years is small, ranging from one case in 2019 to 24 cases in 2015. Gonorrhea
is  the  second  most  common  sexually  transmitted  infection  in  the  United  States  (34).
Historically,  panel  physicians  relied  on  the  medical  history  and  physical  examination
findings to diagnose gonorrhea. However, because many infections are asymptomatic,
in  2016,  CDC  issued  technical  instructions  that  require  laboratory  testing.  Panel
physicians  perform  a  nucleic  acid  amplification  test,  typically  with  a  urine  sample.
Compared with gonorrhea rates reported by age group for the U.S. general population
in  2018  (34),  rates  for  refugees  and  eligible  others  were  lower  or  similar  for  every

5-year age group among persons aged 15–44 years, three times higher among those
aged 45–54 years, and six times higher among those aged 55–64 years, similar to the
pattern observed for primary and secondary syphilis. However, even among refugees
and  eligible  others,  rates  were  highest  among  younger  adults  (15–34  years),  ranging
from 289 to 668 cases per 100,000 persons with test results, and lowest among adults
aged  ≥35  years,  ranging  from  0  to  234  cases  per  100,000  persons  with  test  results.
Young adults remain at greatest risk for gonorrhea. Overall, the number of gonorrhea
cases identified by the addition of laboratory testing is small, with 58 cases detected in
2018  and  73  cases  in  2019.  Hansen’s  disease  is  rare  among  refugees  and  eligible
others. However, this disease still occurs in many places, including within pockets of the
United States (35). In 2014, the technical instructions clarified the need to follow World
Health  Organization  (WHO)  treatment  regimens  for  infected  persons.  In  addition,
because  patients  are  considered  noninfectious  after  at  least  7  days  of  therapy,
according  to  the  WHO  protocol  (36),  immigrants,  refugees,  and  eligible  others  are
allowed to travel while receiving therapy to the United States. EDN sends a separate
notification to the U.S. Hansen’s Disease Center in Louisiana for the small number of
new  arrivals  (25  cases  in  6  years)  admitted  with  Hansen’s  disease.  The  overseas
medical  examination  exists  to  satisfy  statutory  requirements  (4).  However,  these
required  medical  encounters  also  offer  an  opportunity  to  introduce  voluntary  public
health interventions. Refugees, unlike immigrants, are not required to receive vaccines
before  arriving  in  the  United  States.  When  unvaccinated  or  undervaccinated  persons
are  concentrated  together,  outbreaks  of  vaccine-preventable  diseases  are  likely.
Outbreaks  affecting  U.S.-bound  refugees  overseas  have  caused  preventable  illnesses
and deaths, led to disease importation and spread in the United States, created costly
operational  disruptions  for  the  U.S.  government  resettlement  programs,  and
necessitated  costly  public  health  responses  by  U.S.  health  agencies  (8,37).  The
vaccination  program  for  U.S.-bound  refugees  offers  11  vaccines  that  help  prevent  14

diseases.  An  important  priority,  as  measles  cases  increase  worldwide,  is  to  offer  all
refugees at least 1 dose of measles-containing vaccine before they arrive in the United
States.  First-dose  coverage  with  measles-containing  vaccine  increased  from  49%  in
2014  to  96%  in  2019,  and  the  majority  of  those  not  vaccinated  in  2019  had  a
contraindication  that  precluded  vaccination.  The  advantages  of  administering
vaccinations  before  instead  of  after  resettlement  include  providing  protection  in
settings  of  higher  risk,  when  it  is  most  needed;  avoiding  costly  disruptions  to
resettlement;  reducing  the  risk  for  disease  importation;  reducing  the  number  of
vaccinations  state  health  departments  and  resettlement  agencies  must  provide  (38);
and  reducing  the  number  of  vaccinations  needed  by  refugees  during  the  immediate,
and  often  challenging,  postarrival  period.  A  critical  component  of  the  vaccination
program for refugees is ensuring that the EDN record of vaccines received overseas is
available when needed in the United States. A previous analysis showed that the EDN
record  is  routinely  available  at  the  follow-up  evaluation  conducted  by  state  health
departments shortly after a refugee arrives but might not be available beyond this point
(39). In 2015, CDC began working with states to add EDN records to state immunization
information  systems  (IIS),  which  combine  vaccination  information  from  different
providers into a single consolidated record. As of 2019, EDN records are transferred to
IIS  in  Colorado,  Connecticut,  Iowa,  Kentucky,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,  Minnesota,
Nebraska, New York, Tennessee, and Wisconsin. Supplementing IIS with data from EDN
allows states to calculate coverage statistics for refugees more easily and provides a
more  accurate  vaccination  history.  Parasitic  infections  are  among  the  most  common
infections  worldwide,  especially  in  areas  with  inadequate  sanitation  (40,41).  CDC
recommends  numerous  presumptive  antiparasitic  treatments  for  refugees,  including
albendazole  for  soil-transmitted  helminthiases,  ivermectin  for  strongyloidiasis  (in
countries where L. loa is not endemic), and praziquantel for schistosomiasis (42). CDC
also
 recommends
 presumptive
 treatment
 for
 P.
 falciparum
 infection
 with

artemether-lumefantrine  for  U.S.-bound  refugees  from  parts  of  sub-Saharan  Africa
where  malaria  is  endemic.  Refugees  originating  from  areas  where  malaria  is  not
endemic  are  unlikely  to  have  asymptomatic  or  subclinical  P.  falciparum  infection  and
can therefore receive directed treatment, if needed, overseas or in the United States
(43). Although the risk for spread from imported infections in the United States is low,
untreated helminth infections can persist for decades and cause significant harm to the
infected  persons.  Strongyloidiasis  can  become  serious  or  fatal  when  disseminated
disease occurs (44). Chronic schistosomiasis can have significant clinical consequences,
including infertility, liver and kidney failure, and bladder cancer (45). Untreated malaria
can  lead  to  severe  illness  and  death  (46).  This  report  shows  that  the  presumptive
treatment  program  provides  adequate  coverage;  other  analyses  have  shown  that
presumptive  treatment  of  U.S.-bound  refugees  during  the  overseas  medical
examination  reduces  or  eliminates  parasitic  infections  for  most  U.S.-bound  refugees
(47–49)  and  is  cost-effective  (50).  Unlike  the  vaccination  program,  which  offers
vaccination to all refugees, presumptive treatment is only offered in certain countries
when the benefit outweighs the risk, considering such factors as the epidemiologic risk
for  infection,  severity  of  outcomes  if  untreated,  adverse  event  profile  of  the
chemotherapeutic agent, availability and accuracy of testing after arrival, and access to
affordable  treatment  in  the  United  States.  Beginning  in  1995,  notifications  of  newly
arrived  immigrants  and  refugees  were  sent  to  state  health  departments  via  the  U.S.
Postal Service. With the inception of the EDN system in 2008, notifications began to be
sent  electronically.  For  refugees  and  most  Iraqi  and  Afghan  special  immigrant  visa
holders,  EDN  receives  overseas  medical  examination  data  electronically  directly  from
IOM, the agency that conducts examinations and coordinates travel for most refugees
and special immigrant visa holders. For immigrants, collection of overseas medical data
historically  has  involved  transferring  paper  records  from  immigrants  with  a  medical
classification to DHS and then to CDC at U.S. ports of entry and then shipping the paper

records  to  CDC  headquarters  for  manual  data  entry.  This  process  has  taken  up  to  4
weeks,  resulting  in  delays  in  the  notifications  sent  to  state  and  local  health
departments,  causing  losses  to  follow-up.  In  2018,  CDC,  in  collaboration  with  DOS,
launched  the  U.S.  version  of  eMedical,  a  system  for  processing  overseas  medical
examination data for immigrants. Panel physicians enter data directly into the eMedical
system,  and  the  data  are  transferred  to  the  EDN  system  within  2  days  of  the
immigrant’s arrival in the United States. The substantial reduction in record-processing
time  increases  the  likelihood  that  health  departments  will  be  able  to  initiate  timely
follow-up  with  new-arrival  immigrants.  Finally,  eMedical  is  used  to  collect  data  for  all
new-arrival  immigrants,  rather  than  just  for  those  who  arrive  with  a  medical
classification. Top The findings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First,
by  design,  the  EDN  system  only  collects  information  for  the  approximately  10%  of
immigrants who have an overseas medical classification; thus, DHS data were used to
approximate  the  immigrant  denominators.  Second,  because  data  transfer  for
immigrants during the study period primarily relied on staff at ports of entry to correctly
review, retain, and route paper forms for each immigrant with a medical classification,
human  error  likely  caused  some  losses,  resulting  in  possible  underestimates  of
immigrants  with  medical  classifications.  These  two  limitations  apply  only  to  data  for
immigrants,  not  data  for  refugees  or  eligible  others,  and  will  be  remediated  once
eMedical is fully implemented. Third, although state and local health departments are
encouraged and provided incentives to report postarrival examination results to EDN,
underreporting might occur; the proportion of immigrants, refugees, and eligible others
who completed a postarrival examination might be higher than indicated in this report.
Fourth, among U.S.-bound populations, testing for immune reactivity to M. tuberculosis
is  not  routinely  required  for  persons  aged  ≥15  years  or  for  children  aged  <15  years
living in countries where TB incidence is <20 cases per 100,000 population. Thus, some
children,  many  adolescents,  and  most  adults  with  LTBI  are  not  identified  overseas.

Immigrants, refugees, and eligible others who are categorized overseas as having no TB
classification should not be assumed to have received an LTBI evaluation. Likewise, the
overall  proportion  of  persons  categorized  as  class  B2,  LTBI  evaluation,  should  not  be
used  as  a  proxy  for  LTBI  prevalence.  Finally,  persons  who  choose  to  emigrate  likely
differ in many ways from those who choose to stay in their country of origin, whereas
refugees typically differ profoundly from fellow citizens in their countries of origin and
citizens in their new countries of asylum or resettlement. Thus, caution should be used
when extrapolating from data collected for U.S.-bound immigrants in a given country to
that country’s general population, and such extrapolations should not be attempted for
refugees.  Top  Rigorous  diagnostic  testing,  data  collection,  and  data  transfer  from
overseas  to  local  public  health  officials  for  U.S.-bound  mobile  populations  can  be
performed on a worldwide scale. The EDN system plays a critical role in meeting CDC’s
mission to reduce illness and deaths among immigrants, refugees, and other globally
mobile  populations  and  to  prevent  the  introduction,  transmission,  and  spread  of
communicable  diseases  into  the  United  States.  The  surveillance  component  of  EDN
provides  data  to  evaluate  outcomes  from  overseas  and  postarrival  medical
examinations,
 identify
 areas
 for
 improvement,
 and
 guide
 evidence-based
recommendations. The findings also demonstrate that the overseas medical encounter
can be used to successfully provide new public health interventions. The programmatic
component of EDN provides the framework to ensure continuity of care for new arrivals
and  facilitates  domestic  public  health  programming.  Finally,  EDN  provides  the  means
for new or urgent overseas interventions to be quickly documented and communicated
transnationally; for example, although not included during the period covered by this
report, documentation of testing for and vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 in U.S.-bound
populations  could  be  readily  achieved.  Top  International  Organization  for  Migration;
panel  physicians;  Refugee  Processing  Center,  Bureau  of  Population,  Refugees,  and
Migration, U.S. Department of State; Customs and Border Protection, U.S. Department

of Homeland Security; CDC quarantine stations; state and local tuberculosis prevention
and control officers; state refugee health coordinators; Yoni Haber, Wei-Lun Juang, and
Charlie Miller, Division of Global Migration and Quarantine Informatics Team, CDC. Top
Corresponding author: Christina R. Phares, Division of Global Migration and Quarantine,
National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.  Telephone:
404-639-4350;  Email:  cphares@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of  Global  Migration  and
Quarantine,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;
2Departments  of  Medicine  and  Pediatrics,  Center  for  Global  Health  and  Social
Responsibility, University of Minnesota; 3Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National
Center  for  HIV,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB  Prevention,  CDC  Top  All  authors  have
completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors form
for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were
disclosed. Top Top   No tuberculosis (TB) classification* This class includes applicants
without current clinical findings of TB disease, without known HIV infection, and with a
normal  chest  radiograph  (and  for  applicants  who  require  it,  a  negative  interferon
gamma-release assay [IGRA]) with normal TB disease screening examinations. Class A
TB  disease  This  class  includes  all  applicants  who  have  TB  disease.  This  class  also
includes applicants with extrapulmonary TB who have a chest radiograph suggestive of
pulmonary  TB  disease,  regardless  of  sputum  smear  and  culture  results.  Class  B0  TB,
pulmonary† This class includes applicants with TB diagnosed by the panel physician or
who  were  seen  by  the  panel  physician  while  receiving  TB  treatment  and  successfully
completed CDC-defined directly observed treatment (DOT) under the supervision of a
panel  physician  before  immigration.  Class  B1  TB,  pulmonary†  This  class  includes
applicants  who  have  signs  or  symptoms,  physical  examination,  or  chest  radiograph
findings  suggestive  of  TB  disease  or  who  have  known  HIV  infection  but  negative
acid-fast bacillus sputum smears and negative cultures and do not have diagnosed TB
disease. This classification also includes applicants who have TB disease diagnosed by

the  panel  physician,  have  refused  DOT  treatment,  and  are  returning  after  treatment
and  completion  of  1-year  wait.  Class  B1  TB,  extrapulmonary  This  class  includes
applicants with diagnosed extrapulmonary TB who have a normal chest radiograph and
negative sputum smears and negative cultures. Class B2 TB, latent TB infection (LTBI)
evaluation  This  class  includes  applicants  who  have  a  positive  IGRA  or  tuberculin  skin
test  (TST)  but  otherwise  have  a  negative  evaluation  for  TB.  Contacts  with  a  positive
IGRA  or  TST  of  ≥5  mm  induration  must  receive  this  classification  in  addition  to  a
classification of class B3, contact evaluation (if they are not already classified as class
B0 TB, pulmonary; class B1 TB, pulmonary; class B1 TB, extrapulmonary; or class A TB).
Class B3 TB, contact evaluation This class includes applicants who are a recent contact
of a person with known TB disease, regardless of IGRA or TST results. If the IGRA or TST
results  are  positive  and  no  evidence  of  TB  disease  exists,  the  applicant  has  two
classifications: class B2 and class B3; if results are negative, only class B3 applies. Class
A  for  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  or  Hansen’s  disease  This  class  includes  applicants  with
untreated syphilis, gonorrhea, or Hansen’s disease. Class B for syphilis, gonorrhea, or
Hansen’s disease This class includes applicants who completed treatment for syphilis
and  gonorrhea  or  at  least  1  week  of  therapy  for  Hansen’s  disease.  Source:  CDC.
Tuberculosis technical instructions for panel physicians. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
Health
 and
 Human
 Services,
CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/exams/ti/panel/tuberculosis-panel-te
chnical-instructions.html * No TB classification means that TB disease was ruled out at
the time of the examination but does not necessarily mean that LTBI has been ruled out
because testing for immune reactivity to Mycobacterium tuberculosis is not required for
most adults. On the basis of LTBI prevalence in their countries of origin, many adults
who  meet  criteria  for  no  TB  classification  likely  have  LTBI.  †  Before  October  1,  2018,
applicants  who  met  criteria  for  class  B0  or  B1  TB,  pulmonary,  were  aggregated,  with
both  referred  to  as  class  B1  TB,  pulmonary.  This  report  uses  the  disaggregated

classifications,  determined  retroactively,  throughout.  Top    Tuberculosis  (TB)  In
countries with a World Health Organization (WHO)-estimated TB incidence of ≥20 cases
per 100,000 population, applicants aged 2–14 years must receive an interferon-gamma
release assay (IGRA) and, if the result is positive, chest radiography. In countries with
<20  cases  per  100,000  population,  applicants  aged  <15  years  who  have  signs  or
symptoms suggestive of TB disease and those who disclose HIV infection must receive
an  IGRA  and  chest  radiography.  (Testing  for  HIV  infection  is  not  required.)  Before
October 1, 2018, tuberculin skin tests were also allowed as an alternative to IGRAs. In
all countries, regardless of TB incidence, applicants aged ≥15 years must have chest
radiography,  and  applicants  of  any  age  who  have  signs,  symptoms,  or  chest
radiographs suggestive of TB or known HIV infection must provide sputum specimens
on 3 consecutive days for acid-fast bacilli smear microscopy, culture (solid and liquid)
for  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis,  and,  if  culture-positive,  drug  susceptibility  testing.
Syphilis  and  gonorrhea  During  the  study  period,  applicants  aged  ≥15  years  were
required to receive testing for syphilis and gonorrhea, and those aged <15 years were
required to receive testing if infection was suspected or if they had a history of syphilis
or gonorrhea. For syphilis, a nontreponemal serologic test must be used first. Positive or
reactive  results  must  be  confirmed  by  a  treponemal  test.  For  gonorrhea,  beginning
October 1, 2016, applicants must receive a nucleic acid amplification test or gonococcal
culture; in 2017, the use of culture as a screening option was discontinued. Laboratory
testing for gonorrhea was not required before 2016. In 2021, after the study period, the
age requirements for testing were narrowed to 18–44 years for syphilis and 18–24 years
for  gonorrhea.  Applicants  of  any  age  must  still  be  tested  if  infection  is  suspected.
Hansen’s disease All applicants must receive a clinical evaluation for Hansen’s disease.
Diagnoses follow the WHO categorization scheme.* Source: CDC. Tuberculosis technical
instructions  for  panel  physicians.  Atlanta,  GA:  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services,

CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/exams/ti/panel/tuberculosis-panel-te
chnical-instructions.html * World Health Organization. Classification of leprosy. Geneva,
Switzerland:
 World
 Health
 Organization;
 2018.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/leprosy  Top  Abbreviations:  EDN  =
Electronic Disease Notification; IOM = International Organization for Migration. * Data
for  immigrants  who  arrived  before  2018  follow  the  left  pathway.  In  2018,  CDC  in
collaboration  with  U.S.  Department  of  State  launched  the  U.S.  version  of  a  system
called  eMedical  for  processing  overseas  medical  examination  data  for  immigrants.
Panel  physicians  enter  data  directly  into  the  eMedical  system,  which  are  then
transferred  to  the  EDN  system  within  2  days  of  the  immigrant’s  arrival  in  the  United
States.  From  2018  onward,  data  for  most  immigrants  are  transferred  to  EDN  via
eMedical. Data for refugees and most eligible others follow the pathway on the right;
however, data for certain eligible others follow the left pathway. New-arrival immigrants
are persons who, while abroad, completed the application process for lawful permanent
residency in the United States. Refugees are persons unable or unwilling to return to
their  country  of  nationality  because  of  persecution,  or  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, resulting from their race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular
social  group,  or  political  opinion.  Eligible  others  are  persons  admitted  from  abroad,
other  than  refugees,  who  are  eligible  for  services  from  the  Office  of  Refugee
Resettlement (primarily parolees, Iraqi and Afghan special immigrant visa holders, and
follow-to-join  asylees).  IOM,  an  intergovernmental  organization,  has  a  special  role  in
resettlement.  For  refugees  and  many  eligible  others,  IOM  organizes  safe  travel
(departure  and  arrival  in  the  United  States)  and  transmits  overseas  medical
examination  data  to  CDC  including,  in  certain  instances,  data  collected  by  non-IOM
panels.  Top  Abbreviation:  EDN  =  Electronic  Disease  Notification.  *  New-arrival
immigrants are persons who, while abroad, completed the application process for lawful
permanent  residency  in  the  United  States.  Publicly  available  U.S.  Department  of

Homeland  Security  data  were  used  to  determine  the  number  new-arrival  immigrants
without  EDN  data  (US  Department  of  Homeland  Security.  Legal  immigration  and
adjustment  of  status  report  quarterly  data.  Washington,  DC:  US  Department  of
Homeland
 Security;
 2020.
https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/readingroom/special/LIASR). Top * Refugees
are  persons  unable  or  unwilling  to  return  to  their  country  of  nationality  because  of
persecution,  or  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  resulting  from  their  race,  religion,
nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Eligible others
are  persons  admitted  from  abroad,  other  than  refugees,  who  are  eligible  for  services
from the Office of Refugee Resettlement (primarily parolees, Iraqi and Afghan special
immigrant visa holders, and follow-to-join asylees). The Electronic Disease Notification
system  collects  data  for  all  refugees  and  eligible  others.  Top  Abbreviations:  LTBI  =
latent tuberculosis infection; TB = tuberculosis.
*  Eligible  others  are  persons  admitted  from  abroad,  other  than  refugees,  who  are
eligible for services from the Office of Refugee Resettlement (primarily parolees, Iraqi
and Afghan special immigrant visa holders, and follow-to-join asylees).
† See Box 1 for classification criteria.
§ Final TB classifications are mutually exclusive with two exceptions: 1) applicants may
be  simultaneously  categorized  as  class  B1  TB,  pulmonary,  and  class  B1  TB,
extrapulmonary, and 2) applicants may be simultaneously categorized as class B3 TB,
contact  evaluation,  and  any  other  classifications.  Therefore,  the  number  of
classifications might be greater than the number of persons with classifications.
¶  Nationalities  are  listed  in  order  of  the  top  30  birth  countries  (excluding  the  United
States  and  its  territories)  for  TB  cases  reported  to  the  U.S.  National  TB  Surveillance
System  in  2019.  Top  *  U.S.  territories  and  freely  associated  states  are  not  shown.  †
New-arrival  immigrants  are  persons  who,  while  abroad,  completed  the  application
process  for  lawful  permanent  residency  in  the  United  States.  Refugees  are  persons

unable or unwilling to return to their country of nationality because of persecution, or a
well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  resulting  from  their  race,  religion,  nationality,
membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Eligible others are persons
admitted from abroad, other than refugees, who are eligible for services from the Office
of  Refugee  Resettlement  (primarily  parolees,  Iraqi  and  Afghan  special  immigrant  visa
holders,  and  follow-to-join  asylees).  §  See  Box  1  for  classification  criteria.  Top
Abbreviations: LTBI = latent tuberculosis infection; TB = tuberculosis.
*  Eligible  others  are  persons  admitted  from  abroad,  other  than  refugees,  who  are
eligible for services from the Office of Refugee Resettlement (primarily parolees, Iraqi
and Afghan special immigrant visa holders, and follow-to-join asylees).
† See Box 1 for classification criteria.
§ Persons who completed a U.S. examination within the first year of arrival.
¶ U.S. territories and freely associated states are not shown.
**  In  2014  and  2015,  notifications  were  substantially  delayed  for  newly  arriving
immigrants with class B TB who reported intending to live in New York. These delays
might have resulted in losses to follow-up and decreased the proportion of persons who
completed  a  U.S.  examination  in  this  state.  Top  Abbreviations:  LTBI  =  latent
tuberculosis infection; TB = tuberculosis.
*  Eligible  others  are  persons  admitted  from  abroad,  other  than  refugees,  who  are
eligible for services from the Office of Refugee Resettlement (primarily parolees, Iraqi
and Afghan special immigrant visa holders, and follow-to-join asylees).
† See Box 1 for classification criteria.
§ Persons who completed a U.S. examination within the first year of arrival.
¶ U.S. territories and freely associated states are not shown.
**  In  2014  and  2015,  notifications  were  substantially  delayed  for  newly  arriving
immigrants with class B TB who reported intending to live in New York. These delays
might have resulted in losses to follow-up and decreased the proportion of persons who

completed a U.S. examination in this state. Top * Eligible others are persons admitted
from  abroad,  other  than  refugees,  who  are  eligible  for  services  from  the  Office  of
Refugee  Resettlement  (primarily  parolees,  Iraqi  and  Afghan  special  immigrant  visa
holders, and follow-to-join asylees).
†  Requirement  for  reporting  syphilis  stage  was  introduced  in  2014.  For  persons  who
arrived before 2015, data on syphilis stage are incomplete, and this group is excluded
from  counts  and  rate  calculations  for  primary,  secondary,  and  latent  syphilis  but
included in counts and rate calculations for all syphilis.
§ Requirement for laboratory testing for gonorrhea was introduced in 2016. For persons
who were examined before 2018, data for laboratory-confirmed gonorrhea infection are
incomplete, and this group is excluded from counts and rate calculations for gonorrhea.
¶  Includes  48  syphilis  cases  staged  as  primary,  six  as  secondary,  761  as  latent  or
missing, 205 as unstaged in 2014, four as tertiary, and one as neurosyphilis.
** Per 100,000 persons. Syphilis testing was not documented for 5.1% of persons aged
≥15 years. Persons not tested are excluded from all rate calculations.
††  Per  100,000  persons.  Gonorrhea  testing  was  not  documented  for  1.7%  of  persons
aged ≥15 years examined during 2018–2019. Persons not tested are excluded from all
rate calculations.
§§ Includes 513 syphilis cases staged as latent and 248 of unknown duration.
¶¶  Testing  for  syphilis  and  gonorrhea  are  not  required  for  children  aged  <15  years
unless  infection  is  suspected  or  the  child  has  a  history  of  syphilis  or  gonorrhea.  Top
Suggested citation for this article: Phares CR, Liu Y, Wang Z, et al. Disease Surveillance
Among U.S.-Bound Immigrants and Refugees — Electronic Disease Notification System,
United  States,  2014–2019.  MMWR  Surveill  Summ  2022;71(No.  SS-2):1–21.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.ss7102a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.

Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/ss/ss7102a1.htm
