A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Disinfection of healthcare equipment from
the  Guideline  for  Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in  Healthcare  Facilities  (2008).  One
problem  with  implementing  the  aforementioned  scheme  is  oversimplification.  For
example,  the  scheme  does  not  consider  problems  with  reprocessing  of  complicated
medical equipment that often is heat-sensitive or problems of inactivating certain types
of infectious agents (e.g., prions, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease [CJD] agent). Thus,
in  some  situations,  choosing  a  method  of  disinfection  remains  difficult,  even  after
consideration  of  the  categories  of  risk  to  patients.  This  is  true  particularly  for  a  few
medical  devices  (e.g.,  arthroscopes,  laparoscopes)  in  the  critical  category  because  of
controversy  about  whether  they  should  be  sterilized  or  high-level  disinfected.  28,  86
Heat-stable scopes (e.g., many rigid scopes) should be steam sterilized. Some of these
items  cannot  be  steam  sterilized  because  they  are  heat-sensitive;  additionally,
sterilization  using  ethylene  oxide  (EtO)  can  be  too  time-consuming  for  routine  use
between  patients  (new  technologies,  such  as  hydrogen  peroxide  gas  plasma  and
peracetic  acid  reprocessor,  provide  faster  cycle  times).  However,  evidence  that
sterilization  of  these  items  improves  patient  care  by  reducing  the  infection  risk  is
lacking.29,  87-91  Many  newer  models  of  these  instruments  can  withstand  steam
sterilization,  which  for  critical  items  is  the  preferred  method.  Another  problem  with
implementing the Spaulding scheme is processing of an instrument in the semicritical
category (e.g., endoscope) that would be used in conjunction with a critical instrument
that  contacts  sterile  body  tissues.  For  example,  is  an  endoscope  used  for  upper
gastrointestinal tract investigation still a semicritical item when used with sterile biopsy
forceps or in a patient who is bleeding heavily from esophageal varices? Provided that
high-level disinfection is achieved, and all microorganisms except bacterial spores have
been removed from the endoscope, the device should not represent an infection risk

and  should  remain  in  the  semicritical  category.  92-94  Infection  with  spore-forming
bacteria  has  not  been  reported  from  appropriately  high-level  disinfected  endoscopes.
An additional problem with implementation of the Spaulding system is that the optimal
contact  time  for  high-level  disinfection  has  not  been  defined  or  varies  among
professional  organizations,  resulting  in  different  strategies  for  disinfecting  different
types  of  semicritical  items  (e.g.,  endoscopes,  applanation  tonometers,  endocavitary
transducers,  cryosurgical  instruments,  and  diaphragm  fitting  rings).  Until  simpler  and
effective alternatives are identified for device disinfection in clinical settings, following
this guideline, other CDC guidelines 1, 22, 95, 96 and FDA-cleared instructions for the
liquid  chemical  sterilants/high-level  disinfectants  would  be  prudent.  Physicians  use
endoscopes  to  diagnose  and  treat  numerous  medical  disorders.  Even  though
endoscopes represent a valuable diagnostic and therapeutic tool in modern medicine
and the incidence of infection associated with their use reportedly is very low (about 1
in 1.8 million procedures), 97 more healthcare–associated outbreaks have been linked
to contaminated endoscopes than to any other medical device. 6-8, 12, 98 To prevent
the  spread  of  health-care–associated  infections,  all  heat-sensitive  endoscopes  (e.g.,
gastrointestinal  endoscopes,  bronchoscopes,  nasopharygoscopes)  must  be  properly
cleaned  and,  at  a  minimum,  subjected  to  high-level  disinfection  after  each  use.
High-level disinfection can be expected to destroy all microorganisms, although when
high numbers of bacterial spores are present, a few spores might survive. Because of
the  types  of  body  cavities  they  enter,  flexible  endoscopes  acquire  high  levels  of
microbial  contamination  (bioburden)  during  each  use.  99  For  example,  the  bioburden
found  on  flexible  gastrointestinal  endoscopes  after  use  has  ranged  from  105  colony
forming  units  (CFU)/mL  to  1010  CFU/mL,  with  the  highest  levels  found  in  the  suction
channels.99-102  The  average  load  on  bronchoscopes  before  cleaning  was  6.4×104
CFU/mL. Cleaning reduces the level of microbial contamination by 4–6 log10. 83, 103
Using human immunovirus (HIV)-contaminated endoscopes, several investigators have

shown that cleaning completely eliminates the microbial contamination on the scopes.
104,  105  Similarly,  other  investigators  found  that  EtO  sterilization  or  soaking  in  2%
glutaraldehyde  for  20  minutes  was  effective  only  when  the  device  first  was  properly
cleaned.  106  FDA  maintains  a  list  of  cleared  liquid  chemical  sterilants  and  high-level
disinfectants  that  can  be  used  to  reprocess  heat-sensitive  medical  devices,  such  as
flexible
 endoscopes
 [This
 link
 is
 no
 longer
 active:
http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/germlab.html.  The  current  version  of  this  document  may
differ  from  original  version:  FDA-Cleared  Sterilants  and  High  Level  Disinfectants  with
General  Claims  for  Processing  Reusable  Medical  and  Dental  Devices  –  March
2015external  icon].  At  this  time,  the  FDA-cleared  and  marketed  formulations  include:
≥2.4% glutaraldehyde, 0.55% ortho-phthalaldehyde (OPA), 0.95% glutaraldehyde with
1.64%  phenol/phenate,  7.35%  hydrogen  peroxide  with  0.23%  peracetic  acid,  1.0%
hydrogen peroxide with 0.08% peracetic acid, and 7.5% hydrogen peroxide. 85 These
products have excellent antimicrobial activity; however, some oxidizing chemicals (e.g.,
7.5% hydrogen peroxide, and 1.0% hydrogen peroxide with 0.08% peracetic acid [latter
product  is  no  longer  marketed])  reportedly  have  caused  cosmetic  and  functional
damage  to  endoscopes.  69  Users  should  check  with  device  manufacturers  for
information  about  germicide  compatibility  with  their  device.  If  the  germicide  is
FDA-cleared,  then  it  is  safe  when  used  according  to  label  directions;  however,
professionals should review the scientific literature for newly available data regarding
human  safety  or  materials  compatibility.  EtO  sterilization  of  flexible  endoscopes  is
infrequent because it requires a lengthy processing and aeration time (e.g., 12 hours)
and is a potential hazard to staff and patients. The two products most commonly used
for  reprocessing  endoscopes  in  the  United  States  are  glutaraldehyde  and  an
automated,  liquid  chemical  sterilization  process  that  uses  peracetic  acid.  107  The
American  Society  for  Gastrointestinal  Endoscopy  (ASGE)  recommends  glutaraldehyde
solutions that do not contain surfactants because the soapy residues of surfactants are

difficult  to  remove  during  rinsing.  108  ortho-phthalaldehyde  has  begun  to  replace
glutaraldehyde  in  many  health-care  facilities  because  it  has  several  potential
advantages over glutaraldehyde: is not known to irritate the eyes and nasal passages,
does  not  require  activation  or  exposure  monitoring,  and  has  a  12-minute  high-level
disinfection claim in the United States. 69 Disinfectants that are not FDA-cleared and
should not be used for reprocessing endoscopes include iodophors, chlorine solutions,
alcohols, quaternary ammonium compounds, and phenolics. These solutions might still
be  in  use  outside  the  United  States,  but  their  use  should  be  strongly  discouraged
because  of  lack  of  proven  efficacy  against  all  microorganisms  or  materials
incompatibility. FDA clearance of the contact conditions listed on germicide labeling is
based
 on
 the
 manufacturer's
 test
 results
 [This
 link
 is
 no
 longer
 active:
http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/germlab.html.  The  current  version  of  this  document  may
differ  from  original  version:  FDA-Cleared  Sterilants  and  High  Level  Disinfectants  with
General  Claims  for  Processing  Reusable  Medical  and  Dental  Devices  –  March
2015external  icon].  Manufacturers  test  the  product  under  worst-case  conditions  for
germicide  formulation  (i.e.,  minimum  recommended  concentration  of  the  active
ingredient),  and  include  organic  soil.  Typically  manufacturers  use  5%  serum  as  the
organic soil and hard water as examples of organic and inorganic challenges. The soil
represents  the  organic  loading  to  which  the  device  is  exposed  during  actual  use  and
that would remain on the device in the absence of cleaning. This method ensures that
the  contact  conditions  completely  eliminate  the  test  mycobacteria  (e.g.,  105  to  106
Mycobacteria tuberculosis in organic soil and dried on a scope) if inoculated in the most
difficult areas for the disinfectant to penetrate and contact in the absence of cleaning
and  thus  provides  a  margin  of  safety.  109  For  2.4%  glutaraldehyde  that  requires  a
45-minute  immersion  at  25ºC  to  achieve  high-level  disinfection  (i.e.,  100%  kill  of  M.
tuberculosis). FDA itself does not conduct testing but relies solely on the disinfectant
manufacturer's  data.  Data  suggest  that  M.  tuberculosis  levels  can  be  reduced  by  at

least  8  log10  with  cleaning  (4  log10)  83,  101,  102,  110,  followed  by  chemical
disinfection  for  20  minutes  at  20°C  (4  to  6  log10).  83,  93,  111,  112  On  the  basis  of
these data, APIC, 113, the Society of Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates (SGNA)
38,  114,  115,  the  ASGE  108,  American  College  of  Chest  Physicians  12,  and  a
multi-society  guideline  116  recommend  alternative  contact  conditions  with  2%
glutaraldehyde to achieve high-level disinfection (e.g., that equipment be immersed in
2% glutaraldehyde at 20°C for at least 20 minutes for high-level disinfection). Federal
regulations  are  to  follow  the  FDA-cleared  label  claim  for  high-level  disinfectants.  The
FDA-cleared  labels  for  high-level  disinfection  with  >2%  glutaraldehyde  at  25°C  range
from  20-90  minutes,  depending  upon  the  product  based  on  three  tier  testing  which
includes  AOAC  sporicidal  tests,  simulated  use  testing  with  mycobacterial  and  in-use
testing. The studies supporting the efficacy of >2% glutaraldehyde for 20 minutes at
20ºC  assume  adequate  cleaning  prior  to  disinfection,  whereas  the  FDA-cleared  label
claim  incorporates  an  added  margin  of  safety  to  accommodate  possible  lapses  in
cleaning practices. Facilities that have chosen to apply the 20 minute duration at 20ºC
have done so based on the IA recommendation in the July 2003 SHEA position paper,
"Multi-society Guideline for Reprocessing Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopes."19, 57,
83, 94, 108, 111, 116-121 Flexible endoscopes are particularly difficult to disinfect 122
and  easy  to  damage  because  of  their  intricate  design  and  delicate  materials.  123
Meticulous  cleaning  must  precede  any  sterilization  or  high-level  disinfection  of  these
instruments. Failure to perform good cleaning can result in sterilization or disinfection
failure,  and  outbreaks  of  infection  can  occur.  Several  studies  have  demonstrated  the
importance  of  cleaning  in  experimental  studies  with  the  duck  hepatitis  B  virus  (HBV)
106, 124, HIV 125and Helicobacter pylori.126 An examination of health-care–associated
infections  related  only  to  endoscopes  through  July  1992  found  281  infections
transmitted  by  gastrointestinal  endoscopy  and  96  transmitted  by  bronchoscopy.  The
clinical spectrum ranged from asymptomatic colonization to death. Salmonella species

and  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  repeatedly  were  identified  as  causative  agents  of
infections  transmitted  by  gastrointestinal  endoscopy,  and  M.  tuberculosis,  atypical
mycobacteria,  and  P.  aeruginosa  were  the  most  common  causes  of  infections
transmitted  by  bronchoscopy.  12  Major  reasons  for  transmission  were  inadequate
cleaning, improper selection of a disinfecting agent, and failure to follow recommended
cleaning and disinfection procedures 6, 8, 37, 98, and flaws in endoscope design 127,
128  or  automated  endoscope  reprocessors.  7,  98  Failure  to  follow  established
guidelines  has  continued  to  result  in  infections  associated  with  gastrointestinal
endoscopes 8 and bronchoscopes. 7, 12 Potential device-associated problems should be
reported  to  the  FDA  Center  for  Devices  and  Radiologic  Health.  One  multistate
investigation found that 23.9% of the bacterial cultures from the internal channels of 71
gastrointestinal endoscopes grew ³100,000 colonies of bacteria after completion of all
disinfection and sterilization procedures (nine of 25 facilities were using a product that
has  been  removed  from  the  marketplace  [six  facilities  using  1:16  glutaraldehyde
phenate], is not FDA-cleared as a high-level disinfectant [an iodophor] or no disinfecting
agent)  and  before  use  on  the  next  patient.129  The  incidence  of  postendoscopic
procedure infections from an improperly processed endoscope has not been rigorously
assessed.  Automated  endoscope  reprocessors  (AER)  offer  several  advantages  over
manual  reprocessing:  they  automate  and  standardize  several  important  reprocessing
steps130-132, reduce the likelihood that an essential reprocessing step will be skipped,
and reduce personnel exposure to high-level disinfectants or chemical sterilants. Failure
of AERs has been linked to outbreaks of infections 133 or colonization 7, 134, and the
AER  water  filtration  system  might  not  be  able  to  reliably  provide  "sterile"  or
bacteria-free  rinse  water.135,  136  Establishment  of  correct  connectors  between  the
AER  and  the  device  is  critical  to  ensure  complete  flow  of  disinfectants  and  rinse
water.7,  137  In  addition,  some  endoscopes  such  as  the  duodenoscopes  (e.g.,
endoscopic  retrograde  cholangiopancreatography  [ERCP])  contain  features  (e.g.,

elevator-wire  channel)  that  require  a  flushing  pressure  that  is  not  achieved  by  most
AERs  and  must  be  reprocessed  manually  using  a  2-  to  5-mL  syringe,  until  new
duodenoscopes  equipped  with  a  wider  elevator-channel  that  AERs  can  reliably
reprocess become available.132 Outbreaks involving removable endoscope parts 138,
139 such as suction valves and endoscopic accessories designed to be inserted through
flexible  endoscopes  such  as  biopsy  forceps  emphasize  the  importance  of  cleaning  to
remove all foreign matter before high-level disinfection or sterilization. 140 Some types
of  valves  are  now  available  as  single-use,  disposable  products  (e.g.,  bronchoscope
valves)  or  steam  sterilizable  products  (e.g.,  gastrointestinal  endoscope  valves).  AERs
need  further  development  and  redesign  7,  141,  as  do  endoscopes,  123,  142  so  that
they  do  not  represent  a  potential  source  of  infectious  agents.  Endoscopes  employing
disposable  components  (e.g.,  protective  barrier  devices  or  sheaths)  might  provide  an
alternative to conventional liquid chemical high-level disinfection/sterilization.143, 144
Another new technology is a swallowable camera-in-a-capsule that travels through the
digestive  tract  and  transmits  color  pictures  of  the  small  intestine  to  a  receiver  worn
outside  the  body.  This  capsule  currently  does  not  replace  colonoscopies.  Published
recommendations for cleaning and disinfecting endoscopic equipment should be strictly
followed.12,  38,  108,  113-116,  145-148  Unfortunately,  audits  have  shown  that
personnel  do  not  consistently  adhere  to  guidelines  on  reprocessing  149-151  and
outbreaks of infection continue to occur. 152-154 To ensure reprocessing personnel are
properly trained, each person who reprocesses endoscopic instruments should receive
initial  and  annual  competency  testing.38,  155  In  general,  endoscope  disinfection  or
sterilization with a liquid chemical sterilant involves five steps after leak testing: Drying
the  endoscope  (steps  3  and  4)  is  essential  to  greatly  reduce  the  chance  of
recontamination of the endoscope by microorganisms that can be present in the rinse
water. 116, 156 One study demonstrated that reprocessed endoscopes (i.e., air/water
channel,  suction/biopsy  channel)  generally  were  negative  (100%  after  24  hours;  90%

after 7 days [1 CFU of coagulase-negative Staphylococcus in one channel]) for bacterial
growth  when  stored  by  hanging  vertically  in  a  ventilated  cabinet.157  Other
investigators  found  all  endoscopes  were  bacteria-free  immediately  after  high-level
disinfection,  and  only  four  of  135  scopes  were  positive  during  the  subsequent  5-day
assessment (skin bacteria cultured from endoscope surfaces). All flush-through samples
remained sterile. 158 Because tapwater can contain low levels of microorganisms159,
some  researchers  have  suggested  that  only  sterile  water  (which  can  be  prohibitively
expensive) 160 or AER filtered water be used. The suggestion to use only sterile water
or filtered water is not consistent with published guidelines that allow tapwater with an
alcohol  rinse  and  forced  air-drying  38,  108,  113  or  the  scientific  literature.  39,  93  In
addition, no evidence of disease transmission has been found when a tap water rinse is
followed  by  an  alcohol  rinse  and  forced-air  drying.  AERs  produce  filtered  water  by
passage through a bacterial filter (e.g., 0.2 m). Filtered rinse water was identified as a
source  of  bacterial  contamination  in  a  study  that  cultured  the  accessory  and  suction
channels  of  endoscopes  and  the  internal  chambers  of  AERs  during  1996–2001  and
reported 8.7% of samples collected during 1996–1998 had bacterial growth, with 54%
being Pseudomonas species. After a system of hot water flushing of the piping (60ºC for
60  minutes  daily)  was  introduced,  the  frequency  of  positive  cultures  fell  to
approximately  2%  with  only  rare  isolation  of  >10  CFU/mL.  161  In  addition  to  the
endoscope  reprocessing  steps,  a  protocol  should  be  developed  that  ensures  the  user
knows  whether  an  endoscope  has  been  appropriately  cleaned  and  disinfected  (e.g.,
using a room or cabinet for processed endoscopes only) or has not been reprocessed.
When  users  leave  endoscopes  on  movable  carts,  confusion  can  result  about  whether
the endoscope has been processed. Although one guideline recommended endoscopes
(e.g., duodenoscopes) be reprocessed immediately before use, 147 other guidelines do
not  require  this  activity  38,  108,  115  and  except  for  the  Association  of  periOperative
Registered  Nurses  (AORN),  professional  organizations  do  not  recommended  that

reprocessing be repeated as long as the original processing is done correctly. As part of
a  quality  assurance  program,  healthcare  facility  personnel  can  consider  random
bacterial  surveillance  cultures  of  processed  endoscopes  to  ensure  high-level
disinfection  or  sterilization.7,  162-164  Reprocessed  endoscopes  should  be  free  of
microbial  pathogens  except  for  small  numbers  of  relatively  avirulent  microbes  that
represent
 exogenous
 environmental
 contamination
 (e.g.,
 coagulase-negative
Staphylococcus,  Bacillus  species,  diphtheroids).  Although  recommendations  exist  for
the  final  rinse  water  used  during  endoscope  reprocessing  to  be  microbiologically
cultured at least monthly 165, a microbiologic standard has not been set, and the value
of routine endoscope cultures has not been shown. 166 In addition, neither the routine
culture  of  reprocessed  endoscopes  nor  the  final  rinse  water  has  been  validated  by
correlating viable counts on an endoscope to infection after an endoscopic procedure. If
reprocessed  endoscopes  were  cultured,  sampling  the  endoscope  would  assess  water
quality  and  other  important  steps  (e.g.,  disinfectant  effectiveness,  exposure  time,
cleaning) in the reprocessing procedure. A number of methods for sampling endoscopes
and  water  have  been  described.23,  157,  161,  163,  167,  168  Novel  approaches  (e.g.,
detection of adenosine triphosphate [ATP]) to evaluate the effectiveness of endoscope
cleaning  169,  170  or  endoscope  reprocessing  171  also  have  been  evaluated,  but  no
method  has  been  established  as  a  standard  for  assessing  the  outcome  of  endoscope
reprocessing. The carrying  case used  to transport clean and  reprocessed  endoscopes
outside  the  health-care  environment  should  not  be  used  to  store  an  endoscope  or  to
transport  the  instrument  within  the  health-care  facility.  A  contaminated  endoscope
should  never  be  placed  in  the  carrying  case  because  the  case  can  also  become
contaminated.  When  the  endoscope  is  removed  from  the  case,  properly  reprocessed,
and put back in the case, the case could recontaminate the endoscope. A contaminated
carrying
 case
 should
 be
 discarded
 (Olympus
 America,
 June
 2002,
 written
communication). Infection-control professionals should ensure that institutional policies

are consistent with national guidelines and conduct infection-control rounds periodically
(e.g.,  at  least  annually)  in  areas  where  endoscopes  are  reprocessed  to  ensure  policy
compliance. Breaches in policy should be documented and corrective action instituted.
In incidents in which endoscopes were not exposed to a high-level disinfection process,
patients  exposed  to  potentially  contaminated  endoscopes  have  been  assessed  for
possible  acquisition  of  HIV,  HBV,  and  hepatitis  C  virus  (HCV).  A  14-step  method  for
managing  a  failure  incident  associated  with  high-level  disinfection  or  sterilization  has
been  described  [Rutala  WA,  2006  #12512].  The  possible  transmission  of  bloodborne
and other infectious agents highlights the importance of rigorous infection control.172,
173  Although  high-level  disinfection  appears  to  be  the  minimum  standard  for
processing  laparoscopes  and  arthroscopes  between  patients  28,  86,  174,  175,  this
practice  continues  to  be  debated.89,  90,  176  However,  neither  side  in  the  high-level
disinfection  versus  sterilization  debate  has  sufficient  data  on  which  to  base  its
conclusions.  Proponents  of  high-level  disinfection  refer  to  membership  surveys  29  or
institutional  experiences  87  involving  more  than  117,000  and  10,000  laparoscopic
procedures,  respectively,  that  cite  a  low  risk  for  infection  (<0.3%)  when  high-level
disinfection is used for gynecologic laparoscopic equipment. Only one infection in the
membership  survey  was  linked  to  spores.  In  addition,  growth  of  common  skin
microorganisms (e.g., Staphylococcus epidermidis, diphtheroids) has been documented
from  the  umbilical  area  even  after  skin  preparation  with  povidone-iodine  and  ethyl
alcohol.  Similar  organisms  were  recovered  in  some  instances  from  the  pelvic  serosal
surfaces  or  from  the  laparoscopic  telescopes,  suggesting  that  the  microorganisms
probably were carried from the skin into the peritoneal cavity. 177, 178 Proponents of
sterilization  focus  on  the  possibility  of  transmitting  infection  by  spore-forming
organisms. Researchers have proposed several reasons why sterility was not necessary
for all laparoscopic equipment: only a limited number of organisms (usually ≤10) are
introduced  into  the  peritoneal  cavity  during  laparoscopy;  minimal  damage  is  done  to

inner abdominal structures with little devitalized tissue; the peritoneal cavity tolerates
small  numbers  of  spore-forming  bacteria;  equipment  is  simple  to  clean  and  disinfect;
surgical sterility is relative; the natural bioburden on rigid lumened devices is low179;
and no evidence exists that high-level disinfection instead of sterilization increases the
risk for infection. 87, 89, 90 With the advent of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, concern
about  high-level  disinfection  is  justifiable  because  the  degree  of  tissue  damage  and
bacterial  contamination  is  greater  than  with  laparoscopic  procedures  in  gynecology.
Failure to completely dissemble, clean, and high-level disinfect laparoscope parts has
led  to  infections  in  patients.180  Data  from  one  study  suggested  that  disassembly,
cleaning,  and  proper  reassembly  of  laparoscopic  equipment  used  in  gynecologic
procedures  before  steam  sterilization  presents  no  risk  for  infection.181  As  with
laparoscopes  and  other  equipment  that  enter  sterile  body  sites,  arthroscopes  ideally
should  be  sterilized  before  used.  Older  studies  demonstrated  that  these  instruments
were commonly (57%) only high-level disinfected in the United States. 28, 86 A later
survey (with a response rate of only 5%) reported that high-level disinfection was used
by  31%  and  a  sterilization  process  in  the  remainder  of  the  health-care  facilities30
High-level disinfection rather than sterilization presumably has been used because the
incidence of infection is low and the few infections identified probably are unrelated to
the  use  of  high-level  disinfection  rather  than  sterilization.  A  retrospective  study  of
12,505 arthroscopic procedures found an infection rate of 0.04% (five infections) when
arthroscopes  were  soaked  in  2%  glutaraldehyde  for  15–20  minutes.  Four  infections
were  caused  by  S.  aureus;  the  fifth  was  an  anaerobic  streptococcal  infection.  88
Because these organisms are very susceptible to high-level disinfectants, such as 2%
glutaraldehyde, the infections most likely originated from the patient's skin. Two cases
of  Clostridium  perfringens  arthritis  have  been  reported  when  the  arthroscope  was
disinfected  with  glutaraldehyde  for  an  exposure  time  that  is  not  effective  against
spores.  182,  183  Although  only  limited  data  are  available,  the  evidence  does  not

demonstrate  that  high-level  disinfection  of  arthroscopes  and  laparoscopes  poses  an
infection  risk  to  the  patient.  For  example,  a  prospective  study  that  compared  the
reprocessing  of  arthroscopes  and  laparoscopes  (per  1,000  procedures)  with  EtO
sterilization  to  high-level  disinfection  with  glutaraldehyde  found  no  statistically
significant  difference  in  infection  risk  between  the  two  methods  (i.e.,  EtO,  7.5/1,000
procedures;  glutaraldehyde,  2.5/1,000  procedures).89  Although  the  debate  for
high-level  disinfection  versus  sterilization  of  laparoscopes  and  arthroscopes  will  go
unsettled  until  well-designed,  randomized  clinical  trials  are  published,  this  guideline
should  be  followed.  1,  17  That  is,  laparoscopes,  arthroscopes,  and  other  scopes  that
enter normally sterile tissue should be sterilized before each use; if this is not feasible,
they should receive at least high-level disinfection. Disinfection strategies vary widely
for  other  semicritical  items  (e.g.,  applanation  tonometers,  rectal/vaginal  probes,
cryosurgical  instruments,  and  diaphragm  fitting  rings).  FDA  requests  that  device
manufacturers  include  at  least  one  validated  cleaning  and  disinfection/sterilization
protocol  in  the  labeling  for  their  devices.  As  with  all  medications  and  devices,  users
should  be  familiar  with  the  label  instructions.  One  study  revealed  that  no  uniform
technique  was  in  use  for  disinfection  of  applanation  tonometers,  with  disinfectant
contact  times  varying  from  <15  sec  to  20  minutes.  28  In  view  of  the  potential  for
transmission of viruses (e.g., herpes simplex virus [HSV], adenovirus 8, or HIV) 184 by
tonometer  tips,  CDC  recommended  that  the  tonometer  tips  be  wiped  clean  and
disinfected  for  5-10  minutes  with  either  3%  hydrogen  peroxide,  5000  ppm  chlorine,
70%  ethyl  alcohol,  or  70%  isopropyl  alcohol.  95  However,  more  recent  data  suggest
that  3%  hydrogen  peroxide  and  70%  isopropyl  alcohol  are  not  effective  against
adenovirus  capable  of  causing  epidemic  keratoconjunctivitis  and  similar  viruses  and
should  not  be  used  for  disinfecting  applanation  tonometers.  49,  185,  186  Structural
damage  to  Schiotz  tonometers  has  been  observed  with  a  1:10  sodium  hypochlorite
(5,000 ppm chlorine) and 3% hydrogen peroxide.187 After disinfection, the tonometer

should  be  thoroughly  rinsed  in  tapwater  and  air  dried  before  use.  Although  these
disinfectants  and  exposure  times  should  kill  pathogens  that  can  infect  the  eyes,  no
studies  directly  support  this.  188,  189  The  guidelines  of  the  American  Academy  of
Ophthalmology for preventing infections in ophthalmology focus on only one potential
pathogen: HIV. 190 Because a short and simple decontamination procedure is desirable
in  the  clinical  setting,  swabbing  the  tonometer  tip  with  a  70%  isopropyl  alcohol  wipe
sometimes is practiced. 189 Preliminary reports suggest that wiping the tonometer tip
with an alcohol swab and then allowing the alcohol to evaporate might be effective in
eliminating  HSV,  HIV,  and  adenovirus.189,  191,  192  However,  because  these  studies
involved  only  a  few  replicates  and  were  conducted  in  a  controlled  laboratory  setting,
further studies are needed before this technique can be recommended. In addition, two
reports have found that disinfection of pneumotonometer tips between uses with a 70%
isopropyl alcohol wipe contributed to outbreaks of epidemic keratoconjunctivitis caused
by adenovirus type 8.193, 194 Limited studies have evaluated disinfection techniques
for  other  items  that  contact  mucous  membranes,  such  as  diaphragm  fitting  rings,
cryosurgical
 probes,
 transesophageal
 echocardiography
 probes
 195,
 flexible
cystoscopes 196 or vaginal/rectal probes used in sonographic scanning. Lettau, Bond,
and  McDougal  of  CDC  supported  the  recommendation  of  a  diaphragm  fitting  ring
manufacturer  that  involved  using  a  soap-and-water  wash  followed  by  a  15-minute
immersion in 70% alcohol.96 This disinfection method should be adequate to inactivate
HIV, HBV, and HSV even though alcohols are not classified as high-level disinfectants
because  their  activity  against  picornaviruses  is  somewhat  limited.72  No  data  are
available  regarding  inactivation  of  human  papillomavirus  (HPV)  by  alcohol  or  other
disinfectants  because  in  vitro  replication  of  complete  virions  has  not  been  achieved.
Thus,  even  though  alcohol  for  15  minutes  should  kill  pathogens  of  relevance  in
gynecology, no clinical studies directly support this practice. Vaginal probes are used in
sonographic  scanning.  A  vaginal  probe  and  all  endocavitary  probes  without  a  probe

cover  are  semicritical  devices  because  they  have  direct  contact  with  mucous
membranes  (e.g.,  vagina,  rectum,  pharynx).  While  use  of  the  probe  cover  could  be
considered  as  changing  the  category,  this  guideline  proposes  use  of  a  new
condom/probe cover for the probe for each patient, and because condoms/probe covers
can fail 195, 197-199, the probe also should be high-level disinfected. The relevance of
this recommendation is reinforced with the findings that sterile transvaginal ultrasound
probe covers have a very high rate of perforations even before use (0%, 25%, and 65%
perforations from three suppliers). 199 One study found, after oocyte retrieval use, a
very  high  rate  of  perforations  in  used  endovaginal  probe  covers  from  two  suppliers
(75% and 81%),199 other studies demonstrated a lower rate of perforations after use of
condoms  (2.0%  and  0.9%).  197,  200  Condoms  have  been  found  superior  to
commercially  available  probe  covers  for  covering  the  ultrasound  probe  (1.7%  for
condoms versus 8.3% leakage for probe covers).201 These studies underscore the need
for  routine  probe  disinfection  between  examinations.  Although  most  ultrasound
manufacturers  recommend  use  of  2%  glutaraldehyde  for  high-level  disinfection  of
contaminated  transvaginal  transducers,  the  this  agent  has  been  questioned  202
because it might shorten the life of the transducer and might have toxic effects on the
gametes  and  embryos.  203  An  alternative  procedure  for  disinfecting  the  vaginal
transducer  involves  the  mechanical  removal  of  the  gel  from  the  transducer,  cleaning
the transducer in soap and water, wiping the transducer with 70% alcohol or soaking it
for 2 minutes in 500 ppm chlorine, and rinsing with tap water and air drying.204 The
effectiveness of this and other methods 200 has not been validated in either rigorous
laboratory  experiments  or  in  clinical  use.  High-level  disinfection  with  a  product  (e.g.,
hydrogen peroxide) that is not toxic to staff, patients, probes, and retrieved cells should
be  used  until  the  effectiveness  of  alternative  procedures  against  microbes  of
importance  at  the  cavitary  site  is  demonstrated  by  well-designed  experimental
scientific  studies.  Other  probes  such  as  rectal,  cryosurgical,  and  transesophageal

probes  or  devices  also  should  be  high-level  disinfected  between  patients.  Ultrasound
probes  used  during  surgical  procedures  also  can  contact  sterile  body  sites.  These
probes can be covered with a sterile sheath to reduce the level of contamination on the
probe  and  reduce  the  risk  for  infection.  However,  because  the  sheath  does  not
completely protect the probe, the probes should be sterilized between each patient use
as with other critical items. If this is not possible, at a minimum the probe should be
high-level disinfected and covered with a sterile probe cover. Some cryosurgical probes
are not fully immersible. During reprocessing, the tip of the probe should be immersed
in a high-level disinfectant for the appropriate time; any other portion of the probe that
could have mucous membrane contact can be disinfected by immersion or by wrapping
with a cloth soaked in a high-level disinfectant to allow the recommended contact time.
After  disinfection,  the  probe  should  be  rinsed  with  tap  water  and  dried  before  use.
Health-care  facilities  that  use  nonimmersible  probes  should  replace  them  as  soon  as
possible with fully immersible probes. As with other high-level disinfection procedures,
proper  cleaning  of  probes  is  necessary  to  ensure  the  success  of  the  subsequent
disinfection.  205  One  study  demonstrated  that  vegetative  bacteria  inoculated  on
vaginal ultrasound probes decreased when the probes were cleaned with a towel. 206
No information is available about either the level of contamination of such probes by
potential viral pathogens such as HBV and HPV or their removal by cleaning (such as
with  a  towel).  Because  these  pathogens  might  be  present  in  vaginal  and  rectal
secretions  and  contaminate  probes  during  use,  high-level  disinfection  of  the  probes
after  such  use  is  recommended.  Scientific  articles  and  increased  publicity  about  the
potential  for  transmitting  infectious  agents  in  dentistry  have  focused  attention  on
dental  instruments  as  possible  agents  for  pathogen  transmission.207,  208  The
American  Dental  Association  recommends  that  surgical  and  other  instruments  that
normally  penetrate  soft  tissue  or  bone  (e.g.,  extraction  forceps,  scalpel  blades,  bone
chisels,  periodontal  scalers,  and  surgical  burs)  be  classified  as  critical  devices  that

should be sterilized after each use or discarded. Instruments not intended to penetrate
oral soft tissues or bone (e.g., amalgam condensers, and air/water syringes) but that
could contact oral tissues are classified as semicritical, but sterilization after each use is
recommended  if  the  instruments  are  heat-tolerant.  43,  209  If  a  semicritical  item  is
heat–sensitive, it should, at a minimum, be processed with high-level disinfection. 43,
210  Handpieces  can  be  contaminated  internally  with  patient  material  and  should  be
heat sterilized after each patient. Handpieces that cannot be heat sterilized should not
be used. 211 Methods of sterilization that can be used for critical or semicritical dental
instruments  and  materials  that  are  heat-stable  include  steam  under  pressure
(autoclave),  chemical  (formaldehyde)  vapor,  and  dry  heat  (e.g.,  320ºF  for  2  hours).
Dental professionals most commonly use the steam sterilizer. 212 All three sterilization
procedures  can  damage  some  dental  instruments,  including  steam-sterilized  hand
pieces. 213 Heat-tolerant alternatives are available for most clinical dental applications
and are preferred.43 CDC has divided noncritical surfaces in dental offices into clinical
contact and housekeeping surfaces.43 Clinical contact surfaces are surfaces that might
be  touched  frequently  with  gloved  hands  during  patient  care  or  that  might  become
contaminated  with  blood  or  other  potentially  infectious  material  and  subsequently
contact  instruments,  hands,  gloves,  or  devices  (e.g.,  light  handles,  switches,  dental
X-ray equipment, chair-side computers). Barrier protective coverings (e.g., clear plastic
wraps) can be used for these surfaces, particularly those that are difficult to clean (e.g.,
light handles, chair switches). The coverings should be changed when visibly soiled or
damaged  and  routinely  (e.g.,  between  patients).  Protected  surfaces  should  be
disinfected  at  the  end  of  each  day  or  if  contamination  is  evident.  If  not
barrier-protected,  these  surfaces  should  be  disinfected  between  patients  with  an
intermediate-disinfectant  (i.e.,  EPA-registered  hospital  disinfectant  with  tuberculocidal
claim)  or  low-level  disinfectant  (i.e.,  EPA-registered  hospital  disinfectant  with  an  HBV
and HIV label claim). 43, 214, 215 Most housekeeping surfaces need to be cleaned only

with a detergent and water or an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant, depending of the
nature of the surface and the type and degree of contamination. When housekeeping
surfaces  are  visibly  contaminated  by  blood  or  body  substances,  however,  prompt
removal and surface disinfection is a sound infection control practice and required by
the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA).  43,  214  Several  studies
have  demonstrated  variability  among  dental  practices  while  trying  to  meet  these
recommendations.216,  217  For  example,  68%  of  respondents  believed  they  were
sterilizing their instruments but did not use appropriate chemical sterilants or exposure
times  and  49%  of  respondents  did  not  challenge  autoclaves  with  biological
indicators.216  Other  investigators  using  biologic  indicators  have  found  a  high
proportion (15%–65%) of positive spore tests after assessing the efficacy of sterilizers
used in dental offices. In one study of Minnesota dental offices, operator error, rather
than mechanical malfunction218, caused 87% of sterilization failures. Common factors
in  the  improper  use  of  sterilizers  include  chamber  overload,  low  temperature  setting,
inadequate exposure time, failure to preheat the sterilizer, and interruption of the cycle.
Mail-return sterilization monitoring services use spore strips to test sterilizers in dental
clinics,  but  delay  caused  by  mailing  to  the  test  laboratory  could  potentially  cause
false-negatives results. Studies revealed, however, that the post-sterilization time and
temperature after a 7-day delay had no influence on the test results.219 Delays (7 days
at 27ºC and 37ºC, 3-day mail delay) did not cause any predictable pattern of inaccurate
spore  tests.  220  The  CDC  recommendation  for  high-level  disinfection  of  HBV-,  HCV-,
HIV-
 or
 TB-contaminated
 devices
 is
 appropriate
 because
 experiments
 have
demonstrated the effectiveness of high-level disinfectants to inactivate these and other
pathogens that might contaminate semicritical devices. 61, 62, 73, 81, 105, 121, 125,
221-238  Nonetheless,  some  healthcare  facilities  have  modified  their  disinfection
procedures  when  endoscopes  are  used  with  a  patient  known  or  suspected  to  be
infected with HBV, HIV, or M. tuberculosis. 28, 239 This is inconsistent with the concept

of  Standard  Precautions  that  presumes  all  patients  are  potentially  infected  with
bloodborne pathogens.228 Several studies have highlighted the inability to distinguish
HBV- or HIV-infected patients from noninfected patients on clinical grounds.240-242 In
addition, mycobacterial infection is unlikely to be clinically apparent in many patients.
In  most  instances,  hospitals  that  altered  their  disinfection  procedure  used  EtO
sterilization on the endoscopic instruments because they believed this practice reduced
the  risk  for  infection.  28,  239  EtO  is  not  routinely  used  for  endoscope  sterilization
because  of  the  lengthy  processing  time.  Endoscopes  and  other  semicritical  devices
should  be  managed  the  same  way  regardless  of  whether  the  patient  is  known  to  be
infected with HBV, HCV, HIV or M. tuberculosis. An evaluation of a manual disinfection
procedure  to  eliminate  HCV  from  experimentally  contaminated  endoscopes  provided
some  evidence  that  cleaning  and  2%  glutaraldehyde  for  20  minutes  should  prevent
transmission.  236  A  study  that  used  experimentally  contaminated  hysteroscopes
detected  HCV  by  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  in  one  (3%)  of  34  samples  after
cleaning  with  a  detergent,  but  no  samples  were  positive  after  treatment  with  a  2%
glutaraldehyde  solution  for  20  minutes.  120  Another  study  demonstrated  complete
elimination of HCV (as detected by PCR) from endoscopes used on chronically infected
patients  after  cleaning  and  disinfection  for  3–5  minutes  in  glutaraldehyde.  118
Similarly,  PCR  was  used  to  demonstrate  complete  elimination  of  HCV  after  standard
disinfection of experimentally contaminated endoscopes 236 and endoscopes used on
HCV-antibody–positive patients had no detectable HCV RNA after high-level disinfection.
243 The inhibitory activity of a phenolic and a chlorine compound on HCV showed that
the  phenolic  inhibited  the  binding  and  replication  of  HCV,  but  the  chlorine  was
ineffective,  probably  because  of  its  low  concentration  and  its  neutralization  in  the
presence of organic matter. 244 Hemodialysis systems include hemodialysis machines,
water supply, water-treatment systems, and distribution systems. During hemodialysis,
patients have acquired bloodborne viruses and pathogenic bacteria. 245-247 Cleaning

and disinfection are important components of infection control in a hemodialysis center.
EPA  and  FDA  regulate  disinfectants  used  to  reprocess  hemodialyzers,  hemodialysis
machines,  and  water-treatment  systems.  Noncritical  surfaces  (e.g.,  dialysis  bed  or
chair,  countertops,  external  surfaces  of  dialysis  machines,  and  equipment  [scissors,
hemostats, clamps, blood pressure cuffs, stethoscopes]) should be disinfected with an
EPA-registered disinfectant unless the item is visibly contaminated with blood; in that
case a tuberculocidal agent (or a disinfectant with specific label claims for HBV and HIV)
or  a  1:100  dilution  of  a  hypochlorite  solution  (500–600  ppm  free  chlorine)  should  be
used.  246,  248  This  procedure  accomplishes  two  goals:  it  removes  soil  on  a  regular
basis  and  maintains  an  environment  that  is  consistent  with  good  patient  care.
Hemodialyzers are disinfected with peracetic acid, formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, heat
pasteurization  with  citric  acid,  and  chlorine-containing  compounds.  249  Hemodialysis
systems  usually  are  disinfected  by  chlorine-based  disinfectants  (e.g.,  sodium
hypochlorite),  aqueous  formaldehyde,  heat  pasteurization,  ozone,  or  peracetic  acid.
250, 251 All products must be used according to the manufacturers' recommendations.
Some dialysis systems use hot-water disinfection to control microbial contamination. At
its  high  point,  82%  of  U.S.  chronic  hemodialysis  centers  were  reprocessing  (i.e.,
reusing) dialyzers for the same patient using high-level disinfection. 249 However, one
of  the  large  dialysis  organizations  has  decided  to  phase  out  reuse  and,  by  2002  the
percentage of dialysis facilities reprocessing hemodialyzers had decreased to 63%. 252
The  two  commonly  used  disinfectants  to  reprocess  dialyzers  were  peracetic  acid  and
formaldehyde;  72%  used  peracetic  acid  and  20%  used  formaldehyde  to  disinfect
hemodialyzers.  Another  4%  of  the  facilities  used  either  glutaraldehyde  or  heat
pasteurization in combination with citric acid. 252 Infection-control recommendations,
including disinfection and sterilization and the use of dedicated machines for hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive patients, in the hemodialysis setting were detailed in
two
 reviews.
 245,
 246
 The
 Association
 for
 the
 Advancement
 of
 Medical

Instrumentation(AAMI)
 has
 published
 recommendations
 for
 the
 reuse
 of
hemodialyzers.253  The  source  of  health-care–associated  acquisition  of  Clostridium
difficile  in  nonepidemic  settings  has  not  been  determined.  The  environment  and
carriage on the hands of health-care personnel have been considered possible sources
of infection. 66, 254 Carpeted rooms occupied by a patient with C. difficile were more
heavily  contaminated  with  C.  difficile  than  were  noncarpeted  rooms  255.  Because  C.
difficile  spore-production  can  increase  when  exposed  to  nonchlorine-based  cleaning
agents  and  the  spores  are  more  resistant  than  vegetative  cells  to  commonly  used
surface disinfectants256, some investigators have recommended use of dilute solutions
of hypochlorite (1,600 ppm available chlorine) for routine environmental disinfection of
rooms  of  patients  with  C.  difficile-associated  diarrhea  or  colitis  257,  to  reduce  the
incidence of C. difficile diarrhea 258, or in units with high C. difficile rates. 259 Stool
samples of patients with symptomatic C. difficile colitis contain spores of the organism,
as demonstrated by ethanol treatment of the stool to reduce the overgrowth of fecal
flora when isolating C. difficile in the laboratory260, 261. C. difficile-associated diarrhea
rates were shown to have decreased markedly in a bone-marrow transplant unit (from
8.6  to  3.3  cases  per  1,000  patient-days)  during  a  period  of  bleach  disinfection  (1:10
dilution)  of  environmental  surfaces  compared  with  cleaning  with  a  quaternary
ammonium  compound.  Acidified  bleach  and  regular  bleach  (5000  ppm  chlorine)  can
inactivate 106 C. difficile spores in ≤10 minutes 262. However, studies have shown that
asymptomatic patients constitute an important reservoir within the health-care facility
and that person-to-person transmission is the principal means of transmission between
patients.  Thus,  combined  use  of  hand  washing,  barrier  precautions,  and  meticulous
environmental cleaning with an EPA-registered disinfectant (e.g., germicidal detergent)
should effectively prevent spread of the organism 263. Contaminated medical devices,
such as colonoscopes and thermometers,can be vehicles for transmission of C. difficile
spores  264.  For  this  reason,  investigators  have  studied  commonly  used  disinfectants

and exposure times to assess whether current practices can place patients at risk. Data
demonstrate that 2% glutaraldehyde 79, 265-267 and peracetic acid 267, 268 reliably
kill C. difficile spores using exposure times of 5–20 minutes. ortho-Phthalaldehyde and
≥0.2%  peracetic  acid  (WA  Rutala,  personal  communication,  April  2006)  also  can
inactivate  ≥104  C.  difficile  spores  in  10–12  minutes  at  20ºC  268.  Sodium
dichloroisocyanurate at a concentration of 1000 ppm available chlorine achieved lower
log10  reduction  factors  against  C.  difficile  spores  at  10  min,  ranging  from  0.7  to  1.5,
than 0.26% peracetic acid with log10 reduction factors ranging from 2.7 to 6.0268. In
December  1991,  OSHA  promulgated  a  standard  entitled  "Occupational  Exposure  to
Bloodborne Pathogens" to eliminate or minimize occupational exposure to bloodborne
pathogens  214.  One  component  of  this  requirement  is  that  all  equipment  and
environmental  and  working  surfaces  be  cleaned  and  decontaminated  with  an
appropriate  disinfectant  after  contact  with  blood  or  other  potentially  infectious
materials. Even though the OSHA standard does not specify the type of disinfectant or
procedure,  the  OSHA  original  compliance  document  269  suggested  that  a  germicide
must  be  tuberculocidal  to  kill  the  HBV.  To  follow  the  OSHA  compliance  document  a
tuberculocidal  disinfectant  (e.g.,  phenolic,  and  chlorine)  would  be  needed  to  clean  a
blood  spill.  However,  in  February  1997,  OSHA  amended  its  policy  and  stated  that
EPA-registered  disinfectants  labeled  as  effective  against  HIV  and  HBV  would  be
considered as appropriate disinfectants ". . . provided such surfaces have not become
contaminated with agent(s) or volumes of or concentrations of agent(s) for which higher
level disinfection is recommended." When bloodborne pathogens other than HBV or HIV
are  of  concern,  OSHA  continues  to  require  use  of  EPA-registered  tuberculocidal
disinfectants  or  hypochlorite  solution  (diluted  1:10  or  1:100  with  water)  215,  228.
Studies demonstrate that, in the presence of large blood spills, a 1:10 final dilution of
EPA-registered  hypochlorite  solution  initially  should  be  used  to  inactivate  bloodborne
viruses  63,  235  to  minimize  risk  for  infection  to  health-care  personnel  from

percutaneous injury during cleanup. Emerging pathogens are of growing concern to the
general  public  and  infection-control  professionals.  Relevant  pathogens  include
Cryptosporidium  parvum,  Helicobacter  pylori,  E.  coli  O157:H7,  HIV,  HCV,  rotavirus,
norovirus,  severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  (SARS)  coronavirus,  multidrug-resistant
M.
 tuberculosis,
 and
 nontuberculous
 mycobacteria
 (e.g.,
 M.
 chelonae).
 The
susceptibility  of  each  of  these  pathogens  to  chemical  disinfectants  and  sterilants  has
been  studied.  With  the  exceptions  discussed  below,  all  of  these  emerging  pathogens
are  susceptible  to  currently  available  chemical  disinfectants  and  sterilants  270.
Cryptosporidium  is  resistant  to  chlorine  at  concentrations  used  in  potable  water.  C.
parvum is not completely inactivated by most disinfectants used in healthcare including
ethyl  alcohol  271,  glutaraldehyde  271,  272,  5.25%  hypochlorite  271,  peracetic  acid
271,  ortho-phthalaldehyde  271,  phenol  271,  272,  povidone-iodine  271,  272,  and
quaternary ammonium compounds271. The only chemical disinfectants and sterilants
able  to  inactivate  greater  than  3  log10  of  C.  parvum  were  6%  and  7.5%  hydrogen
peroxide 271. Sterilization methods will fully inactivate C. parvum, including steam 271,
EtO 271, 273, and hydrogen peroxide gas plasma271. Although most disinfectants are
ineffective  against  C.  parvum,  current  cleaning  and  disinfection  practices  appear
satisfactory  to  prevent  healthcare-associated  transmission.  For  example,  endoscopes
are unlikely to be an important vehicle for transmitting C. parvum because the results
of  bacterial  studies  indicate  mechanical  cleaning  will  remove  approximately  104
organisms, and drying results in rapid loss of C. parvum viability (e.g., 30 minutes, 2.9
log10 decrease; and 60 minutes, 3.8 log10 decrease) 271. Chlorine at ~1 ppm has been
found capable of eliminating approximately 4 log10 of E. coli O157:H7 within 1 minute
in a suspension test64. Electrolyzed oxidizing water at 23°C was effective in 10 minutes
in  producing  a  5-log10  decrease  in  E.  coli  O157:H7  inoculated  onto  kitchen  cutting
boards274. The following disinfectants eliminated >5 log10 of E. coli O157:H7 within 30
seconds: a quaternary ammonium compound, a phenolic, a hypochlorite (1:10 dilution

of  5.25%  bleach),  and  ethanol53.  Disinfectants  including  chlorine  compounds  can
reduce E. coli O157:H7 experimentally inoculated onto alfalfa seeds or sprouts 275, 276
or  beef  carcass  surfaces277.  Data  are  limited  on  the  susceptibility  of  H.  pylori  to
disinfectants. Using a suspension test, one study assessed the effectiveness of a variety
of disinfectants against nine strains of H. pylori 60. Ethanol (80%) and glutaraldehyde
(0.5%)  killed  all  strains  within  15  seconds;  chlorhexidine  gluconate  (0.05%,  1.0%),
benzalkonium chloride (0.025%, 0.1%), alkyldiaminoethylglycine hydrochloride (0.1%),
povidone-iodine (0.1%), and sodium hypochlorite (150 ppm) killed all strains within 30
seconds.  Both  ethanol  (80%)  and  glutaraldehyde  (0.5%)  retained  similar  bactericidal
activity  in  the  presence  of  organic  matter;  the  other  disinfectants  showed  reduced
bactericidal  activity.  In  particular,  the  bactericidal  activity  of  povidone-iodine  (0.1%)
and sodium hypochlorite (150 ppm) markedly decreased in the presence of dried yeast
solution with killing times increased to 5 – 10 minutes and 5 – 30 minutes, respectively.
Immersing biopsy forceps in formalin before obtaining a specimen does not affect the
ability  to  culture  H.  pylori  from  the  biopsy  specimen  278.  The  following  methods  are
ineffective for eliminating H. pylori from endoscopes: cleaning with soap and water 119,
279,  immersion  in  70%  ethanol  for  3  minutes280,  instillation  of  70%  ethanol126,
instillation of 30 ml of 83% methanol279, and instillation of 0.2% Hyamine solution281.
The differing results with regard to the efficacy of ethyl alcohol against Helicobacter are
unexplained.  Cleaning  followed  by  use  of  2%  alkaline  glutaraldehyde  (or  automated
peracetic acid) has been demonstrated by culture to be effective in eliminating H. pylori
119, 279, 282. Epidemiologic investigations of patients who had undergone endoscopy
with endoscopes mechanically washed and disinfected with 2.0%–2.3% glutaraldehyde
have  revealed  no  evidence  of  person-to-person  transmission  of  H.  pylori  126,  283.
Disinfection  of  experimentally  contaminated  endoscopes  using  2%  glutaraldehyde
(10-minute, 20-minute, 45-minute exposure times) or the peracetic acid system (with
and without active peracetic acid) has been demonstrated to be effective in eliminating

H. pylori 119. H. pylori DNA has been detected by PCR in fluid flushed from endoscope
channels  after  cleaning  and  disinfection  with  2%  glutaraldehyde  284.  The  clinical
significance  of  this  finding  is  unclear.  In  vitro  experiments  have  demonstrated  a
>3.5-log10  reduction  in  H.  pylori  after  exposure  to  0.5  mg/L  of  free  chlorine  for  80
seconds285.  An  outbreak  of  healthcare-associated  rotavirus  gastroenteritis  on  a
pediatric  unit  has  been  reported  286.  Person  to  person  through  the  hands  of
health-care  workers  was  proposed  as  the  mechanism  of  transmission.  Prolonged
survival  of  rotavirus  on  environmental  surfaces  (90  minutes  to  >10  days  at  room
temperature)  and  hands  (>4  hours)  has  been  demonstrated.  Rotavirus  suspended  in
feces  can  survive  longer  287,  288.  Vectors  have  included  hands,  fomites,  air,  water,
and food 288, 289. Products with demonstrated efficacy (>3 log10 reduction in virus)
against  rotavirus  within  1  minute  include:  95%  ethanol,  70%  isopropanol,  some
phenolics, 2% glutaraldehyde, 0.35% peracetic acid, and some quaternary ammonium
compounds  59,  290-293.  In  a  human  challenge  study,  a  disinfectant  spray  (0.1%
ortho-phenylphenol  and  79%  ethanol),  sodium  hypochlorite  (800  ppm  free  chlorine),
and  a  phenol-based  product  (14.7%  phenol  diluted  1:256  in  tapwater)  when  sprayed
onto  contaminated  stainless  steel  disks,  were  effective  in  interrupting  transfer  of  a
human rotavirus from stainless steel disk to fingerpads of volunteers after an exposure
time of 3- 10 minutes. A quaternary ammonium product (7.05% quaternary ammonium
compound diluted 1:128 in tapwater) and tapwater allowed transfer of virus 52. No data
exist  on  the  inactivation  of  HPV  by  alcohol  or  other  disinfectants  because  in  vitro
replication of complete virions has not been achieved. Similarly, little is known about
inactivation of noroviruses (members of the family Caliciviridae and important causes of
gastroenteritis  in  humans)  because  they  cannot  be  grown  in  tissue  culture.  Improper
disinfection  of  environmental  surfaces  contaminated  by  feces  or  vomitus  of  infected
patients  is  believed  to  play  a  role  in  the  spread  of  noroviruses  in  some  settings
294-296. Prolonged survival of a norovirus surrogate (i.e., feline calicivirus virus [FCV],

a closely related cultivable virus) has been demonstrated (e.g., at room temperature,
FCV in a dried state survived for 21–18 days) 297. Inactivation studies with FCV have
shown  the  effectiveness  of  chlorine,  glutaraldehyde,  and  iodine-based  products
whereas  the  quaternary  ammonium  compound,  detergent,  and  ethanol  failed  to
inactivate  the  virus  completely.  297  An  evaluation  of  the  effectiveness  of  several
disinfectants  against  the  feline  calicivirus  found  that  bleach  diluted  to  1000  ppm  of
available  chlorine  reduced  infectivity  of  FCV  by  4.5  logs  in  1  minute.  Other  effective
(log10  reduction  factor  of  >4  in  virus)  disinfectants  included  accelerated  hydrogen
peroxide, 5,000 ppm (3 min); chlorine dioxide, 1,000 ppm chlorine (1 min); a mixture of
four quaternary ammonium compounds, 2,470 ppm (10 min); 79% ethanol with 0.1%
quaternary ammonium compound (3 min); and 75% ethanol (10 min) 298. A quaternary
ammonium compound exhibited activity against feline calicivirus supensions dried on
hard surface carriers in 10 minutes 299. Seventy percent ethanol and 70% 1-propanol
reduced  FCV  by  a  3–4-log10  reduction  in  30  seconds  300.  CDC  announced  that  a
previously  unrecognized  human  virus  from  the  coronavirus  family  is  the  leading
hypothesis for the cause of a described syndrome of SARS 301. Two coronaviruses that
are  known  to  infect  humans  cause  one  third  of  common  colds  and  can  cause
gastroenteritis.  The  virucidal  efficacy  of  chemical  germicides  against  coronavirus  has
been investigated. A study of disinfectants against coronavirus 229E found several that
were effective after a 1-minute contact time; these included sodium hypochlorite (at a
free  chlorine  concentration  of  1,000  ppm  and  5,000  ppm),  70%  ethyl  alcohol,  and
povidone-iodine  (1%  iodine)  186.  In  another  study,  70%  ethanol,  50%  isopropanol,
0.05%  benzalkonium  chloride,  50  ppm  iodine  in  iodophor,  0.23%  sodium  chlorite,  1%
cresol  soap  and  0.7%  formaldehyde  inactivated  >3  logs  of  two  animal  coronaviruses
(mouse hepatitis virus, canine coronavirus) after a 10-minute exposure time 302. The
activity of povidone-iodine has been demonstrated against human coronaviruses 229E
and OC43 303. A study also showed complete inactivation of the SARS coronavirus by

70%  ethanol  and  povidone-iodine  with  an  exposure  times  of  1  minute  and  2.5%
glutaraldehyde with an exposure time of 5 minute 304. Because the SARS coronavirus
is  stable  in  feces  and  urine  at  room  temperature  for  at  least  1–2  days  [The  current
version of this document may differ from original: First data on stability and resistance
of  SARS  coronavirus  compiled  by  members  of  WHO  laboratory  networkexternal  icon],
surfaces  might  be  a  possible  source  of  contamination  and  lead  to  infection  with  the
SARS coronavirus and should be disinfected. Until more precise information is available,
environments  in  which  SARS  patients  are  housed  should  be  considered  heavily
contaminated,  and  rooms  and  equipment  should  be  thoroughly  disinfected  daily  and
after  the  patient  is  discharged.  EPA-registered  disinfectants  or  1:100  dilution  of
household bleach and water should be used for surface disinfection and disinfection on
noncritical
 patient-care
 equipment.
 High-level
 disinfection
 and
 sterilization
 of
semicritical and critical medical devices, respectively, does not need to be altered for
patients with known or suspected SARS. Free-living amoeba can be pathogenic and can
harbor  agents  of  pneumonia  such  as  Legionella  pneumophila.  Limited  studies  have
shown  that  2%  glutaraldehyde  and  peracetic  acid  do  not  completely  inactivate
Acanthamoeba  polyphaga  in  a  20-minute  exposure  time  for  high-level  disinfection.  If
amoeba  are  found  to  contaminate  instruments  and  facilitate  infection,  longer
immersion  times  or  other  disinfectants  may  need  to  be  considered  305.  Publications
have highlighted concerns about the potential for biological terrorism306, 307. CDC has
categorized several agents as "high priority" because they can be easily disseminated
or  transmitted  from  person  to  person,  cause  high  mortality,  and  are  likely  to  cause
public  panic  and  social  disruption  308.  These  agents  include  Bacillus  anthracis  (the
cause  of  anthrax),  Yersinia  pestis  (plague),  variola  major  (smallpox),  Clostridium
botulinum  toxin  (botulism),  Francisella  tularensis  (tularemia),  filoviruses  (Ebola
hemorrhagic fever, Marburg hemorrhagic fever); and arenaviruses (Lassa [Lassa fever],
Junin [Argentine hemorrhagic fever]), and related viruses308. A few comments can be

made  regarding  the  role  of  sterilization  and  disinfection  of  potential  agents  of
bioterrorism309. First, the susceptibility of these agents to germicides in vitro is similar
to that of other related pathogens. For example, variola is similar to vaccinia 72, 310,
311 and B. anthracis is similar to B. atrophaeus (formerly B. subtilis)312, 313. B. subtilis
spores,  for  instance,  proved  as  resistant  as,  if  not  more  resistant  than,  B.  anthracis
spores  (>6  log10  reduction  of  B.  anthracis  spores  in  5  minutes  with  acidified  bleach
[5,250 ppm chlorine])313. Thus, one can extrapolate from the larger database available
on the susceptibility of genetically similar organisms314. Second, many of the potential
bioterrorist  agents  are  stable  enough  in  the  environment  that  contaminated
environmental  surfaces  or  fomites  could  lead  to  transmission  of  agents  such  as  B.
anthracis,  F.  tularensis,  variola  major,  C.  botulinum  toxin,  and  C.  burnetti  315.  Third,
data  suggest  that  current  disinfection  and  sterilization  practices  are  appropriate  for
managing  patient-care  equipment  and  environmental  surfaces  when  potentially
contaminated  patients  are  evaluated  and/or  admitted  in  a  health-care  facility  after
exposure  to  a  bioterrorist  agent.  For  example,  sodium  hypochlorite  can  be  used  for
surface
 disinfection
 (see
 [This
 link
 is
 no
 longer
 active:
http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/factsheets/chemicals/bleachfactsheet.htm.]).
 In
instances  where  the  health-care  facility  is  the  site  of  a  bioterrorist  attack,
environmental  decontamination  might  require  special  decontamination  procedures
(e.g., chlorine dioxide gas for B. anthracis spores). Because no antimicrobial products
are registered for decontamination of biologic agents after a bioterrorist attack, EPA has
granted  a  crises  exemption  for  each  product  (see  [This  link  is  no  longer  active:
http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/factsheets/chemicals/bleachfactsheet.htm.]).
 Of
 only
theoretical concern is the possibility that a bioterrorist agent could be engineered to be
less  susceptible  to  disinfection  and  sterilization  processes  309.  Health  hazards
associated  with  the  use  of  germicides  in  healthcare  vary  from  mucous  membrane
irritation to death, with the latter involving accidental injection by mentally disturbed

patients316. Although their degrees of toxicity vary 317-320, all disinfectants should be
used  with  the  proper  safety  precautions  321  and  only  for  the  intended  purpose.  Key
factors  associated  with  assessing  the  health  risk  of  a  chemical  exposure  include  the
duration, intensity (i.e., how much chemical is involved), and route (e.g., skin, mucous
membranes,  and  inhalation)  of  exposure.  Toxicity  can  be  acute  or  chronic.  Acute
toxicity  usually  results  from  an  accidental  spill  of  a  chemical  substance.  Exposure  is
sudden  and  often  produces  an  emergency  situation.  Chronic  toxicity  results  from
repeated exposure to low levels of the chemical over a prolonged period. Employers are
responsible  for  informing  workers  about  the  chemical  hazards  in  the  workplace  and
implementing  control  measures.  The  OSHA  Hazard  Communication  Standard  (29  CFR
1910.1200, 1915.99, 1917.28, 1918.90, 1926.59, and 1928.21) requires manufacturers
and importers of hazardous chemicals to develop Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS)
for  each  chemical  or  mixture  of  chemicals.  Employers  must  have  these  data  sheets
readily  available  to  employees  who  work  with  the  products  to  which  they  could  be
exposed. Exposure limits have been published for many chemicals used in health care
to help provide a safe environment and, as relevant, are discussed in each section of
this  guideline.  Only  the  exposure  limits  published  by  OSHA  carry  the  legal  force  of
regulations.  OSHA  publishes  a  limit  as  a  time-weighted  average  (TWA),  that  is,  the
average concentration for a normal 8-hour work day and a 40-hour work week to which
nearly  all  workers  can  be  repeatedly  exposed  to  a  chemical  without  adverse  health
effects.  For  example,  the  permissible  exposure  limit  (PEL)  for  EtO  is  1.0  ppm,  8  hour
TWA. The CDC National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) develops
recommended  exposure  limits  (RELs).  RELs  are  occupational  exposure  limits
recommended by NIOSH as being protective of worker health and safety over a working
lifetime.  This  limit  is  frequently  expressed  as  a  40-hour  TWA  exposure  for  up  to  10
hours  per  day  during  a  40-hour  work  week.  These  exposure  limits  are  designed  for
inhalation exposures. Irritant and allergic effects can occur below the exposure limits,

and skin contact can result in dermal effects or systemic absorption without inhalation.
The American Conference on Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIN) also provides
guidelines on exposure limits 322. Information about workplace exposures and methods
to  reduce  them  (e.g.,  work  practices,  engineering  controls,  PPE)  is  available  on  the
OSHA  and  NIOSH  websites.  Some  states  have  excluded  or  limited  concentrations  of
certain  chemical  germicides  (e.g.,  glutaraldehyde,  formaldehyde,  and  some  phenols)
from  disposal  through  the  sewer  system.  These  rules  are  intended  to  minimize
environmental  harm.  If  health-care  facilities  exceed  the  maximum  allowable
concentration of a chemical (e.g., ≥5.0 mg/L), they have three options. First, they can
switch  to  alternative  products;  for  example,  they  can  change  from  glutaraldehyde  to
another  disinfectant  for  high-level  disinfection  or  from  phenolics  to  quaternary
ammonium  compounds  for  low-level  disinfection.  Second,  the  health-care  facility  can
collect the disinfectant and dispose of it as a hazardous chemical. Third, the facility can
use  a  commercially  available  small-scale  treatment  method  (e.g.,  neutralize
glutaraldehyde  with  glycine).  Safe  disposal  of  regulated  chemicals  is  important
throughout  the  medical  community.  For  disposal  of  large  volumes  of  spent  solutions,
users  might  decide  to  neutralize  the  microbicidal  activity  before  disposal  (e.g.,
glutaraldehyde).  Solutions  can  be  neutralized  by  reaction  with  chemicals  such  as
sodium  bisulfite  323,  324  or  glycine  325.  European  authors  have  suggested  that
instruments  and  ventilation  therapy  equipment  should  be  disinfected  by  heat  rather
than by chemicals. The concerns for chemical disinfection include toxic side effects for
the  patient  caused  by  chemical  residues  on  the  instrument  or  object,  occupational
exposure  to  toxic  chemicals,  and  recontamination  by  rinsing  the  disinfectant  with
microbially  contaminated  tap  water  326.  With  the  advent  of  managed  healthcare,
increasing numbers of patients are now being cared for in ambulatory-care and home
settings.  Many  patients  in  these  settings  might  have  communicable  diseases,
immunocompromising conditions, or invasive devices. Therefore, adequate disinfection

in  these  settings  is  necessary  to  provide  a  safe  patient  environment.  Because  the
ambulatory-care setting (i.e., outpatient facility) provides the same risk for infection as
the hospital, the Spaulding classification scheme described in this guideline should be
followed (Table 1). 17 The home environment should be much safer than hospitals or
ambulatory  care.  Epidemics  should  not  be  a  problem,  and  cross-infection  should  be
rare.  The  healthcare  provider  is  responsible  for  providing  the  responsible  family
member information about infection-control procedures to follow in the home, including
hand  hygiene,  proper  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  equipment,  and  safe  storage  of
cleaned  and  disinfected  devices.  Among  the  products  recommended  for  home
disinfection  of  reusable  objects  are  bleach,  alcohol,  and  hydrogen  peroxide.  APIC
recommends  that  reusable  objects  (e.g.,  tracheostomy  tubes)  that  touch  mucous
membranes be disinfected by immersion in 70% isopropyl alcohol for 5 minutes or in
3%  hydrogen  peroxide  for  30  minutes.  Additionally,  a  1:50  dilution  of  5.25%–6.15%
sodium  hypochlorite  (household  bleach)  for  5  minutes  should  be  effective  327-329.
Noncritical items (e.g., blood pressure cuffs, crutches) can be cleaned with a detergent.
Blood spills should be handled according to OSHA regulations as previously described
(see section on OSHA Bloodborne Pathogen Standard). In general, sterilization of critical
items  is  not  practical  in  homes  but  theoretically  could  be  accomplished  by  chemical
sterilants  or  boiling.  Single-use  disposable  items  can  be  used  or  reusable  items
sterilized
 in
 a
 hospital
 330,
 331.
 Some
 environmental
 groups
 advocate
"environmentally  safe"  products  as  alternatives  to  commercial  germicides  in  the
home-care  setting.  These  alternatives  (e.g.,  ammonia,  baking  soda,  vinegar,  Borax,
liquid  detergent)  are  not  registered  with  EPA  and  should  not  be  used  for  disinfecting
because they are ineffective against S. aureus. Borax, baking soda, and detergents also
are  ineffective  against  Salmonella  Typhi  and  E.coli;  however,  undiluted  vinegar  and
ammonia are effective against S. Typhi and E.coli 53, 332, 333. Common commercial
disinfectants
 designed
 for
 home
 use
 also
 are
 effective
 against
 selected

antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  53.  Public  concerns  have  been  raised  that  the  use  of
antimicrobials  in  the  home  can  promote  development  of  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria
334, 335. This issue is unresolved and needs to be considered further through scientific
and clinical investigations. The public health benefits of using disinfectants in the home
are  unknown.  However,  some  facts  are  known:  many  sites  in  the  home  kitchen  and
bathroom  are  microbially  contaminated  336,  use  of  hypochlorites  markedly  reduces
bacteria  337,  and  good  standards  of  hygiene  (e.g.,  food  hygiene,  hand  hygiene)  can
help  reduce  infections  in  the  home  338,  339.  In  addition,  laboratory  studies  indicate
that  many  commercially  prepared  household  disinfectants  are  effective  against
common pathogens 53 and can interrupt surface-to-human transmission of pathogens
48.  The  "targeted  hygiene  concept"—which  means  identifying  situations  and  areas
(e.g.,  food-preparation  surfaces  and  bathroom)  where  risk  exists  for  transmission  of
pathogens—may  be  a  reasonable  way  to  identify  when  disinfection  might  be
appropriate 340. As with antibiotics, reduced susceptibility (or acquired "resistance") of
bacteria to disinfectants can arise by either chromosomal gene mutation or acquisition
of  genetic  material  in  the  form  of  plasmids  or  transposons  338,  341-343,  344  ,  345,
346.  When  changes  occur  in  bacterial  susceptibility  that  renders  an  antibiotic
ineffective against an infection previously treatable by that antibiotic, the bacteria are
referred to as "resistant." In contrast, reduced susceptibility to disinfectants does not
correlate with failure of the disinfectant because concentrations used in disinfection still
greatly  exceed  the  cidal  level.  Thus,  the  word  "resistance"  when  applied  to  these
changes  is  incorrect,  and  the  preferred  term  is  "reduced  susceptibility"  or  "increased
tolerance"344,  347.  No  data  are  available  that  show  that  antibiotic-resistant  bacteria
are less sensitive to the liquid chemical germicides than antibiotic-sensitive bacteria at
currently
 used
 germicide
 contact
 conditions
 and
 concentrations.
 MRSA
 and
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) are important health-care–associated agents.
Some antiseptics and disinfectants have been known for years to be, because of MICs,

somewhat  less  inhibitory  to  S.  aureus  strains  that  contain  a  plasmid-carrying  gene
encoding  resistance  to  the  antibiotic  gentamicin  344.  For  example,  gentamicin
resistance  has  been  shown  to  also  encode  reduced  susceptibility  to  propamidine,
quaternary ammonium compounds, and ethidium bromide 348, and MRSA strains have
been found to be less susceptible than methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) strains to
chlorhexidine, propamidine, and the quaternary ammonium compound cetrimide 349.
In  other  studies,  MRSA  and  MSSA  strains  have  been  equally  sensitive  to  phenols  and
chlorhexidine, but MRSA strains were slightly more tolerant to quaternary ammonium
compounds  350.  Two  gene  families  (qacCD  [now  referred  to  as  smr]  and  qacAB)  are
involved  in  providing  protection  against  agents  that  are  components  of  disinfectant
formulations  such  as  quaternary  ammonium  compounds.  Staphylococci  have  been
proposed to evade destruction because the protein specified by the qacA determinant
is  a  cytoplasmic-membrane–associated  protein  involved  in  an  efflux  system  that
actively reduces intracellular accumulation of toxicants, such as quaternary ammonium
compounds,
 to
 intracellular
 targets.
 351
 Other
 studies
 demonstrated
 that
plasmid-mediated formaldehyde tolerance is transferable from Serratia marcescens to
E. coli 352 and plasmid-mediated quaternary ammonium tolerance is transferable from
S.  aureus  to  E.  coli.353.  Tolerance  to  mercury  and  silver  also  is  plasmid  borne.  341,
343-346 Because the concentrations of disinfectants used in practice are much higher
than  the  MICs  observed,  even  for  the  more  tolerant  strains,  the  clinical  relevance  of
these  observations  is  questionable.  Several  studies  have  found  antibiotic-resistant
hospital  strains  of  common  healthcare-associated  pathogens  (i.e.,  Enterococcus,  P.
aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, E. coli, S. aureus, and S. epidermidis) to be equally
susceptible
 to
 disinfectants
 as
 antibiotic-sensitive
 strains
 53,
 354-356.
 The
susceptibility
 of
 glycopeptide-intermediate
 S.
 aureus
 was
 similar
 to
vancomycin-susceptible, MRSA 357. On the basis of these data, routine disinfection and
housekeeping  protocols  do  not  need  to  be  altered  because  of  antibiotic  resistance

provided  the  disinfection  method  is  effective  358,  359.  A  study  that  evaluated  the
efficacy of selected cleaning methods (e.g., QUAT-sprayed cloth, and QUAT-immersed
cloth) for eliminating VRE found that currently used disinfection processes most likely
are  highly  effective  in  eliminating  VRE.  However,  surface  disinfection  must  involve
contact  with  all  contaminated  surfaces  358.  A  new  method  using  an  invisible
flurorescent  marker  to  objectively  evaluate  the  thoroughness  of  cleaning  activities  in
patient  rooms  might  lead  to  improvement  in  cleaning  of  all  objects  and  surfaces  but
needs  further  evaluation.  360  Lastly,  does  the  use  of  antiseptics  or  disinfectants
facilitate  the  development  of  disinfectant-tolerant  organisms?  Evidence  and  reviews
indicate  enhanced  tolerance  to  disinfectants  can  be  developed  in  response  to
disinfectant exposure 334, 335, 346, 347, 361. However, the level of tolerance is not
important  in  clinical  terms  because  it  is  low  and  unlikely  to  compromise  the
effectiveness of disinfectants of which much higher concentrations are used 347, 362.
The  issue  of  whether  low-level  tolerance  to  germicides  selects  for  antibiotic-resistant
strains is unsettled but might depend on the mechanism by which tolerance is attained.
For  example,  changes  in  the  permeability  barrier  or  efflux  mechanisms  might  affect
susceptibility to both antibiotics and germicides, but specific changes to a target site
might  not.  Some  researchers  have  suggested  that  use  of  disinfectants  or  antiseptics
(e.g., triclosan) could facilitate development of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms 334,
335,  363.  Although  evidence  in  laboratory  studies  indicates  low-level  resistance  to
triclosan, the concentrations of triclosan in these studies were low (generally <1 μg/mL)
and  dissimilar  from  the  higher  levels  used  in  antimicrobial  products  (2,000–20,000
μg/mL)  364,  365.  Thus,  researchers  can  create  laboratory-derived  mutants  that
demonstrate
 reduced
 susceptibility
 to
 antiseptics
 or
 disinfectants.
 In
 some
experiments,  such  bacteria  have  demonstrated  reduced  susceptibility  to  certain
antibiotics 335. There is no evidence that using antiseptics or disinfectants selects for
antibiotic-resistant organisms in nature or that such mutants survive in nature366. ). In

addition, the action of antibiotics and the action of disinfectants differ fundamentally.
Antibiotics  are  selectively  toxic  and  generally  have  a  single  target  site  in  bacteria,
thereby inhibiting a specific biosynthetic process. Germicides generally are considered
nonspecific antimicrobials because of a multiplicity of toxic-effect mechanisms or target
sites and are broader spectrum in the types of microorganisms against which they are
effective  344,  347.  The  rotational  use  of  disinfectants  in  some  environments  (e.g.,
pharmacy  production  units)  has  been  recommended  and  practiced  in  an  attempt  to
prevent development of resistant microbes 367, 368. There have been only rare case
reports that appropriately used disinfectants have resulted in a clinical problem arising
from the selection or development of nonsusceptible microorganisms 369. The effective
use of disinfectants is part of a multibarrier strategy to prevent health-care–associated
infections. Surfaces are considered noncritical items because they contact intact skin.
Use of noncritical items or contact with noncritical surfaces carries little risk of causing
an  infection  in  patients  or  staff.  Thus,  the  routine  use  of  germicidal  chemicals  to
disinfect  hospital  floors  and  other  noncritical  items  is  controversial  370-375.  A  1991
study  expanded  the  Spaulding  scheme  by  dividing  the  noncritical  environmental
surfaces into housekeeping surfaces and medical equipment surfaces 376. The classes
of disinfectants used on housekeeping and medical equipment surfaces can be similar.
However, the frequency of decontaminating can vary (see Recommendations). Medical
equipment surfaces (e.g., blood pressure cuffs, stethoscopes, hemodialysis machines,
and X-ray machines) can become contaminated with infectious agents and contribute
to the spread of health-care–associated infections 248, 375. For this reason, noncritical
medical  equipment  surfaces  should  be  disinfected  with  an  EPA-registered  low-  or
intermediate-level disinfectant. Use of a disinfectant will provide antimicrobial activity
that  is  likely  to  be  achieved  with  minimal  additional  cost  or  work.  Environmental
surfaces (e.g., bedside table) also could potentially contribute to cross-transmission by
contamination of health-care personnel from hand contact with contaminated surfaces,

medical  equipment,  or  patients  50,  375,  377.  A  paper  reviews  the  epidemiologic  and
microbiologic data (Table 3) regarding the use of disinfectants on noncritical surfaces
378.  Of  the  seven  reasons  to  usie  a  disinfectant  on  noncritical  surfaces,  five  are
particularly  noteworthy  and  support  the  use  of  a  germicidal  detergent.  First,  hospital
floors  become  contaminated  with  microorganisms  from  settling  airborne  bacteria:  by
contact with shoes, wheels, and other objects; and occasionally by spills. The removal
of  microbes  is  a  component  in  controling  health-care–associated  infections.  In  an
investigation  of  the  cleaning  of  hospital  floors,  the  use  of  soap  and  water  (80%
reduction) was less effective in reducing the numbers of bacteria than was a phenolic
disinfectant (94%–99.9% reduction) 379. However, a few hours after floor disinfection,
the  bacterial  count  was  nearly  back  to  the  pretreatment  level.  Second,  detergents
become  contaminated  and  result  in  seeding  the  patient's  environment  with  bacteria.
Investigators  have  shown  that  mop  water  becomes  increasingly  dirty  during  cleaning
and  becomes  contaminated  if  soap  and  water  is  used  rather  than  a  disinfectant.  For
example, in one study, bacterial contamination in soap and water without a disinfectant
increased  from  10  CFU/mL  to  34,000  CFU/mL  after  cleaning  a  ward,  whereas
contamination  in  a  disinfectant  solution  did  not  change  (20  CFU/mL)  380.
Contamination  of  surfaces  close  to  the  patient  that  are  frequently  touched  by  the
patient or staff (e.g., bed rails) could result in patient exposures0 381. In a study, using
of detergents on floors and patient room furniture, increased bacterial contamination of
the  patients'  environmental  surfaces  was  found  after  cleaning  (average  increase  =
103.6  CFU/24cm2)  382.  In  addition,  a  P.  aeruginosa  outbreak  was  reported  in  a
hematology-oncology  unit  associated  with  contamination  of  the  surface  cleaning
equipment when nongermicidal cleaning solutions instead of disinfectants were used to
decontaminate the patients' environment 383 and another study demonstrated the role
of environmental cleaning in controlling an outbreak of Acinetobacter baumannii 384.
Studies  also  have  shown  that,  in  situations  where  the  cleaning  procedure  failed  to

eliminate contamination from the surface and the cloth is used to wipe another surface,
the contamination is transferred to that surface and the hands of the person holding the
cloth381,  385.  Third,  the  CDC  Isolation  Guideline  recommends  that  noncritical
equipment contaminated with blood, body fluids, secretions, or excretions be cleaned
and disinfected after use. The same guideline recommends that, in addition to cleaning,
disinfection  of  the  bedside  equipment  and  environmental  surfaces  (e.g.,  bedrails,
bedside  tables,  carts,  commodes,  door-knobs,  and  faucet  handles)  is  indicated  for
certain pathogens, e.g., enterococci, which can survive in the inanimate environment
for  prolonged  periods  386.  Fourth,  OSHA  requires  that  surfaces  contaminated  with
blood  and  other  potentially  infectious  materials  (e.g.,  amniotic,  pleural  fluid)  be
disinfected.  Fifth,  using  a  single  product  throughout  the  facility  can  simplify  both
training  and  appropriate  practice.  Reasons  also  exist  for  using  a  detergent  alone  on
floors
 because
 noncritical
 surfaces
 contribute
 minimally
 to
 endemic
health-care–associated  infections  387,  and  no  differences  have  been  found  in
healthcare–associated  infections  rates  when  floors  are  cleaned  with  detergent  rather
than disinfectant 382, 388, 389. However, these studies have been small and of short
duration
 and
 suffer
 from
 low
 statistical
 power
 because
 the
outcome—healthcare–associated  infections—is  of  low  frequency.  The  low  rate  of
infections  makes  the  efficacy  of  an  intervention  statistically  difficult  to  demonstrate.
Because  housekeeping  surfaces  are  associated  with  the  lowest  risk  for  disease
transmission,  some  researchers  have  suggested  that  either  detergents  or  a
disinfectant/detergent  could  be  used  376.  No  data  exist  that  show  reduced
healthcare–associated infection rates with use of surface disinfection of floors, but some
data  demonstrate  reduced  microbial  load  associated  with  the  use  of  disinfectants.
Given  this  information;  other  information  showing  that  environmental  surfaces  (e.g.,
bedside  table,  bed  rails)  close  to  the  patient  and  in  outpatient  settings  390  can  be
contaminated  with  epidemiologically  important  microbes  (such  as  VRE  and  MRSA)47,

390-394; and data showing these organisms survive on various hospital surfaces 395,
396; some researchers have suggested that such surfaces should be disinfected on a
regular schedule 378. Spot decontamination on fabrics that remain in hospitals or clinic
rooms while patients move in and out (e.g., privacy curtains) also should be considered.
One  study  demonstrated  the  effectiveness  of  spraying  the  fabric  with  3%  hydrogen
peroxide 397. Future studies should evaluate the level of contamination on noncritical
environmental surfaces as a function of high and low hand contact and whether some
surfaces  (e.g.,  bed  rails)  near  the  patient  with  high  contact  frequencies  require  more
frequent  disinfection.  Regardless  of  whether  a  detergent  or  disinfectant  is  used  on
surfaces in a health-care facility, surfaces should be cleaned routinely and when dirty or
soiled  to  provide  an  aesthetically  pleasing  environment  and  to  prevent  potentially
contaminated  objects  from  serving  as  a  source  for  health-care–associated  infections.
398 The value of designing surfaces (e.g. hexyl-polyvinylpyridine) that kill bacteria on
contact 399 or have sustained antimicrobial activity 400 should be further evaluated.
Several investigators have recognized heavy microbial contamination of wet mops and
cleaning cloths and the potential for spread of such contamination 68, 401. They have
shown  that  wiping  hard  surfaces  with  contaminated  cloths  can  contaminate  hands,
equipment, and other surfaces 68, 402. Data have been published that can be used to
formulate effective policies for decontamination and maintenance of reusable cleaning
cloths.  For  example,  heat  was  the  most  reliable  treatment  of  cleaning  cloths  as  a
detergent  washing  followed  by  drying  at  80°C  for  2  hours  produced  elimination  of
contamination.  However,  the  dry  heating  process  might  be  a  fire  hazard  if  the  mop
head contains petroleum-based products or lint builds up within the equipment or vent
hose  (American  Health  Care  Association,  personal  communication,  March  2003).
Alternatively, immersing the cloth in hypochlorite (4,000 ppm) for 2 minutes produced
no detectable surviving organisms in 10 of 13 cloths 403. If reusable cleaning cloths or
mops  are  used,  they  should  be  decontaminated  regularly  to  prevent  surface

contamination  during  cleaning  with  subsequent  transfer  of  organisms  from  these
surfaces to patients or equipment by the hands of health-care workers. Some hospitals
have  begun  using  a  new  mopping  technique  involving  microfiber  materials  to  clean
floors. Microfibers are densely constructed, polyester and polyamide (nylon) fibers, that
are  approximately  1/16  the  thickness  of  a  human  hair.  The  positively  charged
microfibers attract dust (which has a negative charge) and are more absorbent than a
conventional, cotton-loop mop. Microfiber materials also can be wet with disinfectants,
such as quaternary ammonium compounds. In one study, the microfiber system tested
demonstrated  superior  microbial  removal  compared  with  conventional  string  mops
when used with a detergent cleaner (94% vs 68%). The use of a disinfectant did not
improve  the  microbial  elimination  demonstrated  by  the  microfiber  system  (95%  vs
94%).  However,  use  of  disinfectant  significantly  improved  microbial  removal  when  a
conventional string mop was used (95% vs 68%) (WA Rutala, unpublished data, August
2006). The microfiber system also prevents the possibility of transferring microbes from
room to room because a new microfiber pad is used in each room. An important issue
concerning  use  of  disinfectants  for  noncritical  surfaces  in  health-care  settings  is  that
the contact time specified on the label of the product is often too long to be practically
followed. The labels of most products registered by EPA for use against HBV, HIV, or M.
tuberculosis  specify  a  contact  time  of  10  minutes.  Such  a  long  contact  time  is  not
practical  for  disinfection  of  environmental  surfaces  in  a  health-care  setting  because
most health-care facilities apply a disinfectant and allow it to dry (~1 minute). Multiple
scientific papers have demonstrated significant microbial reduction with contact times
of 30 to 60 seconds46-56, 58-64. In addition, EPA will approve a shortened contact time
for  any  product  for  which  the  manufacturers  will  submit  confirmatory  efficacy  data.
Currently,  some  EPA-registered  disinfectants  have  contact  times  of  one  to  three
minutes.  By  law,  users  must  follow  all  applicable  label  instructions  for  EPA-registered
products.  Ideally,  product  users  should  consider  and  use  products  that  have  the

shortened contact time. However, disinfectant manufacturers also need to obtain EPA
approval  for  shortened  contact  times  so  these  products  will  be  used  correctly  and
effectively  in  the  health-care  environment.  Disinfectant  spray-fog  techniques  for
antimicrobial  control  in  hospital  rooms  has  been  used.  This  technique  of  spraying  of
disinfectants  is  an  unsatisfactory  method  of  decontaminating  air  and  surfaces  and  is
not  recommended  for  general  infection  control  in  routine  patient-care  areas386.
Disinfectant  fogging  is  rarely,  if  ever,  used  in  U.S.  healthcare  facilities  for  air  and
surface disinfection in patient-care areas. Methods (e.g., filtration, ultraviolet germicidal
irradiation, chlorine dioxide) to reduce air contamination in the healthcare setting are
discussed  in  another  guideline  23.  Contaminated  disinfectants  and  antiseptics  have
been occasional vehicles of health-care infections and pseudoepidemics for more than
50  years.  Published  reports  describing  contaminated  disinfectants  and  antiseptic
solutions leading to health-care-associated infections have been summarized 404. Since
this  summary  additional  reports  have  been  published  405-408.  An  examination  of
reports  of  disinfectants  contaminated  with  microorganisms  revealed  noteworthy
observations.  Perhaps  most  importantly,  high-level  disinfectants/liquid  chemical
sterilants  have  not  been  associated  with  outbreaks  due  to  intrinsic  or  extrinsic
contamination.Members of the genus Pseudomonas (e.g., P. aeruginosa) are the most
frequent
 isolates
 from
 contaminated
 disinfectants—recovered
 from
 80%
 of
contaminated  products.  Their  ability  to  remain  viable  or  grow  in  use-dilutions  of
disinfectants  is  unparalleled.  This  survival  advantage  for  Pseudomonas  results
presumably  from  their  nutritional  versatility,  their  unique  outer  membrane  that
constitutes an effective barrier to the passage of germicides, and/or efflux systems 409.
Although the concentrated solutions of the disinfectants have not been demonstrated
to  be  contaminated  at  the  point  of  manufacture,  an  undiluted  phenolic  can  be
contaminated  by  a  Pseudomonas  sp.  during  use  410.  In  most  of  the  reports  that
describe  illness  associated  with  contaminated  disinfectants,  the  product  was  used  to

disinfect  patient-care  equipment,  such  as  cystoscopes,  cardiac  catheters,  and
thermometers.  Germicides  used  as  disinfectants  that  were  reported  to  have  been
contaminated include chlorhexidine, quaternary ammonium compounds, phenolics, and
pine oil. The following control measures should be instituted to reduce the frequency of
bacterial  growth  in  disinfectants  and  the  threat  of  serious  healthcare–associated
infections  from  the  use  of  such  contaminated  products  404.  First,  some  disinfectants
should not be diluted; those that are diluted must be prepared correctly to achieve the
manufacturers' recommended use-dilution. Second, infection-control professionals must
learn from the literature what inappropriate activities result in extrinsic contamination
(i.e., at the point of use) of germicides and train users to prevent recurrence. Common
sources  of  extrinsic  contamination  of  germicides  in  the  reviewed  literature  are  the
water to make working dilutions, contaminated containers, and general contamination
of  the  hospital  areas  where  the  germicides  are  prepared  and/or  used.  Third,  stock
solutions of germicides must be stored as indicated on the product label. EPA verifies
manufacturers' efficacy claims against microorganisms. These measures should provide
assurance  that  products  meeting  the  EPA  registration  requirements  can  achieve  a
certain level of antimicrobial activity when used as directed. CDC provides information
on  infection  control  and  clinical  safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among
healthcare workers, patients, and visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages 
Language Assistance 

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/healthcare-equipment.html
