Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  [Pediculus  humanus  capitis]  [Pediculus  humanus  humanus]
Pediculosis  is  infestation  with  the  human  head-and-body  louse,  Pediculus  humanus.
There  are  two  subspecies,  the  head  louse  (P.  h.  capitis)  and  the  body  louse  (P.  h.
humanus).  They  are  ectoparasites  whose  only  known  hosts  are  humans.  Recent
molecular data suggest that the two subspecies are ecotypes of the same species and
that evolution between the two populations take place continually. Reference: Veracz A,
Raoult  D.  2012.  Biology  and  genetics  of  human  head  and  body  lice.  Trends  in
Parasitology.  28:  563-571.   The  life  cycle  of  the  head  louse  has  three  stages:  egg,
nymph, and adult. Eggs: Nits are head lice eggs. They are hard to see and are often
confused for dandruff or hair spray droplets. Nits are laid by the adult female and are
cemented at the base of the hair shaft nearest the scalp . They are 0.8 mm by 0.3 mm,
oval and usually yellow to white. Nits take about 1 week to hatch (range 6 to 9 days).
Viable eggs are usually located within 6 mm of the scalp. Nymphs: The egg hatches to
release a nymph . The nit shell then becomes a more visible dull yellow and remains
attached to the hair shaft. The nymph looks like an adult head louse, but is about the
size  of  a  pinhead.  Nymphs  mature  after  three  molts  (,  )  and  become  adults  about  7
days after hatching. Adults: The adult louse is about the size of a sesame seed, has 6
legs (each with claws), and is tan to grayish-white . In persons with dark hair, the adult
louse will appear darker. Females are usually larger than males and can lay up to 8 nits
per day. Adult lice can live up to 30 days on a person’s head. To live, adult lice need to
feed on blood several times daily. Without blood meals, the louse will die within 1 to 2
days  off  the  host.  Body  lice:  Body  lice  are  morphologically  similar  to  head  lice.  They
have  a  different  life  cycle,  whereas  body  lice  reside  on  and  lay  their  eggs  on  the
clothing  and  fomites  of  infected  individuals  and  migrate  to  the  human  body  to  feed.

Head  lice  infestation  is  very  common  and  is  distributed  worldwide.  Preschool  and
elementary-age  children,  3  to  11  years  of  age  are  infested  most  often.  Females  are
infested more often than males, probably due to more frequent head to head contact.
Body lice are also cosmopolitan but are less common and usually seen in settings of
poverty,  war,  and  homelessness.    The  majority  of  head  lice  infestations  are
asymptomatic.  When  symptoms  are  noted  they  may  include  a  tickling  feeling  of
something  moving  in  the  hair,  itching,  caused  by  an  allergic  reaction  to  louse  saliva,
and  irritability.  Secondary  bacterial  infection  may  be  a  complication.  Body  lice  can
serve  as  vectors  for  Rickettsia  prowazekii  (epidemic  typhus),  Bartonella  quintana
(trench fever), and Borrelia recurrentis (louse-borne relapsing fever). The main mode of
transmission  of  head  lice  is  contact  with  a  person  who  is  already  infested  (i.e.,
head-to-head contact). Contact is common during play (sports activities, playgrounds,
at camp, and slumber parties) at school and at home. Less commonly, transmission via
fomites may occur with regards to head lice (more common with body lice). Wearing
clothing,  such  as  hats,  scarves,  coats,  sports  uniforms,  or  hair  ribbons  worn  by  an
infested  person;  using  infested  combs,  brushes  or  towels;  or  lying  on  a  bed,  couch,
pillow,  carpet,  or  stuffed  animal  that  has  recently  been  in  contact  with  an  infested
person may result in transmission. Of note, both nymph and adult lice forms need to
feed on blood to live. If an adult louse does not have a blood meal, it can die in 2 days. 
     The diagnosis of pediculosis is best made by finding a live nymph or adult louse on
the scalp or in the hair of a person. Finding numerous nits within 6 mm of the scalp is
highly suggestive of active infestation. Finding nits only more than 6 mm from the scalp
is only indicative of previous infestation.  Treatment information for pediculosis can be
found  at:  https://www.cdc.gov/lice/index.html   DPDx  is  an  educational  resource
designed  for  health  professionals  and  laboratory  scientists.  For  an  overview  including
prevention,  control,  and  treatment  visit  www.cdc.gov/parasites/.  To  receive  email
updates about this page, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/pediculosis/index.html
