Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Persons  who  have  pediculosis  pubis  (i.e.,  pubic  lice)  usually
seek medical attention because of pruritus or because they notice lice or nits on their
pubic  hair.  Pediculosis  pubis  is  caused  by  the  parasite  Phthirus  pubis  and  is  usually
transmitted  by  sexual  contact  (1393).  The  clinical  diagnosis  is  based  on  typical
symptoms of itching in the pubic region. Lice and nits can be observed on pubic hair.
Permethrin 1% cream rinse applied to affected areas and washed off after 10 minutes
OR Pyrethrin with piperonyl butoxide applied to the affected area and washed off after
10 minutes Malathion 0.5% lotion applied to affected areas and washed off after 8–12
hours  OR  Ivermectin  250  µg/kg  body  weight  orally,  repeated  in  7–14  days  Reported
resistance  to  pediculicides  (permethrin  and  pyrethrin)  has  been  increasing  and  is
widespread (1394,1395). Malathion can be used when treatment failure is believed to
have  occurred  as  a  result  of  resistance.  The  odor  and  longer  duration  of  application
associated with malathion therapy make it a less attractive alternative compared with
the  recommended  pediculicides.  Ivermectin  has  limited  ovicidal  activity  (1396).
Ivermectin  might  not  prevent  recurrences  from  eggs  at  the  time  of  treatment,  and
therefore treatment should be repeated in 7–14 days (1397,1398). Ivermectin should be
taken with food because bioavailability is increased, thus increasing penetration of the
drug into the epidermis. Adjustment of ivermectin dosage is not required for persons
with  renal  impairment;  however,  the  safety  of  multiple  doses  among  persons  with
severe  liver  disease  is  unknown.  Lindane  is  not  recommended  for  treatment  of
pediculosis because of toxicity, contraindications for certain populations (pregnant and
breastfeeding women, children aged <10 years, and those with extensive dermatitis),
and complexity of administration. The recommended regimens should not be applied to
the  eyes.  Pediculosis  of  the  eyelashes  should  be  treated  by  applying  occlusive

ophthalmic ointment or petroleum jelly to the eyelid margins 2 times/day for 10 days.
Bedding  and  clothing  should  be  decontaminated  (i.e.,  machine  washed  and  dried  by
using  the  heat  cycle  or  dry  cleaned)  or  removed  from  body  contact  for  at  least  72
hours.  Fumigation  of  living  areas  is  unnecessary.  Pubic  hair  removal  has  been
associated with atypical patterns of pubic lice infestation and decreasing incidence of
infection  (537,1399).  Persons  with  pediculosis  pubis  should  be  evaluated  for  HIV,
syphilis,  chlamydia,  and  gonorrhea.  Evaluation  should  be  performed  after  1  week  if
symptoms  persist.  Retreatment  might  be  necessary  if  lice  are  found  or  if  eggs  are
observed  at  the  hair-skin  junction.  If  no  clinical  response  is  achieved  to  one  of  the
recommended regimens, retreatment with an alternative regimen is recommended. Sex
partners  within  the  previous  month  should  be  treated.  Sexual  contact  should  be
avoided  until  patients  and  partners  have  been  treated,  bedding  and  clothing
decontaminated,  and  reevaluation  performed  to  rule  out  persistent  infection.  Existing
data from human participants demonstrate that pregnant and lactating women should
be  treated  with  either  permethrin  or  pyrethrin  with  piperonyl  butoxide.  Because  no
teratogenicity  or  toxicity  attributable  to  ivermectin  has  been  observed  during  human
pregnancy experience, ivermectin is classified as “human data suggest low risk” during
pregnancy  and  probably  compatible  with  breastfeeding  (431).  Persons  who  have
pediculosis  pubis  and  HIV  infection  should  receive  the  same  treatment  regimen  as
those who do not have HIV. Scabies is a skin infestation caused by the mite Sarcoptes
scabiei, which causes pruritus. Sensitization to S. scabiei occurs before pruritus begins.
The first time a person is infested with S. scabiei, sensitization takes weeks to develop.
However,  pruritus  might  occur  <24  hours  after  a  subsequent  reinfestation.  Scabies
among adults frequently is sexually acquired, although scabies among children usually
is not (1400–1402). Scabies diagnosis is made by identifying burrows, mites, eggs, or
the  mites’  feces  from  affected  areas.  Skin  scrapings  can  be  examined  under  the
microscope to identify organisms, although this method has low sensitivity and is time

consuming (1403). Alternatively, noninvasive examination of the affected skin by using
videodermatoscopy, videomicroscopy, or dermoscopy can be used, each of which has
high sensitivity and specificity, particularly when performed by experienced operators
(1404).  Low-technology  strategies  include  the  burrow  ink  test  and  the  adhesive  tape
test.  Permethrin  5%  cream  applied  to  all  areas  of  the  body  from  the  neck  down  and
washed off after 8–14 hours OR Ivermectin 200 ug/kg body weight orally, repeated in
14 days* * Oral ivermectin has limited ovicidal activity; a second dose is required for
eradication.  Lindane  1%  1  oz  of  lotion  or  30  g  of  cream  applied  in  a  thin  layer  to  all
areas  of  the  body  from  the  neck  down  and  thoroughly  washed  off  after  8  hours*  *
Infants  and  children  aged  <10  years  should  not  be  treated  with  lindane.  Topical
permethrin  and  oral  and  topical  ivermectin  have  similar  efficacy  for  cure  of  scabies
(1405–1410).  Choice  of  treatment  might  be  based  on  patient  preference  for  topical
versus
 oral
 therapy,
 drug
 interactions
 with
 ivermectin
 (e.g.,
 azithromycin,
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole [Bactrim], or cetirizine [Zytrec]), and cost. Permethrin is
safe  and  effective  with  a  single  application  (1411).  Ivermectin  has  limited  ovicidal
activity and might not prevent recurrences of eggs at the time of treatment; therefore,
a second dose of ivermectin should be administered 14 days after the first dose (1412).
Ivermectin  should  be  taken  with  food  because  bioavailability  is  increased,  thereby
increasing penetration of the drug into the epidermis. Adjustments to ivermectin dosing
are  not  required  for  patients  with  renal  impairment;  however,  the  safety  of  multiple
doses among patients with severe liver disease is unknown. Lindane is an alternative
regimen  because  it  can  cause  toxicity  (1413);  it  should  be  used  only  if  the  patient
cannot  tolerate  the  recommended  therapies  or  if  these  therapies  have  failed
(1414–1416).  Lindane  is  not  recommended  for  pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women,
children  aged  <10  years,  and  persons  with  extensive  dermatitis.  Seizures  have
occurred when lindane was applied after a bath or used by patients who had extensive
dermatitis.  Aplastic  anemia  after  lindane  use  also  has  been  reported  (1413).  Lindane

resistance has been reported in some areas of the world, including parts of the United
States  (1413).  Bedding  and  clothing  should  be  decontaminated  (i.e.,  either  machine
washed  and  dried  by  using  the  heat  cycle  or  dry  cleaned)  or  removed  from  body
contact for >72 hours. Fumigation of living areas is unnecessary. Persons with scabies
should be advised to keep fingernails closely trimmed to reduce injury from excessive
scratching  (1417).  Crusted  scabies  is  an  aggressive  infestation  that  usually  occurs
among  immunodeficient,  debilitated,  or  malnourished  persons,  including  persons
receiving  systemic  or  potent  topical  glucocorticoids,  organ  transplant  recipients,
persons with HIV infection or human T-lymphotropic virus-1 infection, and persons with
hematologic  malignancies.  Crusted  scabies  is  transmitted  more  easily  than  scabies
(1418). No controlled therapeutic studies for crusted scabies have been conducted, and
a recommended treatment remains unclear. Substantial treatment failure might occur
with  a  single-dose  topical  scabicide  or  with  oral  ivermectin  treatment.  Combination
treatment is recommended with a topical scabicide, either 5% topical permethrin cream
(full-body application to be repeated daily for 7 days then 2 times/week until cure) or
25% topical benzyl benzoate, and oral ivermectin 200 ug/kg body weight on days 1, 2,
8, 9, and 15. Additional ivermectin treatment on days 22 and 29 might be required for
severe cases (1419). Lindane should be avoided because of the risks for neurotoxicity
with heavy applications on denuded skin. The rash and pruritus of scabies might persist
for  <2  weeks  after  treatment.  Symptoms  or  signs  persisting  for  >2  weeks  can  be
attributed to multiple factors. Treatment failure can occur as a result of resistance to
medication or faulty application of topical scabicides. These medications do not easily
penetrate  into  thick,  scaly  skin  of  persons  with  crusted  scabies,  perpetuating  the
harboring  of  mites  in  these  difficult-to-penetrate  layers.  In  the  absence  of
recommended  contact  treatment  and  decontamination  of  bedding  and  clothing,
persisting  symptoms  can  be  attributed  to  reinfection  by  family  members  or  fomites.
Finally,  other  household  mites  can  cause  symptoms  to  persist  as  a  result  of

cross-reactivity  between  antigens.  Even  when  treatment  is  successful,  reinfection  is
avoided,  and  cross-reactivity  does  not  occur,  symptoms  can  persist  or  worsen  as  a
result  of  allergic  dermatitis.  Retreatment  2  weeks  after  the  initial  treatment  regimen
can be considered for those persons who are still symptomatic or when live mites are
observed. Use of an alternative regimen is recommended for those persons who do not
respond initially to the recommended treatment. Persons who have had sexual, close
personal,  or  household  contact  with  the  patient  within  the  month  preceding  scabies
infestation should be examined. Those identified as being infested should be provided
treatment. Scabies epidemics frequently occur in nursing homes, hospitals, residential
facilities,  and  other  communities  (1420,1421).  Control  of  an  epidemic  can  only  be
achieved  by  treating  the  entire  population  at  risk.  Ivermectin  can  be  considered  in
these settings, especially if treatment with topical scabicides fails. Mass treatment with
oral ivermectin is highly effective in decreasing prevalence in settings where scabies is
endemic (1422). Epidemics should be managed in consultation with a specialist. Infants
and  young  children  should  be  treated  with  permethrin;  the  safety  of  ivermectin  for
children  weighing  <15  kg  has  not  been  determined.  Infants  and  children  aged<10
years should not be treated with lindane. Ivermectin likely poses a low risk to pregnant
women and is likely compatible with breastfeeding; however, because of limited data
regarding ivermectin use for pregnant and lactating women, permethrin is the preferred
treatment  (431)  (see  Pediculosis  Pubis).  Persons  with  HIV  infection  who  have
uncomplicated scabies should receive the same treatment regimens as those who do
not have HIV. Persons with HIV infection and others who are immunosuppressed are at
increased  risk  for  crusted  scabies  and  should  be  managed  in  consultation  with  a
specialist. Next

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/ectoparasitic.htm
