Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Recommendations and Reports / July 31, 2020 / 69(7);1–27
Barbara Cole, MSN1; Diana M. Nilsen, MD2; Lorna Will, MA3; Sue C. Etkind, MS4; Marcos
Burgos, MD5; Terence Chorba, MD6 (View author affiliations) Views equals page views
plus PDF downloads Box 1 Box 2 Box 3 Box 4 Box 5 This report provides an introduction
and reference tool for tuberculosis (TB) controllers regarding the essential components
of a public health program to prevent, control, and eliminate TB. The Advisory Council
for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association
recommendations in this report update those previously published (Advisory Council for
the Elimination of Tuberculosis. Essential components of a tuberculosis prevention and
control  program.  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Council  for  the  Elimination  of
Tuberculosis.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  1995;44[No.  RR-11]).  The  report  has  been  written
collaboratively  on  the  basis  of  experience  and  expert  opinion  on  approaches  to
organizing programs engaged in diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and surveillance for
TB  at  state  and  local  levels.  This  report  reemphasizes  the  importance  of
well-established priority strategies for TB prevention and control: identification of and
completion  of  treatment  for  persons  with  active  TB  disease;  finding  and  screening
persons who have had contact with TB patients; and screening, testing, and treatment
of other selected persons and populations at high risk for latent TB infection (LTBI) and
subsequent active TB disease. Health departments are responsible for public safety and
population health. To meet their responsibilities, TB control programs should institute or
ensure completion of numerous responsibilities and activities described in this report:
preparing  and  maintaining  an  overall  plan  and  policy  for  TB  control;  maintaining  a
surveillance system; collecting and analyzing data; participating in program evaluation
and  research;  prioritizing  TB  control  efforts;  ensuring  access  to  recommended

laboratory and radiology tests; identifying, managing, and treating contacts and other
persons at high risk for Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection; managing persons who
have TB disease or who are being evaluated for TB disease; providing TB training and
education;  and  collaborating  in  the  coordination  of  patient  care  and  other  TB  control
activities. Descriptions of CDC-funded resources, tests for evaluation of persons with TB
or  LTBI,  and  treatment  regimens  for  LTBI  are  provided  (Supplementary  Appendices;
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  Top  This  report  provides  an  introduction  and
reference tool for tuberculosis (TB) controllers regarding the essential components of a
public health TB program. In addition, previously published guidelines are updated to
provide a national standard for the assessment of individual TB control programs (1).
This  report  also  is  a  guide  for  public  health  TB  programs,  summarizing  the  essential
components for a public health program to prevent, control, and eliminate TB (Box 1).
Updates to clinical recommendations and other information that can change rapidly are
provided  online  (Supplementary  Appendices;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289)
but are not reflected in this published report. This report can be used in the following
ways to optimize TB programs: To provide an introduction to TB control essentials for
new TB controllers in state or local health jurisdictions To provide a frame of reference
for  policymakers  and  consultants  for  evaluating  individual  TB  control  programs  To
clarify and articulate the rationale for essential program components and activities to
decision-makers,  whether  in  health  departments  or  in  the  legislative  arena,  who
allocate  financial  and  personnel  resources  to  TB  programs  To  educate  colleagues  or
others
 regarding
 the
 structure
 and
 function
 of
 TB
 control
 programs
 The
recommendations in this report update those previously published regarding essential
components of TB prevention and control programs (1). To update the report, a work
group was formed comprising subject matter experts from the Advisory Council for the
Elimination  of  Tuberculosis  (ACET),  the  National  Tuberculosis  Controllers  Association
(NTCA),  and  CDC.  The  report  has  been  written  collaboratively  on  the  basis  of

experience  and  expert  opinion  on  approaches  that  have  succeeded  in  organizing
programs engaged in diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and surveillance for TB at state
and  local  levels.  Each  member  of  the  work  group  was  assigned  sections  to  write.
Regularly  scheduled  meetings  were  held  to  revise  or  review  the  report.  The  finalized
report  was  approved  by  ACET,  constituting  authorities  knowledgeable  in  the  fields  of
public  health,  epidemiology,  immunology,  infectious  diseases,  pulmonary  disease,
pediatrics,  tuberculosis,  microbiology,  and  preventive  health  care  delivery,  and
representation  of  the  stakeholders,  namely  state,  territorial,  and  local  health
departments  and  other  federal  agencies  and  organizations  with  interests  in  TB
prevention  and  control.  The  recommendations  have  been  updated  as  a  result  of
changes in epidemiology of TB in the United States, where incidence rates decreased or
plateaued during 1993–2019 (2), and changes in technologies that assist in diagnosis,
treatment, prevention, and surveillance of disease. In certain jurisdictions, this progress
has led to changes in the organization of and to decreased funding for TB programs,
which  might  impede  additional  progress  toward  elimination  of  TB  as  a  public  health
problem in the United States. In 1993, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared
TB  to  be  a  global  emergency,  as  connections  between  the  then-emerging  human
immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  epidemic  and  TB  were  being  recognized,  with  persons
with HIV infection having marked increases in risk for developing TB relative to those
without HIV infection (3). The resulting increases in TB incidence and prevalence had
global  implications.  By  2014,  when  annual  TB  deaths  worldwide  reached  1.5  million,
WHO  formulated  an  action  framework,  thus  providing  guidance  toward  ending  the
ongoing  global  TB  epidemic,  progress  of  low-incidence  countries  to  preelimination  by
2035, and subsequent progress in these same countries toward achieving elimination of
TB as a public health problem by 2050 (4). CDC has a national strategic TB plan (5), and
in  2015,  the  U.S.  government  released  an  action  plan  specifically  addressing
drug-resistant TB (6). This report presents the essential TB program elements needed in

U.S. public health jurisdictions to maintain progress toward national and international
objectives. This report also provides guidance for the increasing number of jurisdictions
that, in coming years as TB epidemiology in the United States continues to evolve, will
be able to transition from traditional TB control efforts to additional activities that move
toward  TB  elimination.  In  1988,  the  Institute  of  Medicine  report  The  Future  of  Public
Health (7) proposed a conceptual framework consisting of three core functions of public
health  agencies  at  all  levels  of  government:  assessment,  policy  development,  and
assurance.  Subsequently,  the  Core  Public  Health  Functions  Steering  Committee
proposed a list of the 10 essential public health services that could be mapped to those
three core functions (8). This report can be viewed within the framework of core public
health  functions  and  essential  services.  These  lists  of  core  functions  and  essential
services were not formulated in a TB-specific context but rather were meant to be so
general  in  conceptual  scope  that  their  framework  could  be  broadly  applicable  to  any
public  health  problem.  TB  controllers  might  find  that  this  core  function  framework
provides  a  useful  conceptual  structure  through  which  to  provide  initial  briefings  and
education  about  the  fundamentals  of  TB  disease,  TB  control,  and  TB  elimination  to
potential partners and decision-makers. The terminology more commonly used by TB
control  professionals  can  be  usefully  mapped  to  the  core  functions.  Specific  details
regarding  the  core  public  health  functions  and  essential  services  are  provided
(Supplementary  Appendix  B;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  TB  incidence  in
the  United  States  has  decreased  considerably  from  the  early  1950s  through  2020.
Although  84,304  cases  were  reported  in  the  United  States  in  1953,  only  8,920  were
reported  in  2019  (2).  In  addition,  although  the  U.S.  population  doubled  during  those
years, TB case rates decreased more than eighteenfold, from a rate of 52.6 cases per
100,000 population in 1953 to 2.7 in 2019. With global TB incidence at approximately
130 cases per 100,000 population, the United States and multiple other countries are
considered  to  be  countries  with  low  TB  incidence.  However,  the  generally  favorable

long-term declining trend was interrupted in the mid-1980s and early 1990s, initially by
a  5-year  plateau  in  incidence  (1984–1988),  followed  by  a  4-year  period  (1989–1992)
during which TB incidence increased by 14%. This resurgence of TB in the United States
was attributed to factors that included all of the following (9,10): Immunosuppression:
the HIV epidemic that began in the 1980s Immigration: the increasing occurrence of TB
among non–U.S.-born persons from countries with a high prevalence of TB Inadequate
infection  control:  widespread  transmission  of  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis,  the
causative  bacterium  of  TB,  in  congregate  settings  (e.g.,  health  care  facilities,
correctional  facilities,  drug  treatment  centers,  and  homeless  shelters)  Reductions  in
funding: reductions in funding for TB programs over several decades as a result of the
widespread perception that trends in TB incidence during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s
indicated that TB incidence was substantially reduced Resurgence of TB eventually led
to increased federal funding, which along with the widespread adoption of the essential
TB  program  components,  contributed  to  improvements  in  TB  prevention  and  control
efforts. These improvements have led to decreasing TB incidence rates. Thus, when the
ACET  recommendations  were  published  in  1995  (1),  the  principal  challenge  for  state
and  local  TB  programs  was  to  regain  control  and  reverse  the  resurgence  of  TB.
However,  the  challenge  now  faced  by  certain  health  jurisdictions  is  continuing  to
manage  and  prevent  TB  successfully  during  an  era  in  which  1)  decreasing  incidence
might lead to decreasing visibility and resources and 2) new approaches to diagnosis,
surveillance,  treatment,  and  prevention  are  needed  because  of  the  changing
epidemiology of TB in the United States. In 2000, the Institute of Medicine issued the
report Ending Neglect: The Elimination of Tuberculosis in the United States (11), which
outlined  a  strategy  that  included  the  following  six  goals:  Maintain  disease  control
Accelerate the decrease in incidence Develop new prevention, control, and treatment
tools  Address  global  TB  incidence  Mobilize  and  sustain  public  health  support  Track
elimination progress The strategies are still relevant and should be implemented if the

United  States  is  to  meet  its  TB  elimination  goal.  Top  This  report  reemphasizes  the
importance  of  three  priority  strategies  for  TB  prevention  and  control  that  have  been
well established for decades: Identification of and completion of treatment for persons
with  active  TB  disease  to  render  their  condition  noninfectious  Finding  and  screening
persons who have had contact with TB patients to determine whether they have active
TB  disease  themselves;  whether  they  have  been  infected  with  M.  tuberculosis;  or  for
children  and  other  persons  at  high  risk,  whether  they  require  window  prophylaxis
(preventive treatment of presumed TB infection during the time that it would normally
take  for  a  tuberculin  skin  test  [TST]  or  interferon  gamma-release  assay  [IGRA]  to
become  positive  after  exposure)  and  whether  to  administer  treatment   Screening,
testing, and treatment of other selected persons and populations at high risk for latent
TB infection (LTBI) and subsequent active TB disease to detect persons who can most
benefit from treatment for LTBI, which is essential for TB elimination because of new
immunosuppressive drugs and therapies used for different illnesses, immigration from
areas where TB is endemic, and diminished knowledge and reduced recognition of TB
by clinicians as a result of decreased incidence Although the three priority strategies
focus on individual patients, they serve broader epidemiologic functions because they
reduce  current  and  future  transmission  of  M.  tuberculosis  in  the  community.  Health
departments are responsible for public safety and for protecting population health (Box
2). Through cooperative agreements with CDC for TB prevention and control activities,
state, local, and tribal health departments have primary responsibility for ensuring that
the three priority strategies are implemented in their respective jurisdictions (12). To
meet  these  responsibilities,  TB  control  programs  should  be  able  to  institute  the
following essential components of responsibilities and activities (Box 1) or ensure that
they are completed: Preparing and maintaining an overall plan and policy for TB control
Maintaining  a  surveillance  system  for  timely  and  accurate  reporting  of  persons  with
suspected or confirmed TB disease Collecting and analyzing data for assembling local,

state,  and  national  statistics  and  reporting  to  stakeholders  Participating  in  program
evaluation and research to advance local, national, and international knowledge of the
best  ways  for  identifying,  treating,  and  preventing  TB  Prioritizing  TB  control  efforts,
especially  in  settings  in  which  resources  are  unavailable  for  all  possible  proposed
activities  Ensuring  access  to  laboratory  and  radiology  tests  recommended  for  TB
disease,  drug  resistance,  and  LTBI  Identifying,  managing,  and  treating  contacts  and
other persons at high risk for infection with M. tuberculosis to prevent TB disease and
move  toward  elimination  Managing  persons  who  have  TB  disease  or  who  are  being
evaluated because they might have TB disease Providing training and education for TB
program  staff,  other  health  departments,  clinicians,  patients  and  their  families,
community groups, and the general public Collaborating with medical, community, and
academic partners; with TB colleagues in adjacent and other jurisdictions; and with staff
from selected other public agencies (e.g., corrections, social services, and immigration
and naturalization) to coordinate patient care and other TB control activities A summary
of the components of TB-related responsibilities and activities of health departments is
provided (Box 3), and the responsibilities of the TB controller or TB program manager
are  described  (Supplementary  Appendix  A;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  By
implementing  the  activities  described  in  this  report,  TB  programs  can  increase  their
effectiveness in controlling the disease and increase their jurisdiction’s ability to move
beyond  control  and  toward  elimination.  Although  many  of  the  general  program
components  previously  described  have  remained  unchanged,  the  context  in  which
these  components  are  applied  has  changed.  Thus,  as  some  jurisdictions  note
decreasing  numbers  of  cases  and  TB  case  rates,  they  should  increasingly  focus  on
additional  strategies  that  can  accelerate  progress  toward  TB  elimination.  Such
strategies might include the following: Making LTBI, in addition to suspected and active
TB disease, a reportable condition Providing directly observed therapy (DOT) not only to
TB  patients  but  also  to  selected  persons  with  LTBI  Enlisting  partners  (e.g.,  private

medical  practitioners,  student  health  services,  employers  of  non–U.S.-born  persons,
hospitalist  physicians,  and  staff  from  other  non-TB  health  department  programs)  to
broaden screening for LTBI and to record results in a standardized manner Analyzing
case  and  infection  data  at  least  annually  to  provide  guidance  and  allow  targeting  of
subsequent testing and treatment efforts Maintaining awareness of both the incidence
of TB disease and the prevalence of LTBI for 1) the public through news releases and
posting  of  information  online  and  2)  health  professionals  through  published  case
reports,  case  series,  epidemiologic  analyses  of  local  TB  data,  and  presentations  to
state, local, and tribal medical societies and hospital staff Maintaining communication
with  partners  and  collaborators  in  other  local,  neighboring,  state,  tribal,  and  federal
agencies  to  build  collaborative  TB  initiatives  Top  As  part  of  the  overall  TB  control
strategy, TB programs should consider the changing health care environment in which
TB  care  is  provided.  Policies  and  procedures  should  align  with  the  core  public  health
functions
 and
 essential
 services
 (Supplementary
 Appendix
 B;
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  Evolving  technologies  (e.g.,  electronic  health
records,  telemedicine,  and  electronic  platforms  for  remotely  viewing  patients  taking
their  medications)  provide  alternative  methods  for  facilitating  care.  Cross-cutting
concerns (e.g., ensuring an uninterrupted supply of TB medications, adequate funding,
and  modification  or  development  of  new  laws  to  support  TB  control)  should  be
addressed at the state and national levels. Also important is detecting and treating TB
disease while addressing the reservoir of persons with LTBI. TB control programs should
develop an overall TB control strategy in collaboration with local partners (e.g., health
care providers, professional societies, and voluntary organizations) and state, local, and
tribal  advisory  committees,  if  available.  To  determine  specific  needs,  national,  state,
local,  and  tribal  TB  morbidity  data  and  standard  indicators  of  program  performance
(e.g.,  the  CDC  National  Performance  Objectives)  should  be  used  (13).  The  TB  control
strategy  should  outline  program  priorities  and  objectives  that  consider  epidemiologic

data and the roles of the partnering agencies, organizations, and providers. TB control
programs  should  also  have  written  policies  and  procedures  that  clearly  define  the
standard of practice for TB treatment and prevention. These priorities, objectives, and
plans  should  be  reviewed  periodically  and  revised  as  needed.  TB  control  programs
should  provide  consultation  and  oversight  for  TB-related  activities  throughout  their
jurisdictions,  regardless  of  who  might  be  providing  services.  This  consultation  and
oversight  will  help  ensure  these  services  reflect  standards  of  care  and  public  health
practice.  Programs  should  maintain  expertise  in  TB  management  and  have  access  to
medical  consultation  when  needed.  Pediatric-specific  expertise  should  be  available  to
all TB programs and community providers. Information might be available either from
health  department  staff  or  from  designated  experts  who  have  agreed  to  act  as
consultants for the health department. Consultants should be available to advise health
care  providers,  agencies,  or  institutions  about  routine  challenges  in  patient
management  (e.g.,  treatment  adherence,  interpretation  of  radiologic  tests,  and
common  adverse  drug  reactions)  and  complex  clinical  situations.  Programs  should
ensure  that  staff  or  external  consultants  are  also  available  to  provide  guidance
regarding  use  and  interpretation  of  IGRAs;  genotyping;  mycobacteriology  laboratory
methods,  including  new  molecular  diagnostics;  molecular  drug-resistance  testing;
contact  or  outbreak  investigations;  new  technologies  and  new  medications  as  they
become  available  and  how  to  use  them;  and  other  public  health  concerns  within  TB
control in both community and institutional settings. In collaboration with state, local,
and tribal health departments, CDC’s Division of Tuberculosis Elimination (DTBE) serves
as the national TB program, providing support and guidance to all TB programs in the
United States. CDC’s Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ) also supports
TB  programs  by  preventing  the  introduction,  transmission,  and  spread  of  infectious
diseases  into  the  United  States.  DTBE’s  TB  program  consultants  are  responsible  for
coordinating  and  assisting  TB  programs  in  all  50  states,  eight  current  or  former

territories,  and  nine  large  cities.  In  addition,  CDC  performs  the  following  activities:
Administers  and  promotes  a  national  program  for  preventing,  controlling,  and
eliminating  TB  Provides  leadership  and  formulates  national  policies  and  guidelines
Conducts  behavioral,  health  systems,  and  clinical  research  Supports  a  nationwide
framework  for  TB  surveillance  and  evaluation  of  national  TB  prevention  and  control
program performance Provides administrative support for the federal TB task force and
supports and collaborates with NTCA to promote effective national communications and
coordinated  feedback  regarding  urgent  policy  and  program  performance  concerns
Provides  technical  supervision  and  training  to  federal  assignees  working  in  the  state,
local, and tribal TB control programs Develops training and educational materials and
provides technical assistance for communications and training needs Funds TB Centers
of Excellence for Training, Education, and Medical Consultation in strategic geographic
locations  Participates  in  developing  policies  and  guidelines  for  TB  prevention  and
control  among  populations  at  high  risk  (e.g.,  persons  with  HIV  infection)  Provides
programmatic consultation, technical assistance, and outbreak response assistance to
state,  local,  and  tribal  health  departments  and  provides  technical  assistance  to  TB
programs in other countries by collaborating with international partners CDC guidelines,
publications,  educational  materials,  and  contact  information  are  available  from  CDC’s
TB website (14), and information on CDC-funded resources is available (Supplementary
Appendix C; https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289). TB control programs should serve
the medical community as sources of information and consultation regarding infection
control  practices  for  TB  (15).  During  interactions  with  the  medical  community,  TB
control programs should emphasize the need for maintaining a high level of suspicion
for  TB  when  evaluating  patients  who  have  TB  symptoms  and  also  the  importance  of
early  diagnosis,  isolation,  and  prompt  therapy  initiation.  The  programs  should  give
expert  advice  or  provide  referrals  to  experts  for  information  about  infection  control
measures  for  different  settings  (e.g.,  hospitals,  clinics,  nursing  homes,  correctional

facilities, homeless shelters, and drug treatment centers). Guidance for how to use new
diagnostic  tests  for  release  from  airborne  isolation  in  hospitals  is  now  available  (16);
use of these techniques is specific to each case and should be in accordance with local
TB  control  requirements.  TB  control  programs  should  educate  facility  staff  providing
care for TB patients about the need for routine periodic evaluation of infection control
practices  and  might  also  assist  in  the  evaluation  process.  Assistance  can  include
providing updated recommendations and regulations to the facility, providing names of
experts in infection control, or providing access to personnel involved in programmatic
evaluations. TB increases in certain geographic areas are related to the high risk for TB
among  immunosuppressed  persons  who  have  HIV  infection.  Transmission  of  M.
tuberculosis to HIV-infected persons is of particular concern because, if coinfected with
M.  tuberculosis,  these  persons  are  at  higher  risk  for  the  rapid  development  of  TB
disease  (17).  Program  staff  should  be  particularly  alert  to  the  need  for  preventing
transmission of M. tuberculosis in settings where HIV-infected persons work or receive
care.  Administrative  controls  should  be  established  on  the  basis  of  CDC,  federal,  and
state guidelines (18). This might include surveillance for TB exposure among employees
or  fit  testing  of  respirators  for  certain  employees.  Top  TB  control  programs  should
periodically review applicable laws, regulations, and policies to ensure their consistency
with  recommended  medical  and  public  health  practices.  Jurisdictions  should
recommend laws and create regulations and policies that provide a legal basis for TB
control  activities.  Such  laws  and  regulations  should  include  ensuring  prompt,
mandatory reporting of each confirmed and suspected case of TB disease; protecting
the  health  of  the  public  by  isolating  and  treating  persons  who  have  infectious  TB;
rapidly  detaining  persons  who  have  begun  TB  treatment  and  achieved  noninfectious
status  but  who  are  unwilling  or  unable  to  complete  treatment  and  are  at  risk  for
reverting  to  or  developing  an  infectious  status;  and  observing  laws  and  regulations
protecting  patient  confidentiality.  Policies  should  address  ensuring  examination  of

persons at high risk for TB disease and the prescription and monitoring of treatment for
these  persons;  ensuring  rapid  laboratory  examination  of  specimens  and  reporting  of
results, including drug-susceptibility test (DST) results and negative culture results, to
the  health  department  and  the  requesting  clinician;  ensuring  that  communication
between  providers  and  the  health  department  is  established  for  all  hospitalized
patients; ensuring that patients who have TB disease receive treatment until they are
cured, possibly including mandated DOT; treating patients regardless of their ability to
pay;  and  encouraging  health  care  facilities  and  congregate  settings  to  apply
recommended measures for infection control. TB programs can educate policymakers
or provide technical assistance regarding laws, regulations, and policies that mandate
activities  that  are  no  longer  recommended,  either  by  implementing  authoritative
guidelines  or  by  carefully  reviewing  epidemiologic  data  and  research.  TB  control
programs  should  have  adequate  and  well-trained  staff  for  performing  the  TB-related
activities outlined in this report. The number and type of staff needed by programs will
vary depending on local TB morbidity, the structural organization of the public health
activity,  and  specific  community  needs.  Each  jurisdiction  determines  its  own  staffing
patterns and needs. Staff are necessary for providing medical consultation and for such
activities  as  program  planning,  personnel  and  financial  management,  record-keeping,
collection and epidemiologic analysis of surveillance and other program data, staff and
patient education and training, social services, and coordination of TB-related activities
with  other  health  department  activities  in  the  jurisdiction.  All  TB  control  programs
should  have  a  designated  program  manager.  Depending  on  how  a  program  is
organized,  the  program  manager  might  also  be  the  state’s  designated  TB  controller.
Programs  might  also  have  nurses,  physicians,  medical  consultants,  public  health
advisors,  epidemiologists,  outreach  workers,  and  other  staff  as  needed  to  provide
essential TB program services. Policies and procedures that clearly define the roles and
responsibilities  of  each  member  of  the  TB  program  staff  will  facilitate  training  and

evaluation  of  each  member.  In  certain  settings,  assistance  for  studies  or  special
projects  might  be  available  from  students  in  such  fields  as  epidemiology,  health
promotion, public health, nursing, or other related fields or from physicians or medical
students, especially those interested in infectious disease or pulmonary medicine, who
might  spend  some  of  their  elective  time  working  with  a  TB  program.  Creating  such
opportunities for students can benefit TB programs. Policies and procedures regarding
the work responsibilities, access to confidential data, and publication rights should be in
place before students work with a TB program. TB programs should clearly define the
participation of students with direct patient care activities (e.g., TB clinic, home visits,
or  contact  investigations).  Nursing  students  should  function  within  their  scope  of
practice.  Masters  of  public  health  interns  can  assist  with  data  analysis  and  program
evaluation. A TB clinic might be part of the TB control program, with staff who include
different  combinations  of  nurses,  physicians,  physician  assistants,  and  other  workers.
Clinics  might  have  nurse  managers  responsible  for  providing  the  majority  of  the
education, treatment, clinical monitoring, prevention services, and supervisory needs of
the clinic. A physician who is qualified and trained in TB diagnosis, management, and
clinical monitoring should be available on staff or employed on a contract basis. Clinic
staff  should  have  cross-cultural  skills  and  receive  ongoing  training  appropriate  to  the
community’s  cultural  and  language  needs.  Interpreter  services  are  legally  required
when  providing  health  care;  programs  should  work  with  all  health  care  providers  to
ensure  that  these  services  are  available.  Clear  policies  and  procedures  for  each  role
within the clinic will delineate responsibilities and help define training and evaluation. In
settings where medical care is provided by private-sector practitioners, the TB program
should coordinate services between those health care providers and the public health
staff  providing  DOT  and  daily  monitoring  of  persons  with  TB  disease.  Policies  and
procedures  should  define  the  collaboration  process  so  that  all  parties  know  what  is
expected of them. TB control in the United States is the legal responsibility of state and

local governments (19); financing of TB control programs in the United States relies on
a  mixture  of  state  and  local  funding,  with  supplementary  funding  provided  by  the
federal government. All 50 states, nine large cities, five territories, and three affiliated
sovereign  Pacific  Island  nations  (Palau,  the  Federated  States  of  Micronesia,  and  the
Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands)  receive  federal  supplementary  funding  directly  from
CDC. Funding formulas are applied by CDC to allocate supplementary funding to these
funded  jurisdictions  through  cooperative  agreements.  These  formulas  are  both  needs
based  (based  on  average  case  numbers  in  the  jurisdictions)  and  performance  based
(e.g.,  numbers  of  patients  completing  treatment  within  1  year  and  mean  volume  of
tests  performed),  focusing  on  prevention  and  control  activities  and  on  the  laboratory
systems.  A  prevention  and  control  funding  formula  is  based  on  TB  surveillance  data
using  variables  with  universal  and  consistent  reporting  by  all  of  the  67  funded
jurisdictions  in  the  National  Tuberculosis  Surveillance  System  (NTSS).  The  federal
allocation of supplementary TB funding is based on an iteration of the funding formula
that has both incidence (80%) and performance (20%) components. A workload-based
laboratory formula determines the federal allocation of supplementary support for TB
mycobacteriology work in 58 public health laboratories. TB program staff should consult
CDC program staff regarding specific funding requirements. TB control programs should
seek  funding  for  TB  control  activities  from  federal,  state,  local,  tribal,  and  private
sources. They also should work with local organizations (e.g., state and local medical
societies, lung associations, community groups, and TB coalition members) to educate
policymakers about TB epidemiology, local program priorities, needs, and objectives to
ensure  TB  control.  Policies  and  procedures  regarding  acceptance  and  use  of  funds
should be consistent with federal, local, and state requirements. Optimal TB prevention
and  control  activities  require  a  multidisciplinary  approach  (18).  Thus,  TB  control
programs  in  communities  with  a  high  prevalence  of  TB  should  form  networks  and
coalitions with local groups (e.g., cultural and ethnic organizations, community clinics,

places  of  worship,  professional  societies,  lung  associations,  and  medical  and  nursing
schools).  Collaboration  with  these  groups  helps  the  TB  control  program  ensure  that
community leaders, health care providers, and policymakers are knowledgeable about
TB;  educate  the  public  about  TB;  and  provide  guidance  and  assistance  for  local
screening  and  prevention  services.  Coalitions  with  community  groups  help  TB  control
programs reach groups at high risk more effectively and provide culturally appropriate
services. TB control programs should educate and advise community groups to ensure
the  quality  and  appropriateness  of  TB-related  activities  in  accordance  with  the
community’s needs and national performance standards. Policies regarding definition of
roles,  access  to  confidential  information,  and  responsibilities  for  different  parts  of  a
collaborative  program  will  ensure  that  all  participants  know  how  each  collaboration
works. Stop TB USA (20) exemplifies a national coalition involved in educating health
care  providers  and  the  public  about  TB.  Although  occurrence  of  TB  in  correctional
facilities  and  other  congregate  settings  varies  from  state  to  state,  any  delay  in
detecting a person with infectious TB continues to represent a public health threat. TB
control is an essential element in health care in correctional facilities. All correctional
facilities, including those in which few TB cases are expected to occur, should designate
a person or group of persons experienced in infection control, occupational health, and
engineering  who  are  responsible  for  the  facility’s  TB  infection  control  program.  TB
infection  control  officials  should  be  familiar  with  TB  control  and  prevention  practices
that include screening, containment, and assessment to ensure prompt identification of
persons who might have infectious TB. More detailed descriptions of these practices is
integrated throughout this report. Protocols should exist for diagnosis, treatment, and
follow-up within congregate settings. TB programs should ensure that all clinicians who
treat  inmates  or  employees  with  LTBI  or  active  TB  disease  are  familiar  with
CDC-recommended  treatment  protocols.  Public  health  departments  should  assist
correctional  and  other  congregate  facilities  as  needed  with  developing  and  updating

policies and procedures for TB control. The health department should provide access to
expert  TB  medical  consultation,  adequate  laboratory  services,  and  consultation  or
assistance  with  epidemiologic  investigations  for  major  TB  exposures  in  congregate
settings.  Homeless  shelters  are  another  congregate  setting  with  potential  for  TB
transmission  if  persons  with  infectious  TB  are  not  identified  in  a  timely  manner.
Screening,  containment,  and  assessment  activities  can  present  special  challenges
caused by the mobile nature of the population. Health departments should ensure that
epidemiologic investigations are conducted, whether by the health department or the
shelter  facility.  TB  programs  should  generate  data  for  use  in  program  evaluation,
planning,  and  implementation  of  data-driven  initiatives.  Each  program  should  have
policies  and  procedures  for  confidential  and  nonconfidential  data  access  and  use  of
analyzed  data.  TB  programs  can  benefit  by  participating  in  research  regarding  TB,
whether by working with a local student to support a master’s thesis or participating in
national  and  international  studies.  Before  participating,  policies  should  be  in  place
regarding  participation  in  research,  designation  of  an  institutional  review  board,  and
clarification of responsibilities for supervision of research students. Top TB surveillance
data  are  essential  for  designing  public  health  interventions  that  accelerate  progress
toward  TB  elimination  in  the  United  States.  Identification  of  affected  populations,
geographic distribution of cases, comorbidities, and LTBI trends provide the foundation
for culturally appropriate interventions. Monitoring DST results at the local, state, tribal,
and  national  levels  is  a  vital  surveillance  activity.  In  addition,  DSTs  are  needed  for
ensuring  correct  treatment  regimens.  Collection  of  TB  data  at  the  local,  state,  tribal,
and national levels is based on morbidity and mortality reports. Although reporting laws
vary from state to state, TB is a nationally reportable condition; for each identified case
of active TB disease, the report of a verified case of TB (RVCT) should be submitted to
CDC  (21).  TB  control  programs  should  ensure  that  surveillance  on  drug  resistance  is
performed  on  all  initial  isolates  of  M.  tuberculosis  and  that  the  results  are  reported

promptly  to  the  primary  care  provider  and  the  local  health  department  and  are
submitted  electronically  to  CDC  through  the  RVCT  form.  Drug-resistance  surveillance
includes genetic mutation analysis as well as DST. TB control programs should monitor
local drug-resistance patterns and rates to assess the effectiveness of local TB control
efforts  and  to  determine  the  appropriateness  of  the  CDC-recommended  initial  TB
treatment  regimen  for  any  patient.  TB  control  programs  should  ensure  and  facilitate
reporting  of  TB  cases  and  suspected  TB  cases  from  hospitals,  health  care  providers,
laboratories, and other sources, depending on state or local laws. TB control programs
should  monitor  the  completeness  of  reporting  and  the  duration  of  time  between
diagnosis and reporting. Programs should communicate regularly with infection control
practitioners  in  hospitals,  clinics,  or  congregate  settings  where  TB  is  frequently
diagnosed  or  that  tend  to  serve  populations  at  high  risk.  TB  cases  and  suspected  TB
cases should be reported and entered promptly into the electronic case database and
transmitted  to  CDC  as  required.  Prompt  TB  case  or  suspected  TB  case  reporting  is
necessary  for  evaluation,  treatment,  and  case  management;  effective  contact
investigations;  treatment  completion  for  patients  and  their  infected  contacts;
identification and prevention of ongoing transmission; program planning and evaluation
at  local,  state,  tribal,  and  national  levels;  and  monitoring  of  epidemiologic  trends,
including  drug  resistance  and  identification  of  populations  at  risk.  Data  from  case
reports  should  be  reported  promptly  to  NTSS  and  submitted  electronically  to  CDC.
These data are used for monitoring national TB trends, prioritizing needs, and creating
the  annual  CDC  TB  surveillance  report  (22).  Passive  and  active  surveillance  are
principal strategies for identifying TB cases. Passive surveillance relies on health care
providers  or  laboratories  reporting  persons  with  clinical,  radiologic,  or  bacteriologic
findings indicative of TB. TB control programs should ensure health care providers and
laboratories are familiar with and follow disease reporting laws. To identify unreported
cases,  TB  programs  should  conduct  active  surveillance  focusing  on  health  care

providers  serving  populations  at  high  risk,  laboratories,  and  pharmacies.  Unreported
cases might also be discovered through routine checks of death records and Medicare
and Medicaid billing. TB control programs should understand their local epidemiology to
identify populations at high risk and engage in appropriate case finding and prevention
measures.  Genotyping  of  specimens  that  are  culture  positive  for  M.  tuberculosis  can
identify clusters of patients where transmission might have occurred and can be used
to monitor for TB outbreaks. TB testing of populations at low risk should be discouraged
because it can yield false-positive results and strain limited public health resources. To
fulfill community public health responsibilities, TB control programs should maintain a
computerized  record  system  (case  registry)  with  updated  information  on  all  clinically
active  and  suspected  TB  cases  in  the  community.  To  ensure  follow-up  with  all  TB
patients and persons with suspected TB, registry information (e.g., smear, culture, and
DST  results;  clinical  status;  chest  radiograph  results;  and  doses  of  medications  being
administered) should be regularly obtained and updated. A specified health department
staff  member  should  review  detailed  registry  information  routinely  to  1)  identify
patients  with  confirmed  TB  disease  or  LTBI  and  who  might  be  having  difficulties
adhering  or  responding  to  standard  therapy  (e.g.,  patients  who  have  persistently
culture-positive sputa or who are taking medications to which their TB organisms are
resistant,  and  2)  ensure  follow-up  (e.g.,  initiating  field  follow-up  visits  or  arranging
medical consultation with providers). TB control programs should also maintain records
regarding  screening,  examination,  and  treatment  status  of  contacts  of  patients  with
infectious  TB.  Program  staff  should  periodically  review  screening  activities  to  assess
their effectiveness in identifying persons with LTBI and ensure that these persons are
completing courses of treatment for LTBI when recommended. If reviews demonstrate
that  few  or  no  new  cases  are  being  identified  by  particular  screening  activities,  TB
programs should further evaluate or discontinue these activities as indicated. Persons
with TB disease or LTBI sometimes move among health jurisdictions. The TB program

should facilitate information transfer among jurisdictions so that patients are not lost to
follow-up and that treatment is continuous and completed. A sample interjurisdictional
report form is available on the NTCA website (23). Although in certain jurisdictions all
LTBI cases are reportable, information should be reported promptly regarding contacts
of patients with infectious TB in any jurisdiction. A surveillance case definition for LTBI
approved by the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists can be used (24). Close
contacts  of  persons  with  infectious  TB,  and  other  contacts  at  high  risk  for  infection,
should be tested for TB infection as soon as they can be identified; if contacts within
this group are infected, TB programs should evaluate the need to expand the contact
investigation  so  that  persons  potentially  infected  are  able  to  be  tested  and,  if  found
infected,  medically  evaluated  and  offered  treatment  if  indicated.  Persons  recently
infected are at the highest risk for progression to TB disease; therefore, complete and
rapid reporting of their status and initiation of treatment are necessary for preventing
the  spread  of  TB  disease.  TB  programs  should  identify  other  groups  at  high  risk  and
collect their testing results to establish a baseline for an infection rate. Groups at high
risk  who  are  reported  to  state  or  local  health  departments  on  arrival  in  the  United
States include immigrants and refugees with a class B notification status. Class A and B
notification  categories  can  be  ascribed  to  visa  applicants  by  panel  physicians  in  the
country of origin (Box 4) (25). TB programs should strive to screen, test, evaluate, and
offer treatment to those persons, if indicated. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF)  issued  a  recommendation  for  screening  for  LTBI  among  populations  at
increased  risk  for  TB  (26).  When  primary  care  practitioners  implement  this
recommendation,  they  might  increase  the  number  of  persons  treated  for  LTBI  and
potentially decrease new cases of TB disease. A method for clinical health care systems
to  track  and  report  their  screening,  testing,  and  treatment  would  supplement  the
tracking  and  reporting  system  used  by  public  health  departments.  Top  Data,
management,  analysis,  and  use  for  reporting,  quality  improvement,  identification  of

epidemiologic links, and reporting to stakeholders are vital public health functions. Data
should  be  validated  before  analysis  and  use,  and  quality-control  measures  should  be
established to ensure the accuracy of both the data and data entry. The ability to use
all relevant data available about TB cases is necessary for investigating thoroughly and
then
 preventing
 TB
 disease.
 Genotyping,
 whole-genome
 sequencing,
 and
drug-susceptibility patterns can help providers identify links between persons with TB
disease that are not evident through questioning the patient to identify contacts. These
links might provide additional information about others at risk for TB disease. TB control
programs  should  develop  policies  for  ensuring  data  security  and  confidentiality  of
TB-related records. TB programs should enact strategies for protecting all TB reports,
records,  and  files  containing  patient  names  or  other  identifying  information.  Local
policies regarding the security and confidentiality of such information, including HIV test
results, should adhere to all applicable laws. TB programs should collaborate with HIV
programs and other relevant disease control programs in developing and implementing
confidentiality  policies.  TB  programs  should  store  TB  data  securely  in  an  electronic
system that allows data to be transmitted to care providers, other health departments,
and  consultants,  as  needed.  These  data  should  include  not  only  case  notes  and
medication  records  but  also  digital  radiographic  films  (if  feasible),  interpretations,
laboratory results, and information about drug resistance. Top Ongoing and systematic
program  evaluation  activities  are  an  integral  component  of  public  health  program
success. As TB program resources have decreased during the past decade, the need for
ongoing  program  evaluation  has  acquired  additional  importance  because  finite
resources  should  be  applied  to  the  most  effective  program  activities.  Measuring  the
impact and effectiveness of individual activities within TB programs serves to facilitate
continuous  improvement  and  to  examine  the  need  for  new  or  ongoing  program
activities. When developing a TB program or activity, staff should consider identifying a
baseline before implementing the activity, particularly when that program is expected

to  be  ongoing.  Reports  and  data  are  available  from  CDC’s  TB  website  (27)  and  are
detailed
 in
 this
 report
 (Supplementary
 Appendix
 C;
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  In  addition  to  analysis  of  surveillance  data  for
monitoring morbidity trends, programs can determine the demographic characteristics
of  their  patient  population,  monitor  drug-resistance  rates,  and  determine  treatment
outcomes.  Additional  analyses  regarding  effectiveness  and  outcomes  of  contact
investigations  and  targeted  testing  for  LTBI  and  treatment  programs  should  be
performed. These analyses can be used to assess program performance and progress
toward  achieving  locally  and  nationally  established  program  objectives.  Since  2005,
CDC  has  included  program  evaluation  as  a  core  requirement  of  its  cooperative
agreements with TB programs. With the understanding that TB programs face resource
limitations  and  other  constraints,  CDC  developed  the  National  Tuberculosis  Indicators
Project  (NTIP)  (28),  a  monitoring  system  for  tracking  TB  program  progress  toward
meeting the U.S. national TB program objectives. NTIP facilitates use of existing data to
help programs prioritize activities and focus program evaluation efforts. NTIP provides a
standardized  method  for  calculating  indicators  and  tracking  program  progress  across
sites and temporally, thus enabling the ability of CDC and TB programs to assess the
impact of TB control efforts. NTIP uses data that are being reported to CDC through the
RVCT  form  (21),  the  Aggregate  Reports  for  Tuberculosis  Program  Evaluation  (29)  for
patients’  contacts,  and  the  Electronic  Disease  Notification  System  (30)  for  follow-up
evaluation  of  immigrants  and  refugees  with  class  A  or  B  conditions  (Box  4).  TB
programs  are  encouraged  to  share  NTIP  and  other  program  evaluation  reports  with
relevant  public,  private,  and  community  groups.  TB  programs  should  engage
transparently  with  these  groups  in  developing  evidence-based  efficient  and  effective
strategies for sustaining TB prevention and care efforts. The cohort review process is a
systematic  review  of  management  of  TB  patients  and  their  contacts.  Cohort  review
identifies  areas  of  success  and  those  that  need  improvements  in  programmatic  and

clinical operations. A cohort is a group of TB patients identified during a specific time,
often  3  months,  who  have  completed  or  are  nearing  the  end  of  treatment.  Details
regarding patients’ clinical status, case management, respective contact investigation,
and  outcomes  are  reviewed  by  staff,  case  managers,  and  clinicians  to  ensure
accountability, educate staff about products and goals, and improve case management
and  prevention.  Programs  should  review  TB  cases  among  children  and  other  sentinel
events  as  separate  cohorts.  Details  of  the  cohort  review  process  are  available  from
CDC’s TB website (31). Programs also should conduct periodic reviews of case registry
and  other  selected  data  records  systems  (e.g.,  laboratory  reports,  pharmacy  reports,
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome registries, and death certificates) to validate the
surveillance  system  and  to  detect  any  failure  to  report  cases.  Such  periodic  reviews
assist in identifying gaps and challenges in program operations. As part of evaluation
efforts, TB programs should also analyze each new TB case and each TB-related death
to determine whether the case or death might have been prevented. On the basis of
such assessments, the program can develop and implement new policies to reduce the
number of preventable cases and deaths and prepare annual reports based on these
assessments  in  collaboration  with  community-based  organizations  and  professional
societies.  These  reports  should  document  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  TB  incidence
and  treatment  completion  in  the  area,  assess  the  adequacy  of  prevention  and  care
measures  in  demonstrating  program  effectiveness,  and  provide  recommendations  for
program  improvements.  A  TB  program  might  determine  that  an  outside  review  by
experts  from  the  state  health  department,  CDC,  local  lung  associations,  or  other  TB
experts  could  be  helpful  in  determining  methods  for  improving  program  performance
and community TB control and for providing support for major changes (e.g., significant
restructuring or acquisition of new resources). All TB programs should collect, analyze,
and  use  data  to  help  guide  decisions  about  the  quality  of  TB  services  and  patient
outcomes.  A  quality  improvement  (QI)  approach  focuses  on  systematically  assessing

and  improving  processes  and  outcomes  for  patient  care,  with  the  overall  goal  of
ensuring  positive  outcomes  for  patients.  QI  uses  data  to  assess  the  strengths  and
weaknesses  in  delivering  care  to  patients  and  measuring  clinical  outcomes.  Key
components  of  a  QI  program  include   conducting  assessments  that  identify  areas
requiring improvement based on established standards; collecting and analyzing data
to  establish  measurable  baseline  indicators;  developing  a  plan  with  specific
interventions  for  addressing  identified  problems  and  gaps;  educating  staff  regarding
problems  and  proposed  interventions,  with  input  from  relevant  staff;  implementing
interventions  at  the  patient  level  by  ensuring  that  care  is  patient  centered  at  the
program level and by ensuring consistency with standards of practice, evidence-based
guidelines,  and  established  agency  policies;  reassessing  the  identified  concerns  by
using  measurable  indicators;  using  data  to  measure  the  effectiveness  of  the
interventions;  disseminating  findings  to  relevant  staff,  administration,  and  other
stakeholders; and modifying methods used to assess and measure the effectiveness of
the interventions. Assessment and implementation methods will vary across programs.
Improving  the  quality  of  patient  care,  ensuring  positive  outcomes  for  patients,  and
increasing efficiency of the care delivery system are common goals. To be effective, QI
should be an ongoing process that involves managers, staff, and patients. The primary
purpose of conducting an evaluation is to influence decisions. By using results of the
evaluation,  decision-makers  might  decide  to  continue,  change,  expand,  or  end  a
program  or  associated  activity.  Evaluation  design  is  dynamic,  changing  as  programs
develop and real-world challenges emerge. Therefore, the first task for the evaluator or
evaluation team is to define the intended audience and develop measurable evaluation
questions. The intended audience will influence the type of evaluation questions to be
addressed. For example, a local health department official might be interested in the
number of persons successfully treated for LTBI in an outpatient clinic setting, whereas
an  official  responsible  for  program  funding  is  probably  more  interested  in  cost  and

availability of anti-TB medications. The objective of the evaluation team is to use the
best approach available that yields the most accurate results with available resources
for conducting the evaluation. The evaluator or evaluation team should then be able to
communicate  results  accurately  and  clearly  to  diverse  audiences  who  might  lack  a
complete  understanding  of  program  complexities  and  their  potential  impacts.  A
step-by-step guide to program evaluation is available from CDC’s TB website (32). TB
program staff apply analytic methods in different ways to assess program performance.
Potential  designs  are  available  that  can  be  used  to  answer  the  evaluation  questions,
and no single correct method exists. A systematic review of literature or contact with a
CDC  program  consultant  can  identify  additional  information  and  tools  useful  for
successfully  answering  evaluation  questions  of  interest.  Program  staff  should  share
lessons  learned  with  other  programs  and  consider  publishing  results  for  the  larger
public  health  community.  One  forum  available  to  all  TB  programs  is  the  TB  Program
Evaluation Network (TB PEN). TB PEN comprises state and local TB program evaluation
personnel designated as focal points (i.e., staff in each jurisdiction directly funded by
CDC who are responsible for TB program evaluation activities) and other TB program
staff  who  are  working  with  or  interested  in  program  evaluation.  TB  PEN  focal  points
participate  in  bimonthly  conference  calls  to  share  program  evaluation  successes  and
challenges to assist one another in improving the quality of their TB program activities.
The  TB  Education  and  Training  Network  (TB  ETN)  is  a  networking  initiative  that
facilitates  communication  and  collaboration  among  TB  professionals  interested  in  TB
education and training and enhances the capacity of training and education staff in TB
control  programs.  TB  PEN  collaborates  with  TB  ETN  on  a  biennial  conference  that
enables  TB  PEN  focal  points  to  learn  from  in-person  educational  sessions,  scientific
research lectures, poster presentations, and program evaluation updates at local, state,
tribal, and federal levels and from networking with program evaluation colleagues. The
TB PEN steering committee also maintains a website that contains program evaluation

and quality improvement resources (33). Top Numerous advances in TB prevention and
control have occurred within laboratory science since this report was last published in
1995.  Two  types  of  immunologic-based  test  methods  are  available  for  detecting  M.
tuberculosis infection in the United States: the Mantoux TST and IGRAs. The addition of
IGRA as a new test for TB infection has been groundbreaking. Unlike traditional TSTs,
IGRAs differentiate between infection with M. tuberculosis versus the effect of bacillus
Calmette-Guérin  (BCG)  vaccine.  TB  epidemiology  in  the  United  States  identifies  the
majority of new TB disease cases among persons from countries with high TB incidence
with  uniform  BCG  vaccination  requirements.  IGRAs  allow  identification  of  TB  infection
regardless  of  BCG  status.  However,  the  TST  is  still  a  valid  test  for  TB  infection
(Supplementary  Appendix  E;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  New  molecular
diagnostic tests identify both M. tuberculosis and genetic mutations that identify some
degree  of  potential  drug  resistance  within  hours  of  specimen  receipt,  without  waiting
for culture-based DSTs. Use of whole-genome sequencing can identify M. tuberculosis
and  genetic  mutations  associated  with  drug  resistance.  These  modalities  allow  for
earlier identification of M. tuberculosis and initiation of recommended therapy for TB,
thus resulting in decreased transmission of M. tuberculosis. However, specimens should
still be cultured for phenotypic drug susceptibility. Because available tests and methods
of analysis are constantly changing, detailed descriptions and uses are provided online
(Supplementary  Appendices;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).   TB  programs
should have access to the most updated tests, with results reported as they become
available, for managing complex cases of disease, remove persons from isolation in a
timely  fashion,  and  identify  linked  cases.  Laboratories  should  report  test  results,
including negative results, to the public health TB program in addition to the ordering
clinician.  Tests  used  for  assessing  TB  disease  and  monitoring  treatment  progress  are
explained in detail (Supplementary Appendix D; https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289),
and  their  use  is  discussed  in  the  following  section.  Top  LTBI  is  the  presence  of  M.

tuberculosis organisms (tubercle bacilli) without signs and symptoms or radiographic or
bacteriologic  evidence  of  TB  disease.  Therefore,  persons  with  LTBI  do  not  experience
clinical illness; they are asymptomatic, and their infection is not transmissible. The only
evidence of infection might be a reaction to a TST or a positive IGRA test. In persons
with LTBI, TB infection can persist for decades, and those with M. tuberculosis infection
can  remain  at  risk  for  progressing  to  TB  disease,  especially  if  the  immune  system
becomes impaired. An estimated 13 million persons have LTBI in the United States (34).
Since  the  early  1980s,  TB  prevention  and  control  in  the  United  States  has  expanded
with treatment of persons with LTBI to prevent TB disease. Approximately 80% of the
active TB disease cases in the United States are believed to be caused by reactivation
of LTBI (34,35). As TB disease rates in the United States decrease, finding and treating
persons at high risk for LTBI has become a higher priority and a cornerstone strategy
for TB elimination. LTBI treatment is important because it can substantially reduce the
risk  that  persons  infected  with  M.  tuberculosis  will  progress  to  TB  disease.  However,
LTBI treatment can be associated with adverse events; therefore, the goal of preventive
therapy  is  to  treat  those  for  whom  prophylaxis  for  LTBI  carries  substantially  more
benefit  than  potential  harm.  TB  risk  assessment  is  an  essential  TB  prevention  and
control strategy that helps detect persons with LTBI who can benefit from treatment.
Because TB risk assessment de-emphasizes testing of groups who are not at high risk
for  TB,  it  can  help  reduce  wasted  resources  and  prevent  nonessential  treatment.
Programs should pursue testing for LTBI only if diagnostic evaluation can be performed,
a course of therapy can be prescribed, and therapy is likely to be completed. Guidelines
provide recommendations for groups who should be screened, tested, and treated for
LTBI  (36,37).  USPSTF  guidelines  provide  recommendations  for  incorporating  TB
prevention  into  routine  primary  care  (26).  A  risk  assessment  based  on  local  or  state
epidemiology  of  TB  infection  and  disease  should  be  prepared  and  made  available  to
stakeholders  and  providers.  Clinical,  epidemiologic,  and  behavioral  risk  factors  for  TB

disease and infection have been documented and are included in the joint guidelines
from  the  American  Thoracic  Society  (ATS),  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America
(IDSA), and CDC. Considering these risk factors in two categories can be helpful: 1) risk
factors  for  TB  exposure  or  2)  risk  factors  for  progression  to  active  TB  disease  after
becoming  infected  (37).  TB  programs  should  retest  a  person  who  previously  tested
negative only if new risk factors occur after the previous assessment. Risk factors might
include new close contact with a patient with infectious TB or new immunosuppression
but also can include foreign residence or foreign travel in certain circumstances (e.g.,
extended duration, likely contact with persons with infectious TB, or high prevalence of
TB  in  a  travel  location).  Health  care  providers  should  check  with  local  TB  control
programs  for  recommendations  regarding  local  epidemiology,  regulations,  legal
mandates, and patient populations when setting TB testing policies (see Role of Health
Departments and Overall Planning and Policy Components) (Supplementary Appendix F;
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289). The frequency  of repeat testing  depends on  a
person’s degree of risk for exposure to TB disease as determined by locally generated
data. Facilities should compile and analyze their epidemiologic and programmatic data
and  work  with  local  and  state  health  departments  when  making  those  decisions.
Selecting  a  test  for  TB  infection  depends  on  the  situation  and  the  patient
(Supplementary  Appendix  D;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  Among  patients
with an initial negative test who are at risk for poor outcomes, use of both TSTs and
IGRAs can increase sensitivity for detecting M. tuberculosis infection. Using both tests is
not recommended unless the test that is initially used is negative. Persons who might
be considered at risk for poor outcomes include those with HIV infection, children aged
<5  years,  and  persons  with  other  immunosuppressive  conditions  (38,39).  Routine
testing  with  either  TST  or  IGRA  among  populations  at  low  risk  for  TB  infection  is  not
recommended. Based on the sensitivity and specificity of the TST and the prevalence of
TB  in  different  groups,  three  cutoff  levels  have  been  recommended  for  defining  a

positive tuberculin reaction: ≥5 mm, ≥10 mm, and ≥15 mm of induration. The criteria
for  tuberculin  skin  positivity,  by  reaction  induration  cutoff  level  and  risk  group,  are
provided  (Box  5).  QuantiFERON  test  results  are  reported  as  positive,  negative,  or
indeterminate,
 and
 T-SPOT
 test
 results
 are
 reported
 as
 positive,
 negative,
indeterminate,  or  borderline.  CDC  recommends  that  the  laboratory  provide  both
quantitative  and  qualitative  results  (39).  TB  disease  should  be  ruled  out  after  any
positive TB test, with a thorough physical examination, history, chest radiography, and
when  indicated,  bacteriologic  studies.  Determining  whether  a  patient  has  a  previous
history  of  treatment  for  LTBI  or  TB  disease  and  performing  a  risk  assessment  for  TB
infection  are  vital  for  determining  the  benefits  of  treatment  (see  Principles  for  Risk
Assessment, Testing, and Treatment for LTBI). If a patient has a positive test result and
TB  disease  is  ruled  out,  the  patient  should  be  considered  for  LTBI  treatment.  If  the
person accepts and is able to receive treatment for LTBI, the clinician should develop a
plan of treatment with the patient to ensure adherence. However, if the patient refuses
or  is  unable  to  receive  treatment  for  LTBI,  the  clinician  should  educate  the  patient
about  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  TB  disease  and  about  the  need  for  rapid  medical
evaluation  if  TB  signs  or  symptoms  occur.  Since  the  1995  publication  of  “Essential
Components  of  a  Tuberculosis  Prevention  and  Control  Program”  (1),  numerous
important  studies  of  shorter  LTBI  treatment  regimens  have  been  published.  These
studies  present  high  quality  of  evidence,  efficacy,  effectiveness  (including  better
treatment  completion  rates  and  fewer  side  effects)  supporting  the  use  of  shorter
regimens  for  LTBI  (40–44).  CDC  and  NTCA  have  recently  published  guidelines  for  the
treatment  of  LTBI  that  favor  use  of  shorter  rifamycin-based  regimens  when  possible
(45).  Many  public  health  programs  are  using  these  shorter  regimens  (Supplementary
Appendix F; https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289). Top Effective treatment of persons
requires  both  a  tailored  medical  management  plan  and  a  patient-focused  case
management plan. After disease has been verified or is strongly suspected, both plans

should be coordinated so that the most optimal care is provided to the patient, family,
and  community.  TB  control  programs  should  ensure  that  the  services  needed  for
evaluating,  treating,  and  monitoring  TB  patients  are  readily  available  in  each
community. In certain areas, these services might be provided directly by the state TB
program.  In  other  areas,  local  TB  programs  or  health  care  professionals,  with
supervision  and  consultation  from  the  city  or  state  TB  program,  provide  patients’
treatment services. The policies, procedures, and laws specified at the beginning of this
report  (see  Overall  Planning  and  Policy  Components)  provide  guidance  for  managing
care for persons with TB disease. Although patients might undergo the majority of their
evaluation  and  treatment  in  settings  other  than  the  health  department,  the  major
responsibility for monitoring and ensuring the quality of all TB-related activities in the
community  lies  with  the  health  department  as  part  of  its  duties  in  protecting  public
health.  The  public  health  goals  of  TB  patient  management  are  to  initiate  treatment
promptly  and  ensure  completion  of  effective  therapy  to  cure  disease,  reduce
transmission, and prevent development of drug-resistant TB. These goals are achieved
through case management. The TB program should have protocols in place for TB case
management and treatment (46,47). The TB control program, in conjunction with the
patient’s health care provider, is responsible for ensuring that the TB patient completes
the recommended treatment for TB disease in a timely manner. TB programs should be
familiar with and have access to new diagnostic tools (e.g., blood-based IGRAs, nucleic
acid amplification tests [NAATs], and other diagnostic tests as they become available).
The
 laboratory
 appendix
 (Supplementary
 Appendix
 D;
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289)  includes  information  regarding  specific  tests.
Sputum  and  other  specimens  from  suspected  sites  should  be  obtained  as  soon  as
possible for acid-fast bacillus smear and culture, rapid identification of M. tuberculosis
complex by using NAATs, and initial molecular testing within the limits of the guidelines
(48).  Each  patient  should  receive  a  medical  evaluation  and  chest  radiography,  with

additional  imaging  of  the  affected  area,  if  not  the  lungs.  Additional  tests,  including
assessment for HIV infection status, should be performed, depending on the patient’s
medical history and current condition. A medical regimen should be prescribed on the
basis  of  patient  clinical  and  epidemiologic  characteristics  (48).  Case  management  for
TB disease includes patient-centered activities (e.g., DOT for medications, assessment
of  side  effects,  and  patient  monitoring)  and  other  public  health  activities.  The  case
management  team  should  work  closely  with  those  providing  medical  management  to
ensure  optimal  care  for  each  patient.  Public  health  workers  in  TB  programs  play  an
integral role in helping patients complete TB treatment through the case management
process.  Case  management  provides  patient-centered  care  for  treatment  completion
and  ensures  that  all  public  health  activities  related  to  stopping  TB  transmission  are
completed.  This  includes  ensuring  that  each  patient  is  educated  about  TB  and  its
treatment, the importance of treatment adherence, and that contacts should be elicited
and  evaluated.  This  patient-centered  approach  can  help  ensure  successful  treatment
and public health outcomes because it emphasizes a tailored approach that addresses
both the patient’s clinical and social concerns. Within 3 working days after the case is
reported, a health department worker should visit the patient in the hospital or at home
to conduct an interview, initiate patient education, identify contacts, make referrals for
medical evaluation, and detect possible problems related to adherence to therapy. An
initial treatment and monitoring plan should be developed and implemented within 1
week of diagnosis. This treatment plan should be reviewed regularly and modified as
needed when additional relevant information becomes available (e.g., DST results) or
when the patient’s care is transferred from one provider to another. When developing
and implementing a treatment plan, TB programs should work closely with health care
providers from local hospitals, drug treatment centers, HIV clinics, correctional facilities,
dialysis  centers,  health  maintenance  organizations,  private  physicians’  offices,  and
other facilities where TB patients receive medical care. TB programs should fulfill their

mandated responsibilities and also respect the relationship between the patient and the
primary health care provider. Other resources describe case management for persons
with TB disease (46,47). In addition to the medical and case manager, team members
might  include  clinic  supervisors,  outreach  workers,  health  educators,  nurses,  nurse
practitioners,  physician  assistants,  pharmacists,  physicians,  and  social  workers.  The
patient is always a member of the team; family members might assist as available or
interested.  Specific  responsibilities  might  be  assigned  to  other  team  members;
however, the case manager is ultimately responsible for ensuring that needed activities
are performed. The specifics of this team, including size and number of members and
function of each member, vary by jurisdiction and local needs. Although certain patients
might  undergo  their  evaluation  and  treatment  in  settings  other  than  the  health
department  (e.g.,  hospitals  or  correctional  facilities),  the  health  department  is  legally
obligated to monitor and ensure the quality of all TB-related activities within a health
jurisdiction.  Thus,  all  TB  patients  should  be  assigned  case  managers,  whether  they
receive  TB  care  in  health  department  clinics  or  from  private  providers.  A  specific
clinician should be responsible for decisions regarding patient medications, testing, and
assessment  of  progress  throughout  treatment.  That  clinician  should  provide  medical
oversight  of  all  patient  care  and  thus  should  have  an  excellent  understanding  of  TB
disease  and  its  treatment,  the  effect  of  comorbidities  on  TB  treatment,  and
drug-to-drug  interactions  (49).  A  specific  health  care  worker  (i.e.,  a  case  manager)
should  be  assigned  primary  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  all  treatment  and  public
health activities associated with the TB patient are completed. Although one person is
assigned primary responsibility, case management can involve a team of persons who
collaborate to provide continuity of care. The case manager is responsible for ensuring
the  following  activities  are  completed  for  all  TB  patients  to  whom  they  are  assigned:
Establishing a trusting relationship with the patient; Educating the patient about TB and
its treatment; Ensuring that treatment and monitoring plans are in place; Ensuring the

patient  adheres  to  and  completes  treatment;  Identifying  contacts  of  a  patient  with
infectious TB and providing testing and treatment as needed for all contacts; Expanding
the contact investigation as necessary when results from initial investigations become
available;  and  Conducting  quality  assurance  through  routine  systematic  review  of
patient progress. Methods for promoting adherence to therapy should be tailored to the
patient’s  needs,  lifestyle,  social  support  system,  and  beliefs  about  health.  An
assessment of these factors should be included in developing a case management plan
(46,47).  TB  programs  should  educate  patients  about  the  causes  and  effects  of  TB,
dosing  and  possible  adverse  reactions  of  their  medications,  and  the  importance  of
taking their medications according to the care plan. To facilitate adherence, the plan
should  use  short-course  treatment  regimens  and  fixed-dose  combinations,  if  such
regimens  and  combinations  are  recommended  and  available.  A  welcoming  and
respectful  atmosphere  within  the  clinic  setting  is  fundamental  to  maintaining
adherence. The case manager should conduct an assessment of risk for nonadherence
to treatment. TB programs should consider treating all patients with DOT, which is the
standard of care in the United States (50). With DOT, a health care provider or other
responsible  person  observes  the  patient  swallowing  each  dose  of  anti-TB  medication.
DOT can be administered with daily or intermittent regimens and can be administered
to  patients  in  an  office  or  a  clinic  setting  or  by  an  outreach  worker  in  the  patient’s
home,  place  of  employment,  school,  or  other  mutually  agreed-upon  place.  In  certain
instances,  DOT  might  be  administered  by  the  staff  of  correctional  facilities  or  drug
treatment programs, dialysis center staff, home health care personnel, staff of maternal
and  child  health  facilities,  or  responsible  community  members.  New  technologic
methods  (e.g.,  video  DOT)  might  be  used  to  promote  adherence  to  treatment  when
in-person DOT is not feasible (51,52). Incentives and enablers should be available for
enhancing adherence to therapy. An incentive is an inducement or reward that serves
as motivation for a desired action (e.g., a gift card for a local shop after completion of

the first 2 weeks of treatment or a small toy for a child who takes the medication). An
enabler  is  an  item  or  action  that  removes  barriers  for  achieving  a  desired  outcome
(e.g.,  transportation  passes  to  get  to  the  clinic  or  assistance  with  rent  payments  to
prevent a person from becoming homeless). Health care professionals, including private
practitioners, who become aware of a TB patient who has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to adhere to a prescribed treatment regimen should immediately consult
the  health  department.  The  TB  program  can  assist  in  evaluating  the  patient  for  the
causes  of  nonadherence  to  therapy  and  provide  assistance  (e.g.,  outreach  worker
services)  to  enable  the  patient  to  complete  the  recommended  therapy.  If  the  patient
still does not adhere to treatment, the health department should take action based on
local and state laws and regulations. This entails issuing a health officer order for DOT
or seeking court-ordered DOT or detention for patients who are unwilling or unable to
complete  treatment  and  who  have  infectious  TB  or  for  those  who  are  at  risk  for
becoming  infectious  or  experiencing  drug-resistant  TB.  A  list  of  recommended  legal
resources  for  TB  programs  has  been  developed  (19).  Additional  services  might  be
needed to facilitate continuity and completion of therapy. Social workers, interpreters,
and referral sources should be available in the clinic or easily accessible to the patients.
To  ensure  that  patients  receive  treatment  until  they  are  cured,  TB  programs  should
make use of available legal authority and facilities available to isolate and treat patients
who  have  infectious  TB  (see  Overall  Planning  and  Policy  Components).  When  all  less
restrictive measures have failed, TB programs should be prepared to use any available
legal authority to detain patients unwilling or unable to complete their treatment. This
authority also might apply to nonadherent patients who no longer have infectious TB
but  whose  disease  might  again  become  infectious  or  develop  drug  resistance.
Procedures  and  plans  should  be  established  to  ensure  that  patients  in  isolation  or
detention  have  safeguards  for  due  process  (e.g.,  how  to  request  release  from
detention)  and  have  their  basic  needs  met  (e.g.,  food,  basic  supplies,  and  other

necessities). Although the majority of medical treatment plans for TB disease begin with
the  standard  four-drug  regimen  (rifampin,  isoniazid,  pyrazinamide,  and  ethambutol
[RIPE]),  patient-specific  drug  regimens  should  be  considered  on  the  basis  of  the
patient’s history. For example, a history of exposure to persons with multidrug-resistant
TB (MDR TB) might change the initial medication recommendations. A history of bladder
cancer  treatment  in  a  patient  with  disseminated  disease  might  lead  the  clinician  to
consider that the cause of the TB disease is Mycobacterium bovis BCG rather than M.
tuberculosis.  Clinicians  should  take  a  thorough  medical  history,  conduct  a  complete
physical examination to detect TB disease outside the lungs, and assess the patient’s
history of exposure to TB disease and other factors in the patient’s history to select the
best initial drug regimen. Subsequent decisions about the patient’s regimen depend on
the  results  of  drug  susceptibilities,  side  effects  experienced  by  the  patient,  disease
progression,  and  any  new  information  about  the  patient’s  history  and  exposures  that
are  discovered  after  the  initial  evaluation.  As  soon  as  patient  specimens  and
bacteriology are obtained and TB disease is diagnosed or suspected, a clinician should
start  treatment  and  ensure  the  TB  case  is  reported  to  the  health  department.  TB
programs  should  send  smear-positive  respiratory  specimens  for  TB  identification  and
molecular  diagnostic  testing  to  test  for  genetic  mutations  that  are  surrogates  for
drug-resistant TB (48). TB programs should start TB treatment either empirically or on
the basis of laboratory findings such as molecular analysis or DST results. Because the
majority of TB disease in the United States is pansusceptible, patients usually can be
started  empirically  on  the  standard  four-drug  treatment  regimen  noted  previously  in
the  most  recent  version  of  the  ATS/CDC/IDSA  TB  treatment  guidelines  (48).  Clinic
services provided by TB programs, if available, should be accessible and acceptable to
community members served by the clinic. Clinic hours should be convenient and ideally
might include evening or weekend hours for persons who work or attend school. The
clinic should be easily accessible by public transportation, or transportation should be

provided, if possible. Intervals between the time of referral and the time of appointment
and  waiting  times  in  the  clinic  should  be  kept  to  a  minimum.  In  busy  TB  clinics  or
multipurpose  clinics,  priority  should  be  given  to  persons  with  TB  disease  or  being
evaluated  for  TB  disease  and  to  persons  receiving  TB  medications.  Clinic  services,
including  diagnostic  evaluation,  medications,  and  transportation,  should  be  provided
regardless  of  the  patient’s  ability  to  pay.  The  clinic  should  have  staff  who  speak  the
same  language  and  have  similar  cultural  and  socioeconomic  backgrounds  as  the
community served by the clinic, or the clinic should employ persons trained to work in
cross-cultural  settings.  Language  interpretation  services  should  be  available.  Expert
medical consultation should be available for management of all TB patients, including
those  who  have  drug-resistant  TB.  These  consultative  services  should  be  available  to
the TB program and health care providers in the community. The consultation might be
provided  by  a  staff  member  of  the  TB  program  or  by  a  local  or  regional  consultant
collaborating  with  the  health  department.  Consultative  services  are  also  provided
through CDC’s TB Centers of Excellence (53). MDR TB should be considered in patients
with of a history of previous TB treatment or who are from a country with high MDR TB
rates (37). Treatment initiation decisions can be guided by results of molecular testing.
Molecular testing results might be obtained by sending specimens to the CDC Molecular
Detection  of  Drug  Resistance  (MDDR)  service  (54)  and  public  health  laboratories.
Specimens might also be sent to National Jewish Health in Denver, Colorado, or to other
laboratories,  for  a  fee.  Certain  instruments  can  test  for  isoniazid  resistance,  as
recommended by WHO. Rifampin resistance can be tested by the GeneXpert or through
MDDR  testing.  Newer  drugs  (e.g.,  bedaquiline)  have  been  approved  for  MDR  TB
treatment. Drugs that are approved for other bacterial infections (e.g., fluoroquinolones
and linezolid) also are important drugs for treating MDR TB. Although shorter treatment
regimens for MDR TB are being investigated, describing those trials is beyond the scope
of  this  report.  TB  controllers  should  keep  abreast  of  new  developments  related  to

drug-susceptible and drug-resistant TB. Medical consultation should be sought for any
questions  related  to  TB  treatment  and  especially  for  decisions  regarding  MDR  TB
treatment  regimens.  Certain  jurisdictions  have  specific  MDR  TB  consultative  services;
consultation  might  also  be  obtained  from  the  TB  Centers  of  Excellence.  A  guide  to
testing  and  treatment  for  drug-resistant  TB  is  available  from  the  Curry  International
Tuberculosis  Center’s  website  (55).  On  the  basis  of  broad  individual  patient  data
meta-analyses, newer guidelines for treating drug-resistant TB have been developed by
ATS,  CDC,  the  European  Respiratory  Society,  and  IDSA  (56).  A  system  should  be  in
place to facilitate referral of TB patients for evaluation and treatment of other medical
problems,  including  those  conditions  that  can  affect  the  course  or  outcome  of  TB
treatment (e.g., HIV infection, underlying malignancy, diabetes mellitus, and substance
abuse).  Consultants  should  see  referred  patients  in  a  timely  fashion,  and  the
consultant’s assessment and recommendations should be made available promptly to
the  referring  health  care  provider.  If  patients  receive  care  in  more  than  one  setting,
treatment  should  be  coordinated  with  the  other  health  care  providers  to  ensure
continuity and completion of therapy, minimize drug interactions, and avoid duplication
of efforts. The TB program takes primary responsibility for ensuring TB treatment and
monitoring  for  adherence.  TB  programs  should  refer  patients  with  infectious  TB  with
recommended respiratory precautions and notify the receiving health care provider or
transport  personnel  that  the  patient  has  an  aerosol-transmissible  disease.  The  TB
program and all clinical settings should develop and implement protocols for ensuring
rapid  reporting  of  known  or  suspected  TB  cases  to  the  health  department  having
jurisdiction.  Regardless  of  the  patient’s  ability  to  pay,  TB  programs  should  make
accommodations  available  for  any  TB  patient  requiring  inpatient  hospital  care  for
TB-related  conditions.  The  facility  should  have  effective  infection  control  measures  in
place to prevent transmission of TB infection within the hospital (18). For example, the
hospital  should  have  provisions  that  allow  patients  with  suspected  or  confirmed

infectious  TB  disease  to  be  separated  from  other  patients.  Although  ideally  such
patients  should  be  placed  in  an  airborne  infection  isolation  room,  if  such  a  room  is
unavailable, a room with effective general ventilation should be used, with use of air
cleaning  technologies  (e.g.,  a  portable  high-efficiency  particulate  air  [HEPA]  filtration
system). Medical staff knowledgeable about the management of TB patients should be
available  to  assist  in  patient  care  while  the  patient  is  hospitalized.  In  addition,
medications should be available in the facility so that the patient can start or continue
therapy  in  the  hospital.  Diagnostic  services  (e.g.,  radiology  and  mycobacteriology)
should  be  available  for  monitoring  the  patient  for  the  response  to  treatment.  The
patient  should  also  be  monitored  for  adverse  events  and  for  other  existing  or  new
medical conditions. Inpatient Care. Staff at inpatient settings might be unfamiliar with
standards  of  TB  treatment  (e.g.,  DOT  for  all  medications).  Ingestion  might  not  be
documented,  or  the  doses  might  not  be  counted  in  the  overall  dose  count  for
treatment; therefore, the TB program and the patient are best served by the inpatient
staff performing DOT and documenting actual ingestion of the medications. As soon as
possible after admission, a representative from the TB program should visit the patient
in the hospital to identify contacts, collect information for the initial treatment plan, and
ensure that no obstacles to the patient’s follow-up care exist. Discharge planning from
the hospital begins as soon as the patient is admitted. TB programs should work with
the hospital to facilitate TB patient discharge. Some jurisdictions allow the discharge of
patients with infectious TB into the community, provided that DOT has been initiated
and  that  the  patient  is  tolerating  medications,  is  being  discharged  to  a  setting  that
facilitates continued care and treatment while minimizing potential exposure of others,
and has an appointment for follow-up. A contract between the patient and the health
department  to  maintain  noninstitutional  home  isolation  might  be  required.  A
hospitalized patient should be reported to the health department; in many jurisdictions,
approval from the health department must be obtained before discharge (57–59). Other

Settings: Coordinating Care with Other Health Care Providers and Facilities. TB patients
often  receive  care  in  multiple  settings,  including  HIV  clinics,  drug  treatment  centers,
correctional facilities, hospitals, nursing homes, or primary care clinics. When patients
move  among  these  different  settings,  continuity  and  completion  of  treatment  can  be
compromised, unless a system for coordinating care exists. To provide and coordinate
continuous  TB  treatment  and  to  facilitate  transfers  of  care,  TB  programs  should
communicate  regularly  with  providers  and  facilities  involved  in  TB  patient  care,
including  hospitals,  infection  control  practitioners,  private  practitioners,  community
clinics,  correctional  facilities,  homeless  shelters,  and  drug  treatment  centers.  Top
Contact  investigation  is  a  key  component  of  any  TB  program,  and  the  purpose  is  to
actively  identify  additional  persons  who  might  have  TB  disease  or  LTBI.  The  process
involves interviewing persons with TB disease to identify anyone with whom they have
close, prolonged contact. This might include persons sharing the same household, close
friends,  or  close  work  contacts.  After  these  persons  are  identified,  they  undergo  an
evaluation  that  might  include  LTBI  testing,  ruling  out  TB  disease,  and  identifying
persons  with  a  history  of  previous  TB  disease  or  infection.  Contacts  are  tested
according  to  CDC  and  NTCA  guidelines  (60).  Contacts  who  have  a  positive  test  (e.g.,
TST or IGRA) or have suspected or confirmed TB disease are offered treatment for LTBI
or  TB  disease  as  indicated.  Many  of  these  persons  receive  case  management  until
therapy  completion.  Contact  investigations  encompass  all  aspects  of  TB  control,
including  surveillance,  case  identification,  case  management,  infection  control,  and
prevention.  Protocols  should  be  in  place  to  assist  TB  program  staff  in  performing
contact  investigations,  including  determination  and  documentation  of  the  infectious
period  to  establish  priorities  for  the  investigation.  Contact  investigations  should  be
conducted by using a concentric circle model, with an initial focus on those at highest
risk.  Persons  at  highest  risk  include  those  with  prolonged  exposure  to  an  infectious
person,  those  at  risk  for  progression  to  active  TB  disease,  or  those  at  high  risk  for

transmitting disease to others. The priority, speed, and extent of a contact investigation
should be guided by the likelihood of transmission on the basis of the characteristics of
the  source  patient,  environment,  and  exposed  persons.  This  activity  can  identify
undiagnosed active TB cases, in addition to persons with LTBI. TB program staff should
begin a contact investigation as soon as they are notified of a suspected or confirmed
case  of  infectious  TB.  A  contact  investigation  is  initiated  for  suspected  or  confirmed
cases  of  respiratory  TB  (i.e.,  pulmonary,  laryngeal,  or  pleural,  when  indicated).  To
identify persons accurately as contacts, program staff should determine the infectious
period  for  the  index  patient.  An  infectious  period  is  calculated  to  identify  the  period
during  which  the  exposure  is  most  intense  (on  the  basis  of  patient  clinical
characteristics)  and  when  it  stops  (on  the  basis  of  treatment  initiation).  TB  programs
should calculate an 8- to 10-week window period. Preventive treatment of presumed TB
infection is recommended during the window period for contacts who are at increased
risk
 for
 progression
 to
 TB
 disease
 (i.e.,
 children
 aged
 <5
 years
 and
immunocompromised  persons).  Decisions  to  treat  persons  beyond  the  window  period
might  be  made  for  certain  persons.  TB  programs  should  communicate  with  providers
who are not in the health department. Contacts might choose to be tested by their own
provider  rather  than  by  TB  program  staff.  In  that  instance,  communicating  with
providers  to  ensure  exposed  persons  are  evaluated  in  a  timely  manner  and  retested
after the window period, if indicated, is crucial. TB programs should assess transmission
after  evaluation  and  testing  of  the  closest  contacts,  with  expansion  of  a  contact
investigation, if indicated. If expansion is indicated, the next circle of contacts might be
in  congregate  settings  such  as  workplaces,  schools,  correctional  facilities,  hospital  or
health  care  settings,  and  shelters  or  other  settings  providing  services  for  homeless
persons. These investigations can be complicated and can include educational sessions
for  exposed  and  unexposed  persons,  communication  with  senior-level  health
department  staff,  and  possible  interest  by  media  outlets.  Ultimately,  ensuring  that

exposed  persons  are  evaluated  for  TB  infection  and  disease  is  part  of  the  health
department’s mandated responsibility for protecting the public’s health. TB genotyping
is  a  laboratory-based  approach  used  for  analyzing  the  genetic  material  of  M.
tuberculosis that distinguishes different M. tuberculosis strains (61,62). When combined
with epidemiologic data, genotyping can help identify persons with TB disease involved
in  the  same  chain  of  recent  transmission.  TB  genotyping  helps  distinguish  between
persons whose TB disease is the result of TB infection that was acquired in the past and
those  with  recently  or  newly  acquired  infection  with  development  of  TB  disease.  TB
genotyping  can  be  helpful  during  a  conventional  contact  investigation.  Use  of
genotyping can discover unsuspected transmission associations between TB patients by
identifying
 unknown
 transmission
 settings
 or
 interjurisdictional
 transmission.
Genotyping  can  also  establish  criteria  for  outbreak-related  case  definitions,  identify
additional persons with TB disease involved in an outbreak, determine completeness of
contact  investigations,  distinguish  recent  reinfection  from  relapse,  and  detect
laboratory cross-contamination. When two or more M. tuberculosis isolates are matched
by  genotyping  methods,  they  are  referred  to  as  a  genotype  cluster.  Members  of  the
same genotype cluster are assumed to have the same strain, which can be a surrogate
for  recent  transmission  and  the  need  for  further  epidemiologic  investigation.
Genotyping  information,  epidemiologic  linkages,  and  DST  results  can  help  distinguish
recent  transmission  from  reactivation  of  TB  infection.  Analysis  of  clustered  cases  can
assist in prioritization of resources for further epidemiologic investigation. Clusters can
become outbreaks if transmission is ongoing in the community. Members of the same
genotype  cluster  are  assumed  to  have  the  same  strain,  which  might  indicate  recent
transmission  and  the  need  for  further  epidemiologic  investigation.  Investigation  of
patient  demographic,  geographic,  and  clinical  data;  genotyping;  and  DST  results  can
help  determine  epidemiologic  links  between  patients.  A  TB  outbreak  investigation  is
initiated  when  transmission  that  is  higher  than  expected  is  detected  given  the

population demographics, the local epidemiology in a health jurisdiction, or the strain
genotype. An outbreak investigation typically requires public health resources beyond
those that are routinely needed for TB control. TB outbreaks are defined on the basis of
local  epidemiology  of  the  jurisdiction  and  are  relative  to  the  local  context.  A
recommended definition consistent with either of the set of the following criteria can be
used: 1) two or more contacts are identified as having active TB disease, or 2) two or
more  cases  that  have  occurred  within  1  year  of  one  another  are  discovered  to  be
linked. An outbreak investigation is conducted urgently and places greater demands on
the  health  department.  To  the  extent  possible,  investigations  should  be  guided  by
surveillance  data  that  include  all  available  clinical,  epidemiologic,  and  genotyping
information.  The  decision  to  initiate  an  investigation  should  be  discussed  with
senior-level staff to ensure that the necessary resources will be available. Public health
programs  have  an  important  role  in  identifying  and  investigating  laboratory
cross-contamination, which can also be referred to as a false-positive investigation. A
false-positive  M.  tuberculosis  specimen  is  a  positive  culture  that  is  not  the  result  of
disease  but  is  caused  by  contamination  of  a  clinical  device,  a  clerical  error,  or
laboratory cross-contamination during processing. Identification of cross-contamination
provides an opportunity to correct equipment or processes that are responsible for the
false-positive  culture,  correct  an  erroneous  medical  diagnosis,  and  discontinue
unnecessary TB treatment and contact or source case investigations. Identification of
cross-contamination  also  allows  for  removal  of  data  related  to  a  patient’s  incorrect
diagnosis from local and national surveillance systems. False-positive cultures might be
identified through review of patients with only a single positive culture reported, review
of  genotyping  results,  or  clinician  suspicion.  Source  case  investigations  focus  on
identifying the source of infection or disease for young children (i.e., aged ≤5 years). TB
disease in a U.S.-born child who has never lived or traveled outside the United States is
a  sentinel  event.  The  assumption  is  that  any  child  with  TB  must  have  been  exposed

recently to someone close to the child and that the person likely has unrecognized TB
disease. Young children with TB usually do not transmit TB to others, and their contacts
are less likely to be infected because of exposure to them (56). Seeking a source case
follows  the  same  overall  procedures  as  a  standard  contact  investigation.  Parents  or
guardians, referred to as associates, usually are the best informants. Attention should
be  focused  on  all  associates  who  have  symptoms  of  TB  disease.  A  source  case
investigation  should  begin  with  the  closest  associates  (e.g.,  household  members).
Source case investigations should also be considered for children aged ≤5 years with
one or more risk factors for LTBI, most often birth or extended stay in a high-prevalence
country, who test positive for LTBI. These investigations allow TB programs to identify
high-risk households where persons might have undiagnosed or untreated LTBI or TB
disease. Although the yield for finding TB disease in these investigations is usually low,
family  members  might  have  LTBI  and  be  candidates  for  treatment.  Each  jurisdiction
should  determine  its  policy  for  conducting  source  case  investigations  on  the  basis  of
available  resources.  Top  TB  programs  should  provide  education  and  training  in  the
clinical and public health aspects of TB for all TB program staff. Resources are available
to
 assist
 TB
 programs
 with
 fulfilling
 training
 and
 education
 responsibilities
(Supplementary  Appendix  G;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  TB  program  staff
should receive education at regular intervals regarding their particular responsibilities
in  the  program  and  should  demonstrate  proficiency  in  those  areas.  Training  needs
should be tailored to the type of TB staff receiving training (e.g., clinical staff, public
health nurses, TB program managers, communicable disease investigators, community
health workers, or health educators). The following aspects should be included in staff
education  and  training:  TB  knowledge  and  education.  TB  programs  should  provide
tailored training and education for all TB program staff at the time of employment, at
regular intervals during their employment, and as needed to ensure that staff maintain
an accurate, updated level of knowledge about TB infection and disease, diagnosis and

treatment,  public  health  practice,  management  and  evaluation  skills,  laboratory  test
algorithms  and  methods,  and  other  related  topics.  Many  training  and  education
products  have  been  developed  and  made  available  through  CDC  (Supplementary
Appendix  G;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  Staff  should  receive  ongoing
education on the basis of their particular responsibilities and be knowledgeable about
other  staff  responsibilities  (e.g.,  use  of  interpreters).  All  staff  should  also  receive
cultural-sensitivity training. The Patients’ Charter for Tuberculosis Care (63) describes
patients’  rights  and  responsibilities  and  should  be  made  available  to  staff  and  to
patients  in  languages  spoken  by  the  patient  population,  if  available.  Local  and  state
epidemiology  of  TB  and  emergence  of  new  populations  or  settings  of  high  risk  also
might necessitate additional training or retraining of staff. Periodic needs assessment.
TB  programs  should  undertake  staff  training  needs  assessments.  These  assessments
should  include  a  determination  of  the  practitioners’  knowledge,  skills,  and  attitudes
regarding  any  planned  TB  control  interventions.  Contact  investigation  training.  TB
programs  should  provide  staff  training  regarding  how  to  conduct  a  contact  interview
and  how  to  conduct  a  contact  investigation.  The  interrelated  tasks  in  a  contact
investigation require personnel in the health department to fulfill multiple functions and
skills.  The  education  needs  for  all  aspects  of  the  investigation  process,  including
medical  abstraction,  patient  interviewing,  cultural  competency,  maintaining  patient
confidentiality,  and  how  to  perform  TSTs,  should  be  assessed  continuously.  TB
surveillance. TB programs should ensure that relevant staff understand the methods for
performing  optimal  TB  surveillance,  including  active  and  passive  surveillance  and
validation.  Patient  confidentiality.  Confidentiality  is  essential  in  several  of  the  core
components of a TB control program. Health care personnel should be educated about
confidentiality  concerns  that  are  relevant  during  encounters  between  patients  and
health  care  personnel  and  for  collecting,  managing,  and  sharing  data  related  to  TB
patients. Cohort review. TB program staff should understand the methods and content

and have the skills needed to perform cohort reviews. Evaluation. TB programs should
ensure that staff understand the principles of evaluation, the evaluation process, and
methods needed. TB programs should provide comprehensive and tailored information
about TB to public and private audiences, including health care providers in private and
community settings, other staff at community health centers and hospitals, academic
institutions,  medical  professional  organizations,  community-based  organizations,
correctional  facilities,  and  civil  surgeons.  Educational  activities  should  be  tailored  to
these  intended  audiences.   Health  Care  Provider  Education.  Education  and
communication  should  be  prepared  for  health  care  providers  to  improve  their
knowledge  and  awareness  of  TB  and  to  guide  access  to  competent  clinical  services.
Health  care  provider  education  should  include  local  TB  reporting  laws,  including
reporting procedures for those suspected of having TB; current recommendations for TB
diagnosis,  treatment,  and  management;  vital  elements  that  should  be  applied  to
prevent  and  control  TB  in  different  settings  and  among  populations  at  risk;  and
communication  linkages  with  public  health  for  specialized  TB  clinical  support  and
resources  for  shared  TB  case  management,  as  needed.  Community-Based  Education.
Community  leaders  and  health  policymakers,  including  public  health  officials,
advocates, and other community members, should be well-informed about the need to
communicate  and  address  concerns  as  they  arise.  Important  components  of  this
education include local TB epidemiology, including drug resistance and populations at
high  risk;  the  basics  of  TB  diagnosis  and  treatment;  the  need  for  partnering  with  the
local public health TB sector to facilitate access to services for target populations; the
need for advocating to support TB patients and the public health sector; and the need
for coordinating with the public health sector to develop educational materials tailored
to local populations. Education of patients and their families by clinicians, TB program
staff, and trusted community members is widely believed to promote acceptance and
adherence  to  recommended  TB  prevention  and  treatment  activities  and  legal

implications;  however,  a  defined  need  exists  for  more  quality  trials  evaluating
educational interventions with patients and their families, both for active TB and LTBI
(64).  Such  education  can  influence  patients’  decision-making  regarding  whether  to
accept  and  complete  treatment  (65).  TB  programs  should  enlist  community-based
organizations  and  other  key  informants,  as  needed,  to  determine  the  health  beliefs,
norms,  and  values  of  communities  at  high  risk  in  their  jurisdictions.  An  interpreter
should  be  used  when  the  patient  and  health  care  provider  do  not  speak  the  same
language.  Education  efforts  should  include  print  and  electronic  materials  that  are
nonstigmatizing and sensitive to the patient’s culture, language, age, and reading level.
Educational  materials  should  be  written  in  plain  language,  be  understandable  and
visually  appealing,  and  be  provided  in  the  patient’s  language,  if  available.  These
materials  should  include  information  about  TB  and  expected  outcomes  of  treatment;
timeline for course of treatment, sputum samples, release from isolation, and return to
work;  infectiousness  and  infection  control;  drugs,  drug  management,  potential  drug
toxicity,  common  side  effects,  and  drug  resistance;  contact  investigation;  DOT;
potential  legal  implications;  other  aspects  of  patient  care,  as  needed;  and  relevant
information reinforcement. Top TB elimination cannot be accomplished by public health
efforts  alone.  Because  WHO  estimates  that  approximately  25%  of  the  world  has  LTBI
(66), considerable participation from traditional and nontraditional partners is required.
Traditional partners include clinicians, community health centers, and lung associations.
Nontraditional  partners  include  cultural  associations,  religious  organizations,  minority
health  groups,  public  service  organizations,  and  others.  Review  and  analysis  of  TB
program  data  will  assist  in  identifying  potential  partners.  Relationships  should  be
established  between  the  TB  control  program  and  partners  of  interest  (18),  and  each
relationship  might  be  initiated  by  the  partner  or  the  TB  control  program.  Partners
should  collaborate in  establishing  mutual goals. Defining  mutual goals is an  essential
element  in  the  partnership  for  TB  prevention  and  control  and  requires  group-specific

goals.  After  these  goals  are  established,  strategies  for  implementation  can  be
developed.  Any  implementation  strategy  should  include  methods  for  evaluating  each
intervention’s  success  or  failure.  Developing  partnerships,  identifying  and  supporting
mutual  goals,  and  creating  and  implementing  a  plan  for  TB  prevention  and  control
require  time,  effort,  and  resources.  Theories  and  practices  are  available  for  guiding
these  efforts,  and  health  departments  often  have  education  programs  that  can  offer
assistance.  All  partnerships  and  collaborations  are  specific  to  the  program.  Although
partnerships  and  collaboration  can  be  challenging  to  build  and  maintain,  they  are
essential for TB elimination in the United States (18). Top Despite a sustained decrease
in TB disease incidence in the United States from the early 1950s through 2020, with
the existing tools, TB will not be eliminated by 2050 or before, as thought possible by
WHO  for  low-incidence  countries  (4).  Therefore,  increasing  efforts  and  resources  is
essential for combating and eliminating TB in the United States and globally. Research,
including  at  the  local,  national,  and  international  levels,  is  needed  for  answering
questions  that  can  lead  to  TB  elimination  worldwide.  Clinical  and  basic  research  are
essential for providing improvements in TB diagnosis and treatment and for evaluating
the  accuracy  and  effectiveness  of  tests  and  treatments.  Programs  should  take  every
opportunity to participate in local, national, and international research based on local
capacity. Local and state statistics can help researchers identify questions suitable for
study  at  the  local,  state,  or  tribal  level  (see  Program  Evaluation  and  Quality
Improvement). For information regarding CDC TB studies, see CDC’s TB website (67); in
addition,  a  summary  of  research  activities  and  needs  is  described  (Supplementary
Appendix  H;  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).  Top  State  and  local  health
departments  have  the  primary  responsibility  for  preventing  and  controlling  TB.  This
report provides an introduction for TB controllers regarding the essential components of
a  public  health  TB  prevention,  control,  and  elimination  program  and  is  intended  as  a
reference tool to assist in the broad spectrum of activities that are essential for all U.S.

jurisdictions to progress toward and eventually achieve TB elimination. ACET and NTCA
have  prepared  this  report  to  provide  and  update  national  standards  for  use  by  and
assessment  of  individual  TB  control  programs  by  TB  control  program  managers,
policymakers, and other persons evaluating TB programs.  This report also can be used
to assist local programs in obtaining and maintaining adequate resources for TB control
activities.  TB control program managers should continue in their collective efforts to
incorporate  each  of  the  components  described  in  this  report  into  their  program
activities.  Top  Eric  Brenner,  MD,  University  of  South  Carolina  School  of  Public  Health;
Roque Miramontes, MPH, Thomas Navin, MD, Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, CDC;
David Warshauer, PhD, Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene. Membership as of April
2019  Chair:  Barbara  Cole,  MSN,  Riverside  County  Department  of  Public  Health,
Riverside,  California.  Executive  Secretary:  Hazel  D.  Dean,  ScD,  National  Center  for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia. Members: Ana
M. Alvarez, MD, University of Florida College of Medicine, Jacksonville; Lisa Y. Armitige,
MD, PhD, University of Texas Health Center at Tyler, San Antonio; Robert Belknap, MD,
Denver  Public  Health,  Colorado;  Jennifer  Flood,  MD,  California  Department  of  Health
Services, Richmond; David J. Horne, MD, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle;  Robert  C.  Horsburgh,  Jr.,  MD,  Boston  University  School  of  Public  Health,
Massachusetts; Lixia Liu, PhD, Indiana State Department of Health, Indianapolis; Jeffrey
R.  Starke,  MD,  Baylor  College  of  Medicine  and  Texas  Children’s  Hospital,  Houston;
Zelalem Temesgen, MD, Mayo Clinic Center for Tuberculosis, Rochester, Minnesota. Ex
Officio  Members:  Naomi  Aronson,  MD,  Uniformed  Services  University  of  Health
Sciences,  U.S.  Department  of  Defense,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Amy  S.  Bloom,  MD,  US
Agency  for  International  Development,  Washington,  DC;  Ulana  Bodnar,  MD,  U.S.
Department  of  Justice,  Washington,  DC;  Sarah  Bur,  MPH,  Federal  Bureau  of  Prisons,
Washington, DC; Anthony Campbell, DO, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Karen L. Elkins, PhD, Food and Drug Administration,

Silver Spring, Maryland; Diana Elson, DrPH, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
Washington,  DC;  Letha  Healey,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration,
Rockville,  Maryland;  Jonathan  Iralu,  MD,  Indian  Health  Service,  Gallup,  New  Mexico;
Mamodikoe  Makhene,  MD,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Stephen
Martin,  CDC,  Morgantown,  West  Virginia;  Thomas  A.  Nerad,  PhD,  Occupational  Safety
and  Health  Administration,  Washington,  DC;  Gary  A.  Roselle,  MD,  U.S.  Department  of
Veteran  Affairs,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  Liaison  Representatives:  Council  of  State  and
Territorial Health Officers, Shama Desai Ahuja, PhD, New York, New York; Stop TB USA,
Robert  Benjamin,  MD,  Washington,  DC;  RESULTS,  David  Bryden,  Washington,  DC;
American  Thoracic  Society,  Fran  Du  Melle,  MS,  New  York,  New  York;  Pacific  Island
Health Officers Association, Mayleen J. Ekiek, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia;
National  TB  Controllers  Association,  Diana  Fortune,  Smyrna,  Georgia;  Association  of
State and Territorial Health Officials, John Hellerstedt, MD, Arlington, Virginia; American
Medical  Association,  Ilse  Levin,  DO,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Treatment  Action  Group,
Surajkumar  B.  Madoori,  MPH,  MSJ,  MA,  New  York,  New  York;  National  Commission  on
Correctional Health Care, Robert E. Morris, MD, Chicago, Illinois; Public Health Agency of
Canada,  Howard  Njoo,  MD,  Ottawa,  Ontario;  American  College  of  Chest  Physicians,
Amee  S.  Patrawalla,  MD,  Glenview,  Illinois;  U.S.-Mexico  Border  Health  Commission,
Gudelia  Rangel,  PhD,  El  Paso,  Texas;  American  Lung  Association,  Susan  J.  Rappaport,
MPH,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America,  Susan  M.  Ray,  MD,
Arlington, Virginia; International Union Against TB and Lung Disease, Randal Reves, MD,
Paris,  France;  Association  for  Professionals  in  Infection  Control,  Susan  Ruwe,  MSN,
Arlington, Virginia; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Michael L. Tapper,
MD,  Arlington,  Virginia;  National  Medical  Association,  Lornel  G.  Tompkins,  MD,  Silver
Spring,  Maryland;  National  Health  Care  for  the  Homeless  Council,  Bobby  Watts,
Nashville,  Tennessee;  Association  of  Public  Health  Laboratories,  Daphne  Ware,  PhD,
Silver  Spring,  Maryland.  Membership  as  of  April  2019  President:  Diana  Fortune,  New

Mexico  Department  of  Health,  Santa  Fe.  Executive  Director:  Donna  Wegener,  MA,
National  Tuberculosis  Controllers  Association,  Smyrna,  Georgia.  Board  Members:  John
Bernardo,  MD,  Massachusetts  Department  of  Public  Health,  Jamaica  Plains;  Janette
Candido,  Illinois  Department  of  Public  Health,  Springfield;  Peter  Davidson,  PhD,
Michigan  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Lansing;  Peter  Dupree,  MPH,
Colorado  Department  of  Public  Health  and  Environment,  Denver;  Eric  Hawkins,  MPH,
Indiana  State  Department  of  Health,  Indianapolis;  Sandra  Morris,  MPH,  Texas
Department of State Health Services, Austin; Leonard Mukasa, MBChB, PhD, Arkansas
Department  of  Health,  Little  Rock;  Diana  Nilsen,  MD,  New  York  City  Department  of
Health  and  Mental  Hygiene,  Long  Island  City,  New  York;  Dee  Pritschet,  MLS,  North
Dakota  Department  of  Health,  Bismarck;  Caitlin  Reed,  MD,  Olive  View–University  of
California  at  Los  Angeles  Inpatient  TB  Unit,  California;  Kristin  Rounds,  South  Dakota
Department  of  Health,  Pierre;  Jon  Warkentin,  MD,  Tennessee  Department  of  Health,
Nashville;  Suzanne  Wilson,  MPH,  West  Virginia  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Resources,  Charleston;  Patricia  Woods,  MSN,  New  Jersey  Global  TB  Institute,  Newark.
Top  Corresponding  author:  Terence  Chorba,  MD,  Division  of  Tuberculosis  Elimination,
National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC. Telephone:
404-639-0909;  E-mail:  tlc2@cdc.gov.  Top  1Riverside  County  Department  of  Public
Health, Riverside, California; 2New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene,
Long  Island  City,  New  York;  3National  Tuberculosis  Controllers  Association,  Smyrna,
Georgia; 4Stop TB USA, Washington, DC; 5New Mexico Department of Health, Santa Fe,
New Mexico; 6Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC Top 
 All  authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  International  Committee  of  Medical
Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts
of interest were disclosed. Top Top  
Role  of  public  health  departments  Identify  the  unique  role  and  responsibilities  of  the

public  health  department  in  tuberculosis  (TB)  treatment  and  prevention.  Overall
planning  and  policy  components  Develop  an  overall  TB  control  strategy,  including
written  policies  and  procedures  to  provide  guidance  and  oversight  to  facilities  and
practitioners  involved  in  TB  control.  Surveillance  and  reporting  of  persons  with
suspected  or  confirmed  TB  disease  Maintain  a  surveillance  system  for  timely  and
accurate  reporting  of  persons  with  suspected  or  confirmed  TB  disease.  Data
management, analysis, and use Conduct routine data collection and analysis of trends
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  program,  and  apply  the  results  to  policy,  planning,  and
prevention  efforts.  Program  evaluation  and  quality  improvement  Evaluate  programs,
both  internally  and  externally,  to  provide  guidance  for  improvement.  Laboratory  and
other  testing  Maintain  access  to  laboratory  and  radiology  tests  recommended  for  TB
disease, drug resistance, and TB infection. Identification, management, and treatment
of  persons  with  latent  TB  infection  Identify,  manage,  and  treat  contacts  and  selected
other  persons  infected  with  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis.  Identification,  management,
and treatment of persons with TB disease Manage persons with suspected or confirmed
TB  disease  as  soon  as  possible,  begin  a  treatment  regimen,  and  provide  case
management  throughout  treatment.  Epidemiologic  investigation  Provide  a  thorough
and timely investigation, whether investigating a source case or conducting a contact
investigation. Training and education Ensure the provision of training and education to
TB  program  staff,  other  health  departments,  clinicians,  patients  and  families,
community  groups,  and  the  general  public.  Partnerships  and  collaboration  Work  with
stakeholders and populations at high risk to maximize efforts and minimize expenses.
TB  elimination  cannot  be  accomplished  by  public  health  programs  alone.  Research
Participate in local, national, and international research, as program capacity permits.
Top  
Health departments are charged with public safety and with advancing and protecting
population  health.  They  are  authorized  and  compelled  by  legal  statutes  to  perform

specific duties to protect the public’s health. International and national standards define
basic principles that guide health departments and represent a minimum practice for
ensuring  success  in  protecting  populations  from  tuberculosis  (TB).  Although  multiple
entities perform activities that reduce the spread of TB (e.g., evaluating and treating TB
infection and disease), actions that are taken by health departments are time-sensitive,
are supported by a jurisdiction’s legal framework, and focus beyond the individual level
to safeguard the community’s health. The unique scope of services and responsibilities
of TB control is bound by a legal framework assigned to federal, state, local, and tribal
health  departments.  This  legal  framework  includes  investigating  persons  with  TB  and
persons exposed to TB, responding to TB outbreaks, enforcing TB reporting, and issuing
orders of isolation, evaluation, and treatment. Source: Hodge Jr JG, Anderson E, Nelson
G, Larson M. Tuberculosis control laws and policies: a handbook for public health and
legal  practitioners.  Atlanta,  GA:  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  CDC;
2009.  https://www.cdc.gov/tb/programs/TBlawPolicyHandbook.pdf  Top    Top  Class  A
tuberculosis (TB) disease This class includes all applicants who have TB disease. This
also  includes  applicants  with  extrapulmonary  TB  who  have  a  chest  radiograph
indicative  of  pulmonary  TB  disease,  regardless  of  sputum  smear  and  culture  results.
Class B0 TB, pulmonary This class includes applicants with diagnosed TB by the panel
physician  or  who  were  seen  by  the  panel  physician  while  on  TB  treatment  and  who
have  successfully  completed  directly  observed  therapy  (DOT),  as  defined  by  CDC’s
Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, under the supervision of a panel physician
before  immigration.  Class  B1  TB,  pulmonary  This  class  includes  applicants  who  have
signs or symptoms, physical examinations, or chest radiograph findings indicative of TB
disease  or  who  have  known  human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  infection  but  have
negative acid-fast bacillus sputum smears and cultures and do not have diagnosed TB
disease. This classification also includes applicants who have TB disease diagnosed by
the panel physician, have refused DOT treatment, or have returned after treatment and

completion of a 1-year waiting period. Class B1 TB, extrapulmonary This class includes
applicants  with  diagnosed  extrapulmonary  TB  with  a  normal  chest  radiograph  and
negative sputum smears and cultures. Class B2 TB, LTBI evaluation This class includes
applicants  who  have  a  positive  interferon  gamma-release  assay  (IGRA)  or  tuberculin
skin test (TST) but otherwise have a negative evaluation for TB. Contacts with a positive
IGRA or a TST of ≥5 mm induration must receive this classification in addition to a class
B3 TB, contact evaluation, classification (if they are not already class B0 TB, pulmonary;
class B1 TB, pulmonary; class B1 TB, extrapulmonary; or class A TB [with TB disease]).
Class B3 TB, contact evaluation This class includes applicants who are a recent contact
of a known TB disease patient, regardless of IGRA or TST results. If the IGRA or TST is
positive and no evidence of TB disease exists, two classifications apply: class B2 TB and
class B3 TB; if negative, only class B3 TB applies. Source: CDC. Tuberculosis technical
instructions  for  panel  physicians.  Atlanta,  GA:  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services,
 CDC.
https://www.cdc.gov/immigrantrefugeehealth/exams/ti/panel/tuberculosis-panel-technic
al-instructions.html  Top  ≥5  mm  of  induration  Persons  with  human  immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection Close contacts of a person with infectious tuberculosis (TB) Persons
with  chest  radiographs  consistent  with  previous  untreated  TB  Organ  transplant
recipients Other immunosuppressed persons† ≥10 mm of induration Recent immigrants
Injection  drug  users  Residents  or  employees  of  congregate  settings  Mycobacteriology
laboratory personnel ≥15 mm of induration Persons with no known risk factors for TB
Source: CDC. Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection.
MMWR  Recommend  Rep  2000;49(No.  RR-6).  *  From  highest  (≥5  mm)  to  lowest  (≥15
mm) risk for developing active TB disease. These cut points apply both to adults and
children and can be modified on the basis of local epidemiology. † Patients taking the
equivalent  of  >15  mg/day  of  prednisone  for  1  month  or  those  taking  tumor  necrosis
factor-α antagonists or other immunomodulators. Top Suggested citation for this article:

Cole  B,  Nilsen  DM,  Will  L,  Etkind  SC,  Burgos  M,  Chorba  T.  Essential  Components  of  a
Public
 Health
 Tuberculosis
 Prevention,
 Control,
 and
 Elimination
 Program:
Recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the
National  Tuberculosis  Controllers  Association.  MMWR  Recomm  Rep  2020;69(No.
RR-7):1–27. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6907a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/rr6907a1.htm
