Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. If you believe an LCBI is secondary to a non-blood source of
infection, you must first fully meet one of the NHSN site-specific infection definitions as
defined  in  Chapter  17  (CDC/NHSN  Surveillance  Definitions  for  Specific  Types  of
Infections),  or  the  PNEU,  UTI,  or  SSI  protocols.  Once  you  have  done  this,  apply  the
Appendix B guidelines (Secondary BSI Guide) located in Chapter 4 [PDF – 900 KB] of the
NHSN Patient Safety Component Manual. There are only 2 scenarios in which a BSI can
be deemed secondary to another site- specific infection for NHSN reporting purposes:
OR  The  rules  for  the  infection  window  period  and  secondary  BSI  attribution  period
always apply. More guidance about these rules can be found in Chapter 2 (Identifying
HAIs in NHSN) [PDF – 1 MB]. Additionally, a BSI may also be secondary to VAE following
the guidance outlined in the VAE protocol [PDF – 2 MB]. NOTE: If the patient does not
meet any of the site-specific infection criteria from PNEU, UTI, SSI, VAE, or any of the
definitions in Chapter 17 and does not meet the requirements for secondary BSI, then
the LCBI must be reported as a primary LCBI and as a CLABSI if an eligible central line is
present  on  the  BSI  date  of  event  or  the  day  before.   NHSN  developed  Table  B-1
(Secondary  BSI  Guide)  as  a  reference  to  assist  users  in  making  secondary  BSI
determinations. The table lists definitions that require a blood specimen with at least
one matching organism to the site-specific specimen (Scenario #1) and definitions that
use a blood specimen as an element to meet the site-specific definition (Scenario #2).
All elements of the site-specific infection definitions must be met before a secondary
BSI determination can be made. Table B-1 can be found in Chapter 4 [PDF – 1 MB] of
the  Device  Associated  Module  BSI.  To  determine  if  a  positive  blood  culture  can  be
attributed  as  a  secondary  bloodstream  infection  (BSI)  related  to  a  lower  respiratory
tract  event,  consider  the  following  steps:  1)  Does  the  patient  meet  any  of  the  VAE

definitions?  2)   If  the  BSI  cannot  be  attributed  as  a  secondary  BSI  to  VAE,  then  the
positive blood culture can be evaluated to see if it is secondary to any of the infection
sites as defined in Chapter 17 or PNEU, UTI, or SSI event protocols. If another specific
site infection to which the bloodstream infection can be attributed as a secondary BSI is
not identified, the BSI may need to be reported as a primary BSI/CLABSI. See VAE FAQ
#20 (https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-vae.html) for guidance on reporting secondary
BSI pathogens for PVAP events. Yes, it is possible. A secondary BSI cannot be attributed
to PNU1. However, in this instance if a BSI is thought to be secondary to pneumonia but
the blood culture collection date did not occur within the infection window period such
that it could be used as an element to meet the PNU2 definition, reassess to determine
if  the  PNU2  definition  can  be  met  within  the  PNEU  RIT.  Similarly,  if  PNU2  is  met  and
there is a subsequent blood specimen with an eligible pathogen, however it does not
match the specimen used to originally meet PNU2, then reassess to determine if PNU2
can be met using the blood culture such that the date of event falls within the originally
established  PNEU  RIT.  Note:  When  re-meeting  PNEU  within  the  RIT,  provided  that
definitive imaging findings are persistent, a single definitive imaging finding with a test
date  that  occurs  in  a  new  IWP  and  demonstrates  evidence  of  persistence  of  prior
eligible findings will satisfy the imaging requirement for all patients. New or progressive
or serial imaging (for patients with underlying cardiac or pulmonary disease) does not
have to be re-demonstrated. Evidence of persistence of eligible findings alone will meet
the imaging requirement in the RIT. See the example and the table below. Example All
elements  necessary  to  satisfy  the  PNU1  definition  occur  within  the  infection  window
period. The date of event is 2/14. This establishes a PNEU (PNU1) RIT 2/14- 2/27 and a
BSI secondary attribution period (SBAP) 2/11 – 2/27.  Subsequently a blood specimen
with  a  collection  date  2/20  identifies  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa.  The  collection  date  is
within the secondary BSI attribution period for the PNEU event however a secondary BSI
cannot  be  reported  for  PNU1  since  the  blood  culture  is  not  used  to  satisfy  the  PNU1

definition and there is no site-specific culture to which the blood culture pathogen can
match. If during the PNEU RIT and within a new IWP, all elements needed to meet the
PNU2 definition are present to include the blood specimen and this results in a date of
event within the RIT, then the BSI can be attributed as secondary to the PNEU event. 
The  PNEU  date  of  event  remains  (2/14),  as  does  the  originally  determined  RIT,
secondary  BSI  attribution  period,  device  association  and  location  of  attribution.  If  the
PNU2 definition is not met as described above and if additionally, another site-specific
infection for which the BSI can be attributed as a secondary BSI is not identified, then
the BSI is a primary BSI/CLABSI.  To deem a blood culture secondary to GIT 1b or IAB 2b
when organisms are identified on histopathologic exam, you must meet the following
criteria:    2/2:  Pathology  Report:  “Classical  budding  hyphae  and  spores  of  Candida
admixed with ulcer slough (intestines).  2/4: Blood culture: Candida albicans.  Because
the Candida in the blood culture is an MBI Organism, the histopathologic findings and
blood  specimen  are  captured  in  the  GIT  IWP,  and  the  organism  identified  in  the
pathology report and blood specimen match, the Candida blood specimen is deemed
secondary to a GIT 1b. If a single blood culture contains an organism that matches the
site-specific  specimen  and  an  organism  that  does  not  match,  the  non-matching
organism can be captured in the secondary bloodstream infection period (SBAP).  The
non-matching organism is captured only when it is in the same blood specimen with a
matching organism. If there are subsequent blood cultures with only the non-matching
organism, you must assess these blood cultures for LCBI criteria.  For example, a SUTI
1b criterion is cited using fever and a ≥ 100K E. coli urine culture.  Additionally, a blood
specimen  is  positive  for  E.coli  and  Candida,  on  the  next  day.  The  E.  coli  organism  is
captured in the SBAP.  However, the Candida in the blood specimen is not eligible for
SUTI  criterion  and  cannot  be  deemed  secondary  to  SUTI  1b.  The  non-matching
organism  must  be  eligible  for  the  NHSN  site-specific  infection.  CLABSI  surveillance  is
intended to capture BSIs that are associated with the central line itself.  This association

may be due to either suboptimal insertion or maintenance issues.  In such an infection
the  blood  is  believed  to  be  the  primary  site  of  infection.   The  MBI-LCBI  criteria  were
implemented to enable NHSN to identify BSIs that are believed to be the result of the
patient’s weakened immune state and the accompanying alterations of the gut.  In such
situations,  the  patient  truly  has  a  primary  BSI,  because  there  is  not  an  infection  at
another site.  However, the gut is simply the source of colonizing organisms which seed
the bloodstream.  Both situations, where the BSI is primary in nature, are different from
those in which the BSI is believed to be secondary to an infection at another site.  An
example is a BSI that is secondary to a GIT infection in which the bloodstream becomes
a second site of infection through seeding from the original infection site. The goal of
adding  MBI-LCBI  criteria  to  CLABSI  surveillance  is:     Yes.  Effective  with  the  2015
re-baseline, MBI-LCBIs are no longer included in the CLABSI metrics used for national
reporting  or  in  files  that  are  shared  with  CMS  for  reimbursement  determinations.  A
separate  report  has  been  created  for  MBI-LCBI  tracking.  However,  NHSN  has  not
changed  the  requirement  for  hospitals  to  include  MBI-LCBIs  if  the  locations  monthly
reporting  plan  includes  CLABSI  surveillance.  We  believe  the  continued  collection  and
tracking  of  MBI-LCBI  data  is  important  because  these  infections  cause  significant
morbidity and mortality for patients and through their identification and measurement
exists the potential to identify new prevention efforts. Yes, the creation of the repeat
infection  timeframe  (RIT)  eliminated  the  subjectivity  of  trying  to  determine  if  an
infection was on-going or resolved. The 14-day RIT is the period of time in which no new
BSIs  will  be  reported.  The  date  of  event  (DOE)  for  the  primary  BSI  is  day  one  of  the
14-day BSI RIT. Only primary BSIs create a BSI RIT. Secondary BSI’s do not create a BSI
RIT, but the site-specific infection to which the BSI is secondary does create a 14-day
RIT for infections of the same type. If a BSI is identified outside of the 14-day BSI RIT, a
new  event  is  identified  and  must  be  investigated  as  being  primary  or  secondary  in
nature.   Example:  If  a  person  meets  the  definition  for  CLABSI  with  a  positive

Staphylococcus aureus culture on hospital day 12 and on hospital day 18 another blood
culture is positive with an eligible pathogen, is this a new CLABSI? In this example, if a
primary  BSI  with  a  DOE  on  hospital  day  12  is  identified,  and  another  positive  blood
specimen meeting LCBI criteria is identified with a DOE within the 14-day RIT, no new
LCBI will be reported but any additional organisms identified will be added to the initial
BSI event. The next possible DOE for a new BSI would be hospital day 26, which is day
15,  the  day  after  the  14-day  RIT  ended.  For  complete  details  regarding  RIT,  please
see Chapter 2 PDF icon [PDF – 1 MB]. Note: RITs are only set when an infection criterion
is  met,  and  they  are  specific  to  the  type  of  infection  identified  and  do  not  affect
reporting of other types of infections. BSIs that are secondary to another primary site of
infection  do  not  meet  the  NHSN  LCBI  criteria.  A  secondary  BSI  to  a  primary  site  of
infection does not create a RIT of its own that captures all subsequent positive blood
cultures. Therefore, subsequent positive blood specimens may need to be investigated
to determine if they are primary BSIs and possible CLABSIs. No. Device association, the
date  of  event,  and  the  location  of  attribution  are  never  changed  from  the  initial
determination  when  subsequent  BSI  events  occur  during  a  BSI  RIT.  The  subsequent
positive blood specimen, within the BSI RIT, is considered an extension of the initial BSI
event.  Yes.   The  collection  site  (venipuncture  site  or  central  line  drawn)  of  the  blood
specimen  does  not  determine  the  eligibility  of  the  positive  blood  specimen  to  meet
CLABSI  criteria.  All  positive  blood  specimens,  regardless  of  the  sites  from  which  they
were collected or the purposes for which they were drawn must be included in CLABSI
surveillance. Additionally, NHSN does not require that a BSI be attributed to a particular
device  for  reporting  purposes.   A  BSI  is  determined  to  be  central  line  associated
(CLABSI) if an eligible central line (central line that has first been accessed and in place
for more than 2 consecutive calendar days) is present on the BSI date of event (DOE) or
the  day  before.  The  day  of  device  placement  is  CL  Day  1  or  if  the  central  line  was
present on admission (POA), the day of first access in an inpatient location is CL Day 1

for  making  a  device-associated  determination.  The  term  “separate  occasions”  is
required  for  laboratory-confirmed  bloodstream  infections  (LCBIs)  when  only  common
commensals  are  identified  in  the  blood  (LCBI  2  or  3).   The  “two  or  more  blood
specimens drawn on separate occasions” element is met if there is blood collected from
at least two blood draws on the same or consecutive calendar days. The requirement
for  at  least  2  blood  specimens  with  matching  common  commensals  collected  on
separate occasions is implemented to avoid identifying a truly contaminated specimen
as  an  LCBI.  For  the  purposes  of  NHSN  surveillance,  it  is  the  expectation  that  proper
technique for specimen collection is being performed.  If two positive blood cultures are
assigned  separate  specimen  numbers,  processed  individually,  and  are  reported
separately  in  the  final  laboratory  report,  the  findings  are  eligible  for  use  in  LCBI  2/3
criteria  (no  exclusions).  The  two  matching  common  commensal  blood  cultures  are
considered a single element for use in meeting LCBI 2 or 3 criteria.  If signs/symptoms
occur  within  the  infection  window  period  (IWP)  BEFORE  the  first  collected  blood
specimen,  the  date  of  event  (DOE)  will  be  the  date  the  first  element  (sign/symptom)
used  to  meet  LCBI  2  or  3  criteria  occurred.   If  the  sign/symptom  occurs  AFTER  the
collection date of the first blood specimen, the date of event (DOE) will be the collection
date  of  the  first  positive  blood  specimen  that  occurred  during  the  IWP.  Both
Staphylococcus  capitis  and  Staphylococcus  auricularis  are  coagulase  negative
Staphylococci (CNS). However, they are identified to the species level, and at this level
the organisms do not match. Therefore, they are not considered companion (matching)
specimens. Since each organism was identified in a single blood culture, they are both
considered contaminants and are disregarded for NHSN reporting purposes. LCBI 2 or 3
criterion  is  not  met  because  2  blood  cultures,  collected  on  separate  occasions,  with
matching common commensals are not present. If neither of the specimens had been
speciated but instead were reported as coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, they would
be  considered  companion  (matching)  cultures.  The  NHSN  Organism  List  undergoes

revisions  based  on  current  organism  taxonomy.  The  list  can  be  found  under  the
Supporting Material section on any of the NHSN event landing pages (BSI, MDRO/CDIFF,
PNEU,  SSI,  UTI,  and  VAE).  Annual  updates  are  possible  therefore,  the  appropriate
version should be referenced when conducting CLABSI surveillance. Any organism not
found on the NHSN Common Commensal list* is considered a recognized pathogen for
NHSN  reporting  purposes.  *Please  note  this  does  not  include  the  following  excluded
organisms  from  LCBI  criteria:  Campylobacter,  C.  difficile,  Enteropathogenic  E.  coli,
Listeria spp., Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., and Yersinia spp. The following organisms
are  excluded  from  meeting  any  NHSN  infection  definition:  Blastomyces,  Histoplasma,
Coccidioides,  Paracocidioides,  Cryptococcus,  and  Pneumocystis.  All  central  lines
(permanent, temporary, implanted ports, and umbilical lines) will be treated the same
for  making  device  attribution  determinations  (specifically,  CLABSI)  and  for  counting
denominator device days (central line days). For example, a patient admitted on Jan.
1st to an inpatient location with a central line in place that is first accessed on Jan. 4th,
has  a  BSI  DOE  on  Jan  6th.   A  total  of  6  central  line  days  will  be  entered  for  the
denominator  device  day  count.  For  example,  a  patient  admitted  on  Jan.  1st  to  an
inpatient location with a central line in place that is first accessed on Jan. 4th, has a BSI
DOE on Jan 6th.  Because the line was first accessed in an inpatient location, and it has
been in place for more than 2 consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th, it is eligible for a
CLABSI event. If the line is never accessed, it never becomes eligible for a CLABSI event
but is included in the denominator device day counts. Permanent Catheter Example(s):
Example 1: A patient is seen in the ED with a permanent catheter (for example port) in
place on Dec 31st. The permanent catheter is accessed in the ED for IV fluids. Patient is
admitted on Jan. 1st to an inpatient location with IV fluids infusing into the port. Jan 1st
is central line day 1 for making a CLABSI determination. There is a BSI DOE on Jan 6th .
Because the line was first accessed in an inpatient location on Jan 1st, and it has been
in place for more than 2 consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th, it is eligible for a CLABSI

event.   Example 2: A patient is seen in the ED with a permanent catheter (for example
port) in place on Dec 31st. The permanent catheter is accessed in the ED for IV fluids.
Patient  is  admitted  on  Jan.  1st  to  an  inpatient  location,  and  there  are  no  IV  fluids
infusing  into  port  when  the  patient  arrives  to  the  inpatient  location.   The  permanent
catheter  is  accessed  on  Jan  5th,  and  there  is  a  BSI  DOE  on  Jan  6th.   The  line  is  first
accessed in an inpatient location on Jan 5th but has not been accessed for more than 2
consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th. Therefore, the line is not eligible for a CLABSI
event. If the line is never accessed, it never becomes eligible for a CLABSI event but is
included in the denominator device day counts. Note:  If a patient has another central
line in place that is accessed, device attribution (eligible for a CLABSI event) begins on
CL Day 3 after access. If a central line is present for any part of a calendar day, then
that  day  contributes  to  the  minimum  day’s  requirement  for  the  CLABSI.   If  a  full
calendar day passes without a central line being present, then the device day count for
making a CLABSI determination starts over once a new CL is inserted.  Please see Table
3  of  the  NHSN  BSI  Protocol  [PDF  –  900  KB]  for  examples.  Midline  catheters  by
description are not intended to terminate in one of the great vessels or near the heart
which  is  a  part  of  the  definition  of  a  central  line.  However,  the  actual  location  of  the
catheter  tip  is  the  determining  factor,  and  the  chest  x-ray  obtained  to  verify  line
placement should indicate the location of the tip.  Also, consider the line’s intended use.
To  qualify  as  a  central  line,  it  must  be  used  for  infusion,  withdrawal  of  blood,  or
hemodynamic monitoring. Keep in mind both elements of NHSNs central line definition
are required. If both requirements are not met, the device is not a central line. Catheter
tip cultures are not used for NHSN CLABSI surveillance for several reasons.  Catheter tip
cultures have been shown to have higher rates of contamination than blood cultures. 
Furthermore,  not  all  laboratories  are  able  to  perform  quantified  catheter  tip  cultures.
Catheter  tips  are  a  part  of  other  types  of  non-NHSN  surveillance  such  as
catheter-related BSI (CRBSI) which is generally thought of as a clinical definition, used

when  diagnosing  and  treating  patients.  The  Guidelines  for  the  Prevention  of
Intravascular  Catheter-Related  Infections,  2011  address  CRBSI  and  may  be  helpful
when  addressing  a  physician’s  questions.  NHSN  does  not  require  a  CLABSI  to  be
attributed to a specific central line. Instead, you will simply be required to document
whether an eligible central line was present on the BSI date of event or the day before.
An eligible central line is a device that has first been accessed in an inpatient location
and has been in place for more than 2 consecutive calendar days. Only 1 central line
day is counted per patient-per calendar day regardless of how many lines the patient
may  have  in  place  at  the  same  time.  If  a  patient  in  a  SCA/Oncology  unit  has  both  a
temporary and a permanent line, only report the temporary line because it has a higher
risk of infection.  Please see Note: #d, under the Comments and Reporting Instructions
found  in  Chapter  4  BSI  [PDF  –  900  KB]  protocol  for  guidance.  This  guidance  states:  
IABPs  are  not  considered  central  lines  since  they  are  generally  not  used  for  infusion,
blood withdrawal, or hemodynamic monitoring. Do not include IABP device days in the
central  line  day  count.  IABPs  are  not  considered  ventricular  assist  devices.   The
bloodstream  infection  risks  associated  with  IABP  devices  are  different  from  an  NHSN
surveillance  perspective.  The  femoral  artery  is  not  among  the  list  of  great  vessels
defined  for  CLABSI  surveillance  in  NHSN,  therefore,  a  catheter  in  this  vessel  is  not
considered a central line. Do not include femoral artery catheter days in the central line
day count. In both situations, the CLABSI must be attributed to the inpatient location
where the patient is housed. The dialysis unit is defined as a non-bedded inpatient unit
that provides services to inpatients. CLABSI surveillance, for NHSN reporting purposes,
cannot be performed in this location because there can be no patient or central line day
counts.  Likewise,  dialysis  performed  in  the  patient’s  room  by  dialysis  staff  cannot  be
attributed to the dialysis unit. The BSI event form contains the following required field
“Any hemodialysis catheter present?”. The data in this field can be used internally by
facilities to identify and track potential issues related to dialysis care. Data in the “Any

hemodialysis catheter present?” field are not used to exclude events from the CLABSI
SIR. Facilities are responsible for all patient care provided in the facility by employed
and  contracted  staff  alike.  Therefore,  all  CLABSIs  identified  in  dialysis  patients  are
attributed to the in-patient unit where the patient is physically located. A positive blood
specimen meeting an LCBI criteria, that is accompanied by documentation, during the
infection window period (IWP), of observed or suspected patient injection into vascular
access lines during the inpatient admission, will be excluded from CLABSI surveillance.
This exclusion is very specific to INJECTION into the line (tampering with, manipulating,
etc. do not meet the intent of the exclusion). For example, “pulling on the line, picking
at  the  dressing,  removing  the  caps,  and  biting”  are  just  a  few  examples  of  line
manipulation  that  do  not  meet  the  requirements  of  this  exception.  These  actions  are
different from purposeful injection into a vascular line without regard for proper line use
and/or  management  and  places  the  patient’s  health  and  safety  at  risk.  Note:   NHSN
does not define a specific value for these vital signs. Instead, each facility should use
the  vital  sign  parameters  as  stated  in  their  policies  and  procedures  for  clinical
documentation.  The  presence  of  any  of  these  vital  signs  before  the  IWP  does  not
exclude the event from meeting LCBI 2 or 3 criterion.  An LCBI 2 or 3 criterion may be
assigned if an eligible vital sign occurs during the BSI IWP. Information on locations that
are  included  in  reporting  can  be  found  in  the  Operational  Guidance  for  Acute  Care
Hospitals to Report Central Line-Associated Bloodstream Infection (CLABSI) [PDF – 169
KB].  The  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services  are  the  ultimate  source  for
identifying  reporting  required  as  part  of  their  programs.  For  NHSN  to  assist  with  a
primary or secondary BSI case determination please send the following information to
nhsn@cdc.gov:  If  investigating  a  positive  blood  culture:  If  evaluating  for  a  secondary
BSI:  Yes, these events should be reported to NHSN. Although the events are reported,
they are NOT considered central line associated and DO NOT contribute to the CLABSI
SIR measure.  Exclusions include:  An MBI-LCBI designation will not change to an LCBI

event if the two criteria below are met: Please see Example 2b in Chapter 2 [PDF – 909
KB]. Yes, NCT methods are eligible for use to meet LCBI-1 criterion. If an organism is
identified  to  the  genus  or  species  level  by  non-culture  based  microbiologic  testing
methods.   Note: If blood is collected for culture within 2 days before, or 1 day after the
NCT, disregard the result of the NCT and use only the result of the CULTURE to make an
LCBI  surveillance  determination.  If  no  blood  is  collected  for  culture  within  this  time
period, use the result of the NCT for LCBI surveillance determination Yes, NCT methods
are eligible for use to meet LCBI-1 criterion. If an organism is identified to the genus or
species  level  by  non-culture  based  microbiologic  testing  methods.  Note:  If  blood  is
collected for culture within 2 days before, or 1 day after the NCT, disregard the result of
the  NCT  and  use  only  the  result  of  the  CULTURE  to  make  an  LCBI  surveillance
determination. If no blood is collected for culture within this time period, use the result
of the NCT for LCBI surveillance determination AND  Organism(s) identified in blood is
not related to an infection at another site (See LCBI-1 Criterion in the BSI Chapter [PDF
– 1 MB]).   Note: If blood is collected for culture within 2 days before, or 1 day after the
NCT, disregard the result of the NCT and use only the result of the CULTURE to make an
LCBI  surveillance  determination.  If  no  blood  is  collected  for  culture  within  this  time
period,  use  the  result  of  the  NCT  for  LCBI  surveillance  determination  No,  LCBI-2  and
LCBI-3 criteria are only met using matching organisms identified by a blood culture plus
signs and symptoms. (See LCBI-2 and LCBI-3 criteria in the BSI Chapter [PDF – 1 MB]). If
you believe an LCBI is secondary to a non-blood source of infection, you must first fully
meet  one  of  the  NHSN  site-specific  infection  definitions  as  defined  in  Chapter  17
(CDC/NHSN Surveillance Definitions for Specific Types of Infections), or the PNEU, UTI,
or SSI protocols. Once you have done this, apply the Appendix B guidelines (Secondary
BSI Guide) located in Chapter 4 [PDF – 1 MB] of the NHSN Patient Safety Component
Manual. There are only 2 scenarios in which a BSI can be deemed secondary to another
site-  specific  infection  for  NHSN  reporting  purposes:  OR  The  rules  for  the  infection

window period and secondary BSI attribution period always apply. More guidance about
these  rules  can  be  found  in  Chapter  2  (Identifying  HAIs  in  NHSN)  [PDF  –  1  MB].
Additionally, a BSI may also be secondary to VAE following the guidance outlined in the
VAE protocol [PDF – 2 MB]. NOTE: If the patient does not meet any of the site-specific
infection criteria from PNEU, UTI, SSI, VAE, or any of the definitions in Chapter 17 and
does not meet the requirements for secondary BSI, then the LCBI must be reported as a
primary LCBI and as a CLABSI if an eligible central line is present on the BSI date of
event  or  the  day  before.  NHSN  developed  Table  B-1  (Secondary  BSI  Guide)  as  a
reference  to  assist  users  in  making  secondary  BSI  determinations.  The  table  lists
definitions that require a blood specimen with at least one matching organism to the
site-specific specimen (Scenario #1) and definitions that use a blood specimen as an
element  to  meet  the  site-specific  definition  (Scenario  #2).  All  elements  of  the
site-specific infection definitions must be met before a secondary BSI determination can
be made. Table B-1 can be found in Chapter 4 [PDF – 1 MB] of the Device Associated
Module BSI. To determine if a positive blood culture can be attributed as a secondary
bloodstream  infection  (BSI)  related  to  a  lower  respiratory  tract  event,  consider  the
following  steps:  1)  Does  the  patient  meet  any  of  the  VAE  definitions?  2)  If  the  BSI
cannot be attributed as a secondary BSI to VAE, then the positive blood culture can be
evaluated to see if it is secondary to any of the infection sites as defined in Chapter 17
or  PNEU,  UTI,  or  SSI  event  protocols.  If  another  specific  site  infection  to  which  the
bloodstream  infection  can  be  attributed  as  a  secondary  BSI  is  not  identified,  the  BSI
may need to be reported as a primary BSI/CLABSI. Yes, it is possible. A secondary BSI
cannot  be  attributed  to  PNU1.  However,  in  this  instance  if  a  BSI  is  thought  to  be
secondary to pneumonia but the blood culture collection date did not occur within the
infection  window  period  such  that  it  could  be  used  as  an  element  to  meet  the  PNU2
definition, reassess to determine if the PNU2 definition can be met within the PNEU RIT.
Similarly,  if  PNU2  is  met  and  there  is  a  subsequent  blood  specimen  with  an  eligible

pathogen, however it does not match the specimen used to originally meet PNU2, then
reassess to determine if PNU2 can be met using the blood culture such that the date of
event  falls  within  the  originally  established  PNEU  RIT.  NOTE:  When  re-meeting  PNEU
within the RIT, a single eligible imaging finding with a test date that occurs in a new IWP
and  demonstrates  evidence  of  persistence  of  prior  eligible  findings  will  satisfy  the
imaging requirement for all patients. New or progressive or serial imaging (for patients
with  underlying  cardiac  or  pulmonary  disease)  does  not  have  to  be  re-demonstrated.
Evidence of persistence of eligible findings alone will meet the imaging requirement in
the RIT. See the example and table below. Example All elements necessary to satisfy
the PNU1 definition occur within the infection window period. The date of event is 2/14.
This establishes a PNEU (PNU1) RIT 2/14- 2/27 and a BSI secondary attribution period
2/11  –  2/27.   Subsequently  a  blood  specimen  with  a  collection  date  2/20  identifies
Pseudomonas  aeruginosa.  The  collection  date  is  within  the  secondary  BSI  attribution
period for the PNEU event however a secondary BSI cannot be reported for PNU1 since
the blood culture is not used to satisfy the PNU1 definition and there is no site-specific
culture  to  which  the  blood  culture  pathogen  can  match.  If  during  the  PNEU  RIT,  all
elements  needed  to  meet  the  PNU2  definition  are  present  to  include  the  blood
specimen  and  this  results  in  a  date  of  event  within  the  RIT,  then  the  BSI  can  be
attributed as secondary to the PNEU event.  The PNEU date of event remains as 2/14,
as  does  the  originally  determined  RIT,  secondary  BSI  attribution  period,  device
association  and  location  of  attribution.  If  the  PNU2  definition  is  not  met  as  described
above  and  if  additionally,  another  specific  site  infection  for  which  the  BSI  can  be
attributed as a secondary BSI is not identified, then the BSI is a primary BSI/CLABSI. To
deem a blood culture secondary to GIT 1b or IAB 2b when organisms are identified on
histopathologic  exam,  you  must  meet  the  following  criteria:    2/2:  Pathology  Report:
“Classical  budding  hyphae  and  spores  of  Candida  admixed  with  ulcer  slough
(intestines).  2/4: Blood culture: Candida albicans.  Because the Candida in the blood

culture  is  an  MBI  Organism,  the  histopathologic  findings  and  blood  specimen  are
captured in the GIT IWP, and the organism identified in the pathology report and blood
specimen match, the Candida blood specimen is deemed secondary to a GIT 1b. If a
single blood culture contains an organism that matches the site-specific specimen and
an organism that does not match, the non-matching organism can be captured in the
secondary  bloodstream  infection  period  (SBAP).   The  non-matching  organism  is
captured only when it is in the same blood specimen with a matching organism. If there
are subsequent blood cultures with only the non-matching organism, you must assess
these blood cultures for LCBI criteria.  For example, a SUTI 1b criterion is cited using
fever and a ≥ 100K E. coli urine culture.  Additionally, a blood specimen is positive for
E.coli  and  Candida,  on  the  next  day.  The  E.  coli  organism  is  captured  in  the  SBAP.  
However, the Candida in the blood specimen is not eligible for SUTI criterion and cannot
be deemed secondary to SUTI 1b. The non-matching organism must be eligible for the
NHSN  site-specific  infection.  CLABSI  surveillance  is  intended  to  capture  BSIs  that  are
associated with the central line itself.  This association may be due to either suboptimal
insertion or maintenance issues.  In such an infection the blood is believed to be the
primary site of infection.  The MBI-LCBI criteria were implemented to enable NHSN to
identify BSIs that are believed to be the result of the patient’s weakened immune state
and the accompanying alterations of the gut.  In such situations, the patient truly has a
primary  BSI,  because  there  is  not  an  infection  at  another  site.   However,  the  gut  is
simply the source of colonizing organisms which seed the bloodstream.  Both situations,
where the BSI is primary in nature, are different from those in which the BSI is believed
to be secondary to an infection at another site.  An example is a BSI that is secondary
to a GIT infection in which the bloodstream becomes a second site of infection through
seeding from the original infection site. The goal of adding MBI-LCBI criteria to CLABSI
surveillance is: Yes, the creation of the repeat infection timeframe (RIT) eliminated the
subjectivity of trying to determine if an infection was on-going or resolved. The 14-day

RIT is the period of time in which no new BSIs will be reported. The date of event (DOE)
for the primary BSI is day one of the 14-day BSI RIT. Only primary BSIs create a BSI RIT.
Secondary BSI’s do not create a BSI RIT but the site-specific infection to which the BSI is
secondary does create a 14-day RIT for infections of the same type. If a BSI is identified
outside  of  the  14-day  BSI  RIT,  a  new  event  is  identified  and  must  be  investigated  as
being primary or secondary in nature.   In this example, if a primary BSI with a DOE on
hospital day 12 is identified, and another positive blood specimen meeting LCBI criteria
is  identified  with  a  DOE  within  the  14-day  RIT,  no  new  LCBI  will  be  reported  but  any
additional organisms identified will be added to the initial BSI event. The next possible
DOE for a new BSI would be hospital day 26, which is day 15, the day after the 14-day
RIT ended. For complete details regarding RIT, please see Chapter 2 [PDF – 1 MB]. Note:
RITs are only set when an infection criterion is met, and they are specific to the type of
infection identified and do not affect reporting of other types of infections. BSIs that are
secondary to another primary site of infection do not meet the NHSN LCBI criteria. A
secondary  BSI  to  a  primary  site  of  infection  does  not  create  an  RIT  of  its  own  that
captures  all  subsequent  positive  blood  cultures.  Therefore,  subsequent  positive  blood
specimens  may  need  to  be  investigated  to  determine  if  they  are  primary  BSIs  and
possible CLABSIs. Yes, the creation of the repeat infection timeframe (RIT) eliminated
the  subjectivity  of  trying  to  determine  if  an  infection  was  on-going  or  resolved.  The
14-day RIT is the period of time in which no new BSIs will be reported. The date of event
(DOE) for the primary BSI is day one of the 14-day BSI RIT. Only primary BSIs create a
BSI RIT. Secondary BSI’s do not create a BSI RIT, but the site-specific infection to which
the BSI is secondary does create a 14-day RIT for infections of the same type. If a BSI is
identified  outside  of  the  14-day  BSI  RIT,  a  new  event  is  identified  and  must  be
investigated as being primary or secondary in nature.  Example: If a person meets the
definition for CLABSI with a positive Staphylococcus aureus culture on hospital day 12
and on hospital day 18 another blood culture is positive with an eligible pathogen, is

this a new CLABSI? In this example, if a primary BSI with a DOE on hospital day 12 is
identified, and another positive blood specimen meeting LCBI criteria is identified with a
DOE within the 14-day RIT, no new LCBI will be reported but any additional organisms
identified will be added to the initial BSI event. The next possible DOE for a new BSI
would  be  hospital  day  26,  which  is  day  15,  the  day  after  the  14-day  RIT  ended.  For
complete details regarding RIT, please see Chapter 2 [PDF – 1 MB]. Note: RITs are only
set  when  an  infection  criterion  is  met,  and  they  are  specific  to  the  type  of  infection
identified  and  do  not  affect  reporting  of  other  types  of  infections.  BSIs  that  are
secondary to another primary site of infection do not meet the NHSN LCBI criteria. A
secondary  BSI  to  a  primary  site  of  infection  does  not  create  a  RIT  of  its  own  that
captures  all  subsequent  positive  blood  cultures.  Therefore,  subsequent  positive  blood
specimens  may  need  to  be  investigated  to  determine  if  they  are  primary  BSIs  and
possible CLABSIs. Yes.  The collection site (venipuncture site or central line drawn) of
the blood specimen does not determine the eligibility of the positive blood specimen to
meet CLABSI criteria. All positive blood specimens, regardless of the sites from which
they  were  collected  or  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  drawn  must  be  included  in
CLABSI  surveillance.  NHSN  does  not  require  that  a  BSI  be  attributed  to  a  particular
device  for  reporting  purposes.   A  BSI  is  determined  to  be  central  line  associated
(CLABSI)  if  an  eligible  central  line  (central  line  that  has  first  been  accessed  and  has
been in place for more than 2 consecutive calendar days) was present on the BSI date
of event (DOE) or the day before. The day of device placement is CL Day 1 or if the
central  line  was  present  on  admission  (POA),  the  day  of  first  access  in  an  inpatient
location is CL Day 1 for making device-associated attributions. Yes.  The collection site
(venipuncture site or central line drawn) of the blood specimen does not determine the
eligibility  of  the  positive  blood  specimen  to  meet  CLABSI  criteria.  All  positive  blood
specimens, regardless of the sites from which they were collected or the purposes for
which  they  were  drawn  must  be  included  in  CLABSI  surveillance.  Additionally,  NHSN

does not require that a BSI be attributed to a particular device for reporting purposes. 
A  BSI  is  determined  to  be  central  line  associated  (CLABSI)  if  an  eligible  central  line
(central  line  that  has  first  been  accessed  and  in  place  for  more  than  2  consecutive
calendar days) is present on the BSI date of event (DOE) or the day before. The day of
device placement is CL Day 1 or if the central line was present on admission (POA), the
day of first access in an inpatient location is CL Day 1 for making a device-associated
determination. The two matching common commensal blood cultures are considered a
single element for use in meeting LCBI 2 or 3 criteria.  If signs/symptoms occur within
the Infection Window Period (IWP) BEFORE the first collected blood specimen, the date
of event (DOE) will be the date the first element (sign/symptom) used to meet LCBI 2 or
3 criteria occurred.  If the sign/symptom occurs AFTER the collection date of the first
blood specimen, the date of event (DOE) will be the collection date of the first positive
blood  specimen  that  occurred  during  the  infection  window  period  (IWP).  Both  S.
auricularis and S. capitis are coagulase negative staphylococci (CNS) however, they are
identified  to  the  species  level,  which  is  different,  therefore,  they  are  not  considered
companion (matching) specimens. Since each organism was identified in a single blood
culture, they are both considered contaminants and are disregarded for NHSN reporting
purposes.  LCBI  2  or  3  criteria  are  not  met  because  2  blood  cultures,  collected  on
separate occasions, with matching common commensals are not present. If neither of
the  specimens  had  been  speciated  but  instead  were  reported  as  coagulase-negative
staphylococcus,  they  would  be  considered  companion  (matching)  cultures.  Both
Staphylococcus  capitis  and  Staphylococcus  auricularis  are  coagulase  negative
Staphylococci (CNS). However, they are identified to the species level, and at this level
the organisms do not match. Therefore, they are not considered companion (matching)
specimens. Since each organism was identified in a single blood culture, they are both
considered contaminants and are disregarded for NHSN reporting purposes. LCBI 2 or 3
criterion  is  not  met  because  2  blood  cultures,  collected  on  separate  occasions,  with

matching common commensals are not present. If neither of the specimens had been
speciated but instead were reported as coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, they would
be considered companion (matching) cultures. All central lines (permanent, temporary,
implanted  ports,  and  umbilical  lines)  will  be  treated  the  same  for  making  device
attribution  determinations  (specifically,  CLABSI)  and  for  counting  denominator  device
days  (central  line  days).  For  example,  a  patient  admitted  on  Jan.  1st  to  an  inpatient
location with a central line in place that is first accessed on Jan. 4th, has a BSI DOE on
Jan 6th.  Because the line was first accessed in an inpatient location and it has been in
place for more than 2 consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th, it is eligible for a CLABSI
event. If the line is never accessed, it never becomes eligible for a CLABSI event but is
included  in  the  denominator  device  day  counts.  Permanent  Catheter  Example(s)  For
example, a patient is seen in the ED with a permanent catheter (for example port) in
place on Dec 31st. The permanent catheter is accessed in the ED for IV fluids. Patient is
admitted on Jan. 1st to an inpatient location with IV fluids infusing into the port. Jan 1st
is central line day 1 for making a CLABSI determination. There is a BSI DOE on Jan 6th. 
Because the line was first accessed in an inpatient location on Jan 1st and it has been in
place for more than 2 consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th, it is eligible for a CLABSI
event. For example, a patient is seen in the ED with a permanent catheter (for example
port) in place on Dec 31st. The permanent catheter is accessed in the ED for IV fluids.
Patient  is  admitted  on  Jan.  1st  to  an  inpatient  location,  and  there  are  no  IV  fluids
infusing into the port when the patient arrives to the inpatient location.  The permanent
catheter  is  accessed  on  Jan  5th,  and  there  is  a  BSI  DOE  on  Jan  6th.   The  line  is  first
accessed in an inpatient location on Jan 5th but has not been accessed for more than 2
consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th. Therefore, the line is not eligible for a CLABSI
event. If the line is never accessed, it never becomes eligible for a CLABSI event but is
included in the denominator device day counts. NOTE:  If a patient has another central
line in place that is accessed, device attribution (eligible for a CLABSI event) begins on

CL Day 3 after access. Q16. When a patient is admitted to an inpatient location with a
central line in place, and that line is NOT accessed during the hospitalization, are those
days  included  in  the  denominator  device  day  count?  All  central  lines  (permanent,
temporary,  implanted  ports,  and  umbilical  lines)  will  be  treated  the  same  for  making
device  attribution  determinations  (specifically,  CLABSI)  and  for  counting  denominator
device  days  (central  line  days).  For  example,  a  patient  admitted  on  Jan.  1st  to  an
inpatient location with a central line in place that is first accessed on Jan. 4th, has a BSI
DOE  on  Jan  6th.   A  total  of  6  central  line  days  will  be  entered  for  the  denominator
device day count. For example, a patient admitted on Jan. 1st to an inpatient location
with a central line in place that is first accessed on Jan. 4th, has a BSI DOE on Jan 6th. 
Because the line was first accessed in an inpatient location, and it has been in place for
more than 2 consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th, it is eligible for a CLABSI event. If
the line is never accessed, it never becomes eligible for a CLABSI event but is included
in the denominator device day counts. Permanent Catheter Example(s): Example 1: A
patient is seen in the ED with a permanent catheter (for example port) in place on Dec
31st. The permanent catheter is accessed in the ED for IV fluids. Patient is admitted on
Jan. 1st to an inpatient location with IV fluids infusing into the port. Jan 1st is central line
day 1 for making a CLABSI determination. There is a BSI DOE on Jan 6th . Because the
line was first accessed in an inpatient location on Jan 1st, and it has been in place for
more than 2 consecutive calendar days on Jan. 6th, it is eligible for a CLABSI event.  
Example 2: A patient is seen in the ED with a permanent catheter (for example port) in
place on Dec 31st. The permanent catheter is accessed in the ED for IV fluids. Patient is
admitted on Jan. 1st to an inpatient location, and there are no IV fluids infusing into port
when the patient arrives to the inpatient location.  The permanent catheter is accessed
on Jan 5th, and there is a BSI DOE on Jan 6th.  The line is first accessed in an inpatient
location  on  Jan  5th  but  has  not  been  accessed  for  more  than  2  consecutive  calendar
days on Jan. 6th. Therefore, the line is not eligible for a CLABSI event. If the line is never

accessed,  it  never  becomes  eligible  for  a  CLABSI  event  but  is  included  in  the
denominator device day counts. Note:  If a patient has another central line in place that
is accessed, device attribution (eligible for a CLABSI event) begins on CL Day 3 after
access.  Midline  catheters  by  description  are  not  intended  to  terminate  in  one  of  the
great vessels or near the heart which is the definition of a central line. However, the
actual location of the catheter tip is the determining factor and the chest x-ray obtained
to verify line placement should indicate the location of the tip.  Also, consider the line’s
intended use. To qualify as a central line, it must be used for infusion, withdrawal of
blood, or hemodynamic monitoring. Catheter tip cultures are not used for NHSN CLABSI
surveillance for several reasons.  Catheter tip cultures have been shown to have higher
rates of contamination than blood cultures.  Furthermore, not all laboratories are able
to  perform  quantified  catheter  tip  cultures.  Catheter  tips  are  a  part  of  other  types  of
non-NHSN surveillance such as catheter-related BSI (CRBSI) which is generally thought
of as a clinical definition, used when diagnosing and treating patients. The Guidelines
for  the  Prevention  of  Intravascular  Catheter-Related  Infections,  2011  [PDF  –  50
KB] address CRBSI and may be helpful when addressing a physician’s questions. NHSN
does not require a CLABSI to be attributed to a specific central line. Instead, you will
simply be required to document whether an eligible central line was present on the BSI
date of event or the day before. An eligible central line is a device that has first been
accessed  in  an  inpatient location  and  has been  in  place for more than  2 consecutive
calendar  days.  Only  1  central  line  day  is  counted  per  patient-per  calendar  day
regardless  of  how  many  lines  the  patient  may  have  in  place  at  the  same  time.  If  a
patient in a SCA/Oncology unit has both a temporary and a permanent line, only report
the  temporary  line  because  it  has  a  higher  risk  of  infection.  Consult  the  criteria  for
VASC-Arterial or Venous Infection available in Chapter 17 [PDF – 1 MB].  Such a patient
would meet criterion 4.  If your facility is monitoring for these types of infection, enter
this into NHSN as a CVS-VASC event. Please see Note: #d, under the Comments and

Reporting Instructions found in Chapter 4 BSI [PDF – 1 MB] protocol for guidance. This
guidance  states:  Because  IABPs  are  not  considered  central  lines  because  they  are
generally not used for infusion, blood withdrawal, or hemodynamic monitoring. Do not
include  IABP  device  days  in  the  central  line  day  count.    IABPs  are  not  considered
ventricular assist devices.  The bloodstream infection risks associated with IABP devices
is different from an NHSN surveillance perspective. Because the femoral artery is not
among the list of great vessels defined for CLABSI surveillance in NHSN, a catheter in
this vessel is not considered a central line. Do not include femoral artery catheter days
in the central line day count. In both situations, the CLABSI must be attributed to the
inpatient  location  where  the  patient  is  housed.  The  dialysis  unit  is  defined  as  a
non-bedded inpatient unit that provides services to inpatients. CLABSI surveillance, for
NHSN reporting purposes, cannot be performed in this location because there can be no
patient or central line day counts. Likewise, dialysis performed in the patient’s room by
dialysis staff cannot be attributed to the dialysis unit. The BSI event form contains the
following required field “Any hemodialysis catheter present?”. The data in this field can
be used internally by facilities to identify and track potential issues related to dialysis
care.  Data  in  the  “Any  hemodialysis  catheter  present?”  field  are  not  used  to  exclude
events from the CLABSI SIR. Yes. If CLABSI surveillance in an inpatient dialysis location
is part of your monthly reporting plan, all patients in that location must be included in
CLABSI surveillance. (NOTE: inpatient dialysis locations that are non- bedded locations,
in  other  words,  patients  do  not  spend  the  night  in  these  locations,  but  instead  are
transported there for dialysis and then return to a bedded location for the remainder of
their care, cannot participate in the NHSN CLABSI protocol at this time). See question
and answer directly above. Facilities are responsible for all patient care provided in the
facility by employed and contracted staff alike. Therefore, all CLABSIs identified in these
patients are attributed to the in-patient unit where the patient is physically located.   A
positive  blood  specimen  meeting  an  LCBI  criteria,  that  is  accompanied  by

documentation,  during  the  infection  window  period  (IWP),  of  observed  or  suspected
patient  injection  into  vascular  access  lines  during  the  inpatient  admission,  will  be
excluded from CLABSI surveillance. This exclusion is very specific to INJECTION into the
line  (tampering  with,  manipulating,  etc.  do  not  meet  the  intent  of  the  exclusion).  For
example, “pulling on the line, picking at the dressing, removing the caps, and biting”
are just a few examples of line manipulation that do not meet the requirements of this
exception. These actions are different from the purposeful injection into a vascular line
that  is  common  among  IVDA’s.  IVDA’s,  may  inject  their  own  line  without  regard  for
proper line use and/or management, putting their health and safety at risk. Injection, in
this  exclusion,  is  limited  to  patient  injections  only  and  does  not  include  injections
performed  by  other  healthcare  providers  whether  employed,  contracted,  family
members,  or  visitors.   These  events  are  still  considered  LCBIs  but  are  not  associated
with the central line and therefore, are not CLABSIs for NHSN reporting purposes. A BSI
repeat  infection  timeframe  (RIT)  is  created  during  which  no  new  BSI  events  will  be
reported but any additional organisms identified are added to the initial event. Positive
blood specimens collected outside of the BSI RIT must be investigated and must meet
the  documentation  requirements  again  within  the  IWP.  If  addendums  to  the  patient
medical record are made regarding observed or suspected patient injection during the
BSI IWP, the addendum must be documented within 30 days of discharge to be eligible
for  the  exclusion.   If  reporting  the  BSI  to  NHSN,  answer  “Yes”  to  the  risk  factor  field
“Central line”. Information on locations that are included in reporting can be found in
the  Operational  Guidance  for  Acute  Care  Hospitals  to  Report  Central  Line-Associated
Bloodstream Infection (CLABSI) [PDF – 169 KB]. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services  are  the  ultimate  source  for  identifying  reporting  required  as  part  of  their
programs. Information on locations that are included in reporting can be found in the
Operational  Guidance  for  Acute  Care  Hospitals  to  Report  Central  Line-Associated
Bloodstream Infection (CLABSI) [PDF – 200 KB] . The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid

Services  are  the  ultimate  source  for  identifying  reporting  required  as  part  of  their
programs.  For  NHSN  to  assist  with  a  primary  or  secondary  BSI  case  determination
please send the following information to nhsn@cdc.gov: If investigating a positive blood
culture:  If  evaluating  for  a  secondary  BSI:    Q32.  What  is  the  MBI  RIT  Exception?  An
MBI-LCBI designation will not change to an LCBI event if the two criteria below are met:
Please see Example 2b in Chapter 2 [PDF – 909 KB]. An MBI-LCBI designation will not
change to an LCBI event if the two criteria below are met: Please see Example 2b in
Chapter 2 [PDF – 1 MB]. Yes, NCT methods are eligible for use to meet LCBI-1 criterion.
If  an  organism  is  identified  to  the  genus  or  species  level  by  non-culture  based
microbiologic  testing  methods.  Note:  If  blood  is  collected  for  culture  within  2  days
before, or 1 day after the NCT, disregard the result of the NCT and use only the result of
the CULTURE to make an LCBI surveillance determination. If no blood is collected for
culture  within  this  time  period,  use  the  result  of  the  NCT  for  LCBI  surveillance
determination  AND   Organism(s)  identified  in  blood  is  not  related  to  an  infection  at
another site (See LCBI-1 Criterion in the BSI Chapter [PDF – 1 MB]).   No, LCBI-2 and
LCBI-3 criteria are only met using matching organisms identified by a blood culture plus
signs and symptoms. (See LCBI-2 and LCBI-3 criteria in the BSI Chapter [PDF – 1 MB]). 
 Training 
 Newsletters / Members Meeting Updates 
 E-mail Updates 
 Health Department HAI/AR Programs To receive email updates about this page, enter
your email address:  Questions about NHSN?Contact us: nhsn@cdc.gov

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/faqs/faq-bsi.html
