Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / November 17, 2023 / 72(46);1257–1261 Virginia M.
Weaver, MD1; Jeremy T. Hua, MD2; Kathleen M. Fitzsimmons, PhD3; James R. Laing3;
Wigdan Farah, MBBS4; Anne Hart5; Trapper J. Braegger6; Michelle Reid, MPH3; David N.
Weissman,  MD7  (View  author  affiliations)  What  is  already  known  about  this  topic?
Occupational  allergic  diseases,  including  asthma,  are  an  emerging  concern  in  the
rapidly  expanding  U.S.  cannabis  industry.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  In  2022,  the
first  death  attributed  to  occupational  asthma  in  a  U.S.  cannabis  production  worker
occurred  in  Massachusetts.  This  case  illustrates  missed  opportunities  for  prevention,
including  control  of  workplace  exposures,  medical  surveillance,  and  treatment
according  to  current  asthma  guidelines.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health
practice? Prevention is best achieved through a multifaceted approach. It is essential to
evaluate workers with new-onset or worsening asthma for relation to work exposures
and  to  recognize  work  in  cannabis  production  as  potentially  causative.  Views  equals
page views plus PDF downloads Multiple respiratory hazards have been identified in the
cannabis  cultivation  and  production  industry,  in  which  occupational  asthma  and
work-related  exacerbation  of  preexisting  asthma  have  been  reported.  An  employee
working  in  a  Massachusetts  cannabis  cultivation  and  processing  facility  experienced
progressively worsening work-associated respiratory symptoms, which culminated in a
fatal asthma attack in January 2022. This report represents findings of an Occupational
Safety  and  Health  Administration  inspection,  which  included  a  worksite  exposure
assessment,  coworker  and  next-of-kin  interviews,  medical  record  reviews,  and
collaboration with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Respiratory tract or
skin  symptoms  were  reported  by  four  of  10  coworkers  with  similar  job  duties.
Prevention  is  best  achieved  through  a  multifaceted  approach,  including  controlling

asthmagen  exposures,  such  as  cannabis  dust,  providing  worker  training,  and
conducting  medical  monitoring  for  occupational  allergy.  Evaluation  of  workers  with
new-onset or worsening asthma is essential, along with prompt diagnosis and medical
management, which might include cessation of work and workers’ compensation when
relation  to  work  exposures  is  identified.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  work  in
cannabis production is potentially causative. Top Studies in the cannabis cultivation and
production industry have identified multiple respiratory hazards such as microbial and
plant allergens and irritants, as well as chemicals, including pesticides, and allergens
specific to the cannabis plant itself (1–3). Employees in some work areas are exposed to
large  quantities  of  ground  cannabis.  Respiratory  and  skin  signs  and  symptoms,
including asthma, allergic rhinitis, and urticaria, have been reported (2,3). Work-related
asthma  includes  occupational  asthma  (new-onset  asthma  induced  by  sensitizers  or
irritants)  and  work-related  exacerbation  of  preexisting  asthma,  worsened  by  work
exposures  (4).  An  employee  working  in  a  Massachusetts  indoor  cannabis  facility
experienced  progressively  worsening  work-associated  respiratory  symptoms,  which
culminated  in  a  fatal  occupational  asthma  attack.  This  report  provides  information
obtained  in  the  public  health  investigation  performed  to  determine  the  cause  of  this
fatality  and  identify  prevention  options.  Top  The  employee,  a  woman  aged  27  years,
began work at an indoor cannabis cultivation and processing facility on May 20, 2021.
She  worked  throughout  the  facility  as  a  cycle  counter,  including  in  areas  where  the
cannabis  product  was  ground  (Figure).  In  late  July,  she  experienced  onset  of  nausea,
loss of taste and smell, earache, and cough, and her employer required her to obtain
SARS-CoV-2 testing; the results of two tests were negative. Bilateral diffuse wheezing
was noted when a physical examination was performed during the evaluation for the
second  test.  The  patient’s  mother  later  reported  that,  although  her  daughter  had  no
previous  history  of  asthma,  allergies,  or  skin  rash,  she  had  developed  work-related
runny  nose,  cough,  and  shortness  of  breath  after  3–4  months  of  employment.  On

October  1,  the  employee  moved  to  flower  production,  which  entailed  grinding  of
cannabis  flowers  for  approximately  15  minutes,  three  times  per  day,  and  preparing
cannabis cigarettes (prerolls). These activities resulted in increased dust exposure. Dust
from  the  grinder  was  collected  by  a  shop  vacuum;  however,  the  vacuum  had  no
high-efficiency  particulate  air  (HEPA)  filter,  and  visible  dust  escaped.  Additional
dust-generating  processes  included  open  handling  of  ground  product  (e.g.,  while
transferring  product  from  the  grinder  and  filling  prerolls).  Other  flower  production
coworkers reported that the employee’s cough increased, particularly when the grinder
was  on.  Efforts  to  reduce  her  exposure  included  covering  the  grinder  vacuum  with
plastic (the outside of which became visibly coated with ground cannabis) and moving
her  workstation  outside  the  grinder  room.  She  also  used  her  own  N95  respirator  and
wore  company-required  long  sleeves  and  gloves  while  working.  On  November  9,  the
employee  became  acutely  dyspneic  at  work  and  was  transported  by  emergency
medical  services  (EMS)  to  a  local  emergency  department  (Figure).  Enroute  to  the
hospital, she received an albuterol nebulizer, and her dyspnea resolved. She reported
that  she  did  not  have  asthma  but  stated  that  she  might  be  allergic  to  something  at
work  because  she  had  had  a  cough  and  runny  nose  for  >1  month.  Bilateral  faint
wheezes were noted, and she was prescribed a 5-day course of prednisone, cetirizine,
and  an  albuterol  inhaler;  follow-up  with  a  primary  care  physician  was  recommended.
Her mother reported that the employee did not become short of breath at home, except
when  carrying  a  heavy  load  upstairs.  She  said  that  her  daughter  told  her  before  her
subsequent fatal asthma attack that the inhaler, which she used primarily at work, was
nearly  empty.  This  finding  suggests  that  the  employee  had  used  most  of  the
approximately 200 inhalations available in her inhaler over a period of approximately 2
months. On January 4, 2022, the employee told a coworker that her shortness of breath
had  been  getting  progressively  worse  during  the  preceding  2  weeks.  Later  that  day,
while filling prerolls, she began sneezing, and her coughing increased. Despite repeated

albuterol inhaler use, her dyspnea worsened, and EMS was called again. She suffered a
cardiopulmonary arrest before EMS arrived, and her coworkers began resuscitation. She
regained  spontaneous  circulation.  However,  she  did  not  regain  consciousness.
Expiratory wheezing was noted. Anoxic brain death was diagnosed on January 7, 2022,
and  care  was  withdrawn.  An  autopsy  was  not  performed.  Top  The  Massachusetts
Department  of  Public  Health  investigation  revealed  that  the  employee  had  had  a
pulmonary  evaluation  in  2016  for  chronic  cough,  which  included  pre-  and
postbronchodilator spirometry without a methacholine challenge (a bronchoprovocation
test used to help diagnose asthma). The pulmonologist excluded asthma and implicated
cigarette and marijuana smoking, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and rhinitis in the
etiology  of  her  cough  symptoms.  Her  primary  care  physician  had  not  seen  the
employee  since  2015,  and  subsequently  had  not  prescribed  any  allergy  or  asthma
medication.  The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA)  inspection
included personal air sampling after the grinder was connected to a new shop vacuum
with HEPA filtration. The 8-hour time-weighted average respirable dust concentration in
air from the personal breathing zone of the grinder operator was 0.012 mg/m3, and for
two  nearby  employees,  was  nondetectable;  OSHA’s  permissible  exposure  limit  for
respirable  dust  (particulates  not  otherwise  regulated)  is  5  mg/m3.*  Additional  8-hour
monitoring
 for
 endotoxin,
 a
 pro-inflammatory
 contaminant
 associated
 with
gram-negative bacterial growth on organic materials such as cannabis flowers, revealed
27 endotoxin units per cubic meter of air (EU/m3) (grinder operator) and 1.8 and 1.9
EU/m3 (nearby employees); the Dutch Expert Committee on Occupational Safety 8-hour
time  weighted  average  recommendation  is  ≤90  EU/m3.†  A  15-minute  personal  air
sample  obtained  from  the  personal  breathing  zone  of  the  operator  during  active
grinding  was  14  EU/m3.  OSHA  interviewed  one  former  and  nine  current  flower
production  coworkers  of  the  employee  during  February–April,  2022,  four  of  whom
reported work-related respiratory tract or skin signs and symptoms; symptoms in the

former  employee  suggested  occupational  asthma,  because,  although  he  had  a  past
history of asthma, he had not required a bronchodilator inhaler since adolescence. This
activity  was  reviewed  by  CDC,  deemed  not  research,  and  was  conducted  consistent
with  applicable  federal  law  and  CDC  policy.§  Top  Cannabis  industry  employees  are
exposed  to  large  quantities  of  ground  product  in  some  work  areas,  such  as  flower
grinding  and  preroll  production.  Asthma,  allergic  rhinitis,  and  urticaria  have  been
reported  among  cannabis  production  workers  (2,3).  Several  allergens  have  been
identified,  and  irritants  are  present  as  well  (1–3).  Work-related  asthma  includes
occupational  asthma  (i.e.,  new-onset  asthma  induced  by  sensitizers  or  irritants)  and
work-exacerbated asthma (i.e., preexisting asthma worsened by work exposures) (4). In
this case, absence of a history of asthma and the temporal relationship between work
exposure  and  asthma  signs  and  symptoms  are  consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of
occupational asthma. Airborne respirable dust and endotoxin levels below occupational
exposure limits do not exclude a sufficient level of airborne allergen to trigger asthma
and  other  allergic  symptoms.  Enhanced  surveillance  for  work-related  asthma  in  the
state  of  Washington  identified  seven  asthma  cases  among  employees  in  indoor
cannabis  production  facilities  (5).  Three  employees  with  work-exacerbated  asthma
discontinued cannabis employment; one with occupational asthma was symptomatic in
two  different  cannabis  facilities  separated  by  a  2-year  asymptomatic  period  while
unexposed.  In  a  study  of  employees  at  an  indoor  Washington  cannabis  production
facility,  13  of  31  employees  had  symptoms  suggestive  of  asthma  (i.e.,  presence  of
either  an  attack  of  shortness  of  breath,  an  attack  of  asthma,  or  the  use  of  asthma
medication) (6). Among 10 employees with occupational allergy symptoms, seven had
abnormal  spirometry,  and  five  had  skin  prick  testing  consistent  with  cannabis
sensitization.  Five  employees  had  abnormal  or  borderline  fractional  exhaled  nitrogen
oxide  testing,  which  is  used  as  a  marker  of  airway  inflammation  in  asthma
management;  results  increased  significantly  across  the  work  week,  indicating  an

increase  in  airway  inflammation.  Fatal  asthma  can  occur  even  with  disease  that  is
considered  mild;  disparities  in  income,  education,  and  access  to  health  care  are  risk
factors associated with death (7). Work-related asthma has also been associated with
poorer  asthma  control  (8).  Additional  risk  factors  for  the  deceased  employee  in  this
case report include the emergency department visit, recent use of oral glucocorticoids,
increased  dyspnea  and  bronchodilator  inhaler  use  without  inhaled  glucocorticoids,
continued  exposure,  and  lack  of  a  provider  with  expertise  in  occupational  allergies
(7,9). Occupational asthma is generally associated with a latency period of months to
years  between  first  exposure  and  symptoms  (10).  For  example,  fatal  occupational
asthma related to exposure to powdered shark cartilage was reported 16 months after
exposure onset (10). Although latency from this employee’s first occupational cannabis
exposure to symptom onset was short, latency from first exposure was longer because
of personal cannabis use. Cross-sensitivity between cannabis and plant allergens might
also have predisposed this employee to cannabis sensitization (3). The findings in this
report are subject to at least three limitations. First, although the employee’s course is
consistent  with  fatal  asthma  triggered  by  cannabis  allergy,  this  finding  was  not
evaluated by skin testing or specific immunoglobulin E tests. Second, airborne cannabis
allergen levels could not be assessed. Finally, as in many occupational fatality cases,
investigators were not able to speak with the employee, requiring details to be obtained
from  other  sources  such  as  medical  records  and  interviews  with  coworkers  and
next-of-kin.  Providers  and  public  health  professionals  would  benefit  from  additional
research  into  prevalence  and  risk  factors  for  cannabis-related  occupational  allergies.
Development  and  implementation  of  strategies  to  protect  workers  are  critical  in  this
rapidly
 expanding
 industry.
 Measures
 to
 protect
 employees
 might
 include
determination and control of exposures, training of employees and facility managers,
correct use of personal protective equipment, and medical management of employees
with  work-related  symptoms,  which  might  require  cessation  of  work  and  workers’

compensation (Box). It is important to recognize that work in cannabis production is a
risk  for  occupational  allergies.  Top  Corresponding  author:  Virginia  M.  Weaver,
weaver.virginia.m@dol.gov.  Top  1Office  of  Occupational  Medicine  and  Nursing,
Directorate of Technical Support and Emergency Management, Occupational Safety and
Health  Administration,  U.S.  Department  of  Labor,  Washington,  DC;  2Division  of
Environmental  &  Occupational  Health  Sciences,  National  Jewish  Health,  Denver,
Colorado;  3Occupational  Health  Surveillance  Program,  Massachusetts  Department  of
Public  Health;  4Division  of  Pulmonary  and  Critical  Care  Medicine,  Mayo  Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota; 5Region 1, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S.
Department  of  Labor,  Springfield,  Massachusetts;  6Salt  Lake  Technical  Center,
Directorate of Technical Support and Emergency Management, Occupational Safety and
Health  Administration,  U.S.  Department  of  Labor,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah;  7Respiratory
Health  Division,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  CDC.  Top  All
authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical Journal
Editors  form  for  disclosure  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  Jeremy  T.  Hua  reports
support  from  the  Reuben  M.  Cherniack  fellowship  award  at  National  Jewish  Health.
Wigdan Farah reports support from the Mayo Clinic. Trapper J. Braegger and Anne Hart
report support from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. James R. Laing
reports  support  from  the  U.S.  Department  of  Labor’s  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  for
documentation  of  workplace  fatalities  for  the  Census  of  Fatal  Occupational  Injuries,
unrelated  to  the  current  work.  No  other  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.
Top
 *
https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.1000TABLEZ1
† A recommended short-term exposure limit for endotoxins has not been established.
Importantly, airborne respirable dust and endotoxin levels below occupational exposure
limits  do  not  exclude  work-related  triggers  of  asthma  and  other  allergic  signs  and
symptoms
 (e.g.,
 cannabis
 allergens).

https://www.healthcouncil.nl/documents/advisory-reports/2010/07/15/endotoxins-health
-based-recommended-occupational-exposure-limit  §  45  C.F.R.  part  46.102(l)(2),  21
C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C. Sect. 241(d); 5 U.S.C. Sect. 552a; 44 U.S.C. Sect. 3501 et seq.
Top Top Abbreviations: CXR = chest radiograph; ED = emergency department; ICU =
intensive care unit; PCR = polymerase chain reaction. * Cycle counter’s responsibilities
are  counting  packaged  cannabis  products  throughout  the  facility,  including  in  ground
product  areas;  flower  technician’s  responsibilities  are  grinding  cannabis  flowers  and
making
 prerolls.
 Top
 
 *
 https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/91903
 †
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369800248_The_Emerging_Spectrum_of_Resp
iratory_Diseases_in_the_US_Cannabis_Industry  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:
Weaver  VM,  Hua  JT,  Fitzsimmons  KM,  et  al.  Fatal  Occupational  Asthma  in  Cannabis
Production — Massachusetts, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2023;72:1257–1261.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7246a2. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 

and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7246a2.htm
