A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Frequently  asked  questions  about  using  enhanced  barrier  precautions  in  nursing
homes  to  prevent  MDROs.  These  FAQs  were  created  to  address  questions  about
Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  as  defined  in  the  CDC  guidance  Implementation  of
Personal  Protective  Equipment  (PPE)  in  Nursing  Homes  to  Prevent  Spread  of
Multidrug-resistant Organisms (MDROs). Enhanced Barrier Precautions are an infection
control intervention designed to reduce transmission of multidrug-resistant organisms
(MDROs) in nursing homes. Enhanced Barrier Precautions involve gown and glove use
during  high-contact  resident  care  activities  for  residents  known  to  be  colonized  or
infected  with  a  MDRO  as  well  as  those  at  increased  risk  of  MDRO  acquisition  (e.g.,
residents with wounds or indwelling medical devices). As part of Standard Precautions,
which  apply  to  the  care  of  all  residents,  the  use  of  PPE  is  based  on  the  "anticipated
exposure"  to  blood,  body  fluids,  secretions,  or  excretions.  For  example,  gloves  are
recommended  when  contact  with  blood  or  other  potentially  infectious  materials,
mucous membranes, non-intact skin, or contaminated equipment could occur. A gown
is recommended to protect skin and prevent soiling of clothing during procedures and
activities  that  could  cause  contact  with  blood,  body  fluids,  secretions,  or  excretions.
Enhanced Barrier Precautions expand the use of gown and gloves beyond anticipated
blood  and  body  fluid  exposures.  They  focus  on  use  of  gown  and  gloves  during
high-contact resident care activities that have been demonstrated to result in transfer
of MDROs to hands and clothing of healthcare personnel, even if blood and body fluid
exposure  is  not  anticipated.  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  are  recommended  for

residents known to be colonized or infected with a MDRO as well as those at increased
risk  of  MDRO  acquisition  (e.g.,  residents  with  wounds  or  indwelling  medical  devices).
Standard Precautions still apply while using Enhanced Barrier Precautions. For example,
if  splashes  and  sprays  are  anticipated  during  the  high-contact  care  activity,  face
protection  should  be  used  in  addition  to  the  gown  and  gloves.  Contact  Precautions
require the use of gown and gloves on every entry into a resident's room, regardless of
the  level  of  care  being  provided  to  the  resident.  The  resident  is  given  dedicated
equipment (e.g., stethoscope and blood pressure cuff) and is placed in a private room.
When  private  rooms  are  not  available,  some  residents  (e.g.,  residents  with  the  same
pathogen)  may  be  roomed  together.  Residents  on  Contact  Precautions  are
recommended  to  be  restricted  to  their  rooms  except  for  medically  necessary  care,
including  restriction  from  participation  in  group  activities.  Contact  Precautions  are
generally intended to be time limited and, when implemented, should include a plan for
discontinuation or de-escalation. Enhanced Barrier Precautions require the use of gown
and gloves only for high-contact resident care activities (unless otherwise indicated as
part of Standard Precautions). Residents are not restricted to their rooms and do not
require placement in a private room. Enhanced Barrier Precautions also allow residents
to participate in group activities. Because Enhanced Barrier Precautions do not impose
the  same  activity  and  room  placement  restrictions  as  Contact  Precautions,  they  are
intended  to  be  in  place  for  the  duration  of  a  resident's  stay  in  the  facility  or  until
resolution of the wound or discontinuation of the indwelling medical device that placed
them at higher risk.
 Contact  Precautions  are  recommended  if  the  resident  has  acute  diarrhea,  draining
wounds,  or  other  sites  of  secretions  or  excretions  that  are  unable  to  be  covered  or
contained  or  for  a  limited  period  of  time  during  a  suspected  or  confirmed  MDRO
outbreak  investigation.  If  neither  criteria  are  met  and  the  resident  does  not  have
another  indication  for  Contact  Precautions  (See  Question  5),  then  Enhanced  Barrier

Precautions could be used, unless otherwise directed by public health authorities.
 No.  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  are  intended  for  MDROs  (other  than  Clostridioides
difficile) and do not replace existing guidance regarding use of Contact Precautions for
other  pathogens  (e.g.,  Clostridioides  difficile,  scabies,  norovirus)  and  conditions  in
nursing homes. Refer to Appendix A – Type and Duration of Precautions Recommended
for Selected Infections and Conditions of the CDC Guideline for Isolation Precautions for
a list of infections and other conditions where Contact Precautions is recommended.
 No,  at  this  time,  CDC  has  not  recommended  implementation  of  Enhanced  Barrier
Precautions  (EBP)  in  other  healthcare  settings.  All  healthcare  facilities  should  have
practices  in  place  to  prevent  transmission  of  multidrug-resistant  organisms  (MDROs).
Acute care facilities routinely use Contact Precautions as one strategy to prevent MDRO
transmission. Contact Precautions has created challenges for nursing homes trying to
balance interventions to prevent MDRO transmission with residents' quality of life. EBP
is  a  less  restrictive  approach  to  MDRO  prevention  that  places  fewer  limitations  on
resident activities than Contact Precautions.  The studies that informed EBP, including
defining which care activities most commonly result in transfer of MDROs to staff hands
and  clothing,  were  conducted  in  adult  nursing  home  populations.  Such  activities  and
risks  might  be  different  among  pediatric  nursing  home  populations  and  additional
consideration is needed when implementing EBP in these settings. Nursing homes with
pediatric  residents  who  implement  EBP  for  their  pediatric  population  as  part  of  their
MDRO prevention plan may need to redefine high-contact resident care activities based
on the anticipated degree of contact and developmental abilities of pediatric residents
(e.g., repositioning an infant compared to a young adult may require different levels of
assistance). The evidence that Enhanced Barrier Precautions are effective at preventing
MDRO transmission is summarized in the document, Consideration for Use of Enhanced
Barrier Precautions in Skilled Nursing Facilities.
 The high-contact resident care activities described in the guidance were chosen based

on hundreds of observations of care in nursing homes that evaluated the potential for
antibiotic-resistant  bacteria  to  contaminate  the  hands  and  clothing  of  healthcare
personnel. Those activities that demonstrated the highest risk for transfer to hands and
clothing were included in the CDC guidance. Further information is summarized in the
document,  Consideration  for  Use  of  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  in  Skilled  Nursing
Facilities.  This  list  may  not  be  fully  exhaustive;  facilities  could  consider  adding  other
activities specific to their residents.
 While this guidance focuses on gown and glove use, prevention of MDRO transmission
in  nursing  homes  requires  much  more  than  just  proper  use  of  personal  protective
equipment  (PPE).  Adherence  to  other  recommended  infection  prevention  practices
including performing hand hygiene, cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces
and resident care equipment, proper handling of indwelling medical devices, and care
of  wounds  is  also  critical.  CDC  and  health  departments  continue  to  identify  gaps  in
recommended  infection  prevention  practices  as  part  of  on-site  infection  control
assessments in nursing homes. Examples include lack of access to alcohol-based hand
sanitizer  in  resident  rooms  and  other  care  areas;  lack  of  access  to  EPA-registered
disinfectants at the point of use; and failure to clean and disinfect shared resident care
equipment after each use. During public health outbreak responses and as a part of a
Containment  Strategy,  facilities  are  provided  guidance  and  support  to  improve  all
aspects  of  their  infection  prevention  practices,  in  addition  to  implementing  EBP.  CDC
has created a comprehensive, free, online training course for nursing homes addressing
development and implementation of an infection prevention program. Nursing homes
are  encouraged  to  have  staff  review  relevant  modules  and  to  use  the  resources
provided  in  the  training  (e.g.,  policy  and  procedure  templates,  auditing  checklists)  to
assess  and  improve  practices  in  their  facility.  Communicating  infection  prevention
expectations  to  staff,  ensuring  access  to  necessary  supplies,  and  initial  as  well  as
refresher trainings are essential. Assuming Contact Precautions do not otherwise apply,

Enhanced Barrier Precautions are recommended for residents with any of the following:
1) infection or colonization with a MDRO or 2) a wound or indwelling medical device,
even if the resident is not known to be infected or colonized with a MDRO. While prior
iterations  of  the  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  guidance  were  intended  for  use  solely
during  public  health  response  activities,  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  are  currently
recommended  to  be  used  broadly,  in  all  units  across  the  whole  facility,  for  residents
who meet the above criteria. This broader application includes facilities where targeted
MDROs  have  not  yet  been  identified  and  is  intended  to  minimize  the  transmission  of
MDROs in nursing homes.
 Even if the resident colonized with a MDRO is placed on Contact Precautions (e.g., for
uncontained  secretions  or  excretions,  acute  diarrhea,  draining  wounds,  or  ongoing
transmission within the unit or facility is suspected), Enhanced Barrier Precautions are
still recommended for other at-risk residents (i.e., those with indwelling medical devices
or wounds) in the facility.
 There  may  be  circumstances  when  performing  screening  cultures  for  presence  of
certain MDROs could be appropriate, especially as part of public health prevention or
response  measures  to  address  antimicrobial  resistance.  However,  pre-emptive
screening  to  determine  a  resident's  MDRO  status  solely  for  the  purpose  of
implementing  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  is  not  recommended.  Enhanced  Barrier
Precautions are intended to provide an approach for gown and glove use that is based
on resident risk factors and type of care being provided, rather than solely based on
MDRO  status,  especially  for  residents  at  risk  for  MDRO  acquisition  (i.e.,  presence  of
indwelling medical devices or wounds).
 Yes.  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  are  recommended  for  residents  with  indwelling
medical  devices  or  wounds,  who  do  not  otherwise  meet  the  criteria  for  Contact
Precautions,  even  if  they  have  no  history  of  MDRO  colonization  or  infection  and
regardless of whether others in the facility are known to have MDRO colonization. This

is because devices and wounds are risk factors that place these residents at higher risk
for  carrying  or  acquiring  a  MDRO  and  many  residents  colonized  with  a  MDRO  are
asymptomatic or not presently known to be colonized.
 Indwelling medical devices and wounds are risk factors for colonization with a MDRO.
Once colonized, these residents can serve as sources of transmission within the facility.
The  expansion  of  EBP  for  all  residents  with  wounds  or  indwelling  medical  devices  is
intended to protect these high-risk individuals both from acquisition and from serving
as a source of transmission if they have already become colonized. Additional resources
are  summarized  in  the  document,  Consideration  for  Use  of  Enhanced  Barrier
Precautions in Skilled Nursing Facilities.
 At  a  minimum,  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  are  intended  to  be  used  for  residents
colonized or infected with novel (e.g., those newly introduced or emerging in a locality
or  region)  MDROs  or  MDROs  targeted  by  CDC.  The  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions
guidance also provides facilities and jurisdictions the flexibility to implement Enhanced
Barrier Precautions for residents colonized or infected with additional MDROs that may
be  epidemiologically  important  locally.  Determinations  about  an  organism  being
epidemiologically  important  may  be  influenced  by  factors  that  include:  local
epidemiology,  presence  of  ongoing  or  past  outbreaks,  propensity  for  transmission  in
healthcare facilities, association with severe outcomes, or targeting for local prevention
efforts.  No. Single-person rooms (if available) should be prioritized for residents who
have  acute  infection  with  a  communicable  disease  (such  as  influenza,  SARS-CoV-2,
hepatitis  A)  or  for  residents  placed  on  Contact  Precautions  for  presence  of  acute
diarrhea, draining wounds, or other sites of secretions or excretions that are unable to
be covered or contained. Residents on Enhanced Barrier Precautions may share rooms
with  other  residents;  however,  facilities  with  capacity  to  offer  single-person  rooms  or
create  roommate  pairs  based  on  MDRO  colonization  may  choose  to  do  so.  Further,  if
there  are  multiple  residents  with  a  novel  or  targeted  MDRO  in  the  same  facility,

consider cohorting them together in one wing or unit to decrease the direct movement
of  healthcare  personnel  from  colonized  or  infected  residents  to  those  who  are  not
known  to  be  colonized.  When  residents  are  placed  in  shared  rooms,  facilities  must
implement strategies to help minimize transmission of pathogens between roommates
including:  maintaining  spatial  separation  of  at  least  3  feet  between  beds  to  reduce
opportunities  for  inadvertent  sharing  of  items  between  the  residents,  use  of  privacy
curtains  to  limit  direct  contact,  cleaning  and  disinfecting  any  shared  reusable
equipment,  cleaning  and  disinfecting  environmental  surfaces  on  a  more  frequent
schedule, and changing personal protective equipment (if worn) and performing hand
hygiene when switching care from one roommate to another.
 Enhanced Barrier Precautions are intended to be used for the duration of a resident's
stay in a facility. A transition back to Standard Precautions, alone, might be appropriate
for residents placed on Enhanced Barrier Precautions solely because of the presence of
a wound or indwelling medical device when the wound heals or the device is removed.
 Residents  colonized  with  a  novel  or  targeted  MDRO  are  intended  to  remain  on
Enhanced Barrier Precautions for the duration of their stay in a facility. Because MDRO
colonization  is  typically  prolonged  and  follow-up  testing  to  determine  clearance  may
yield  false  negatives,  CDC  does  not  recommend  routine  retesting  of  residents  with  a
history of colonization or infection with a MDRO or discontinuation of Enhanced Barrier
Precautions  after  a  subsequent  negative  test.  The  resident  should  be  maintained  on
Contact  Precautions  in  the  nursing  home  if  he  or  she  has  acute  diarrhea,  draining
wounds,  or  other  sites  of  secretions  or  excretions  that  are  unable  to  be  covered  or
contained  or  for  a  limited  period  of  time  during  a  suspected  or  confirmed  MDRO
outbreak  investigation.  If  none  of  these  are  present,  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions
would typically be appropriate for the management of this resident, unless otherwise
directed by public health authorities.
 Not  necessarily.  Gowns  and  gloves  are  the  minimum  level  of  PPE  required  for  these

high-contact  resident  care  activities.  However,  as  part  of  Standard  Precautions,
additional PPE may be required depending on the resident. For example, face protection
would also be required for activities where splashes and sprays are likely (e.g., wound
irrigation, tracheostomy care).
 Providing  hygiene  refers  to  practices  such  as  brushing  teeth,  combing  hair,  and
shaving.  Many  of  the  high-contact  resident  care  activities  listed  in  the  guidance  are
commonly  bundled  as  part  of  morning  and  evening  care  for  the  resident  rather  than
occurring  as  multiple  isolated  interactions  with  the  resident  throughout  the  day.
Isolated  combing  of  a  resident's  hair  that  is  not  otherwise  bundled  with  other
high-contact resident care activities would not generally necessitate use of a gown and
gloves.
 An  indwelling  medical  device  provides  a  direct  pathway  for  pathogens  in  the
environment  to  enter  the  body  and  cause  infection.  Examples  of  indwelling  medical
devices  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  central  vascular  catheters  (including
hemodialysis  catheters,  peripherally-inserted  central  catheters  (PICCs)),  indwelling
urinary  catheters,  feeding  tubes,  and  tracheostomy  tubes.  Devices  that  are  fully
embedded in the body, without components that communicate with the outside, such
as  pacemakers,  would  not  be  considered  an  indication  for  Enhanced  Barrier
Precautions. Although the data are limited, CDC does not currently consider peripheral
I.V.s (except for midline catheters), continuous glucose monitors, and insulin pumps as
indications  for  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions.  An  ostomy  in  a  resident  without  an
associated  indwelling  medical  device,  would  not  be  considered  an  indication  for
Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions.  In  the  guidance,  wound  care  is  included  as  a
high-contact  resident  care  activity  and  is  generally  defined  as  the  care  of  any  skin
opening requiring a dressing. However, the intent of Enhanced Barrier Precautions is to
focus on residents with a higher risk of acquiring an MDRO over a prolonged period of
time.  This  generally  includes  residents  with  chronic  wounds,  and  not  those  with  only

shorter-lasting  wounds,  such  as  skin  breaks  or  skin  tears  covered  with  a  Band-aid  or
similar dressing. Examples of chronic wounds include, but are not limited to, pressure
ulcers,  diabetic  foot  ulcers,  and  chronic  venous  stasis  ulcers.  Ostomies,  such  as
colostomies  or  ileostomies,  are  not  defined  as  a  wound  for  Enhanced  Barrier
Precautions.  The  presence  of  an  indwelling  device  is  a  major  risk  factor  for  being
colonized with or acquiring a MDRO. Therefore, the safest practice would be to wear a
gown and gloves for any care (e.g., dressing changes) or use (e.g., injecting or infusing
medications or tube feeds) of the indwelling medical device. It may be acceptable to
use gloves, alone, for some uses of a medical device that involve only limited physical
contact  between  the  healthcare  worker  and  the  resident  (e.g.,  passing  medications
through a feeding tube). This is only appropriate if the activity is not bundled together
with other high-contact care activities and there is no evidence of ongoing transmission
in  the  facility.  Facilities  should  define  these  limited  contact  activities  in  their  policies
and procedures and educate healthcare personnel to ensure consistent application of
Enhanced Barrier Precautions.
 In general, gowns and gloves would not be recommended when performing transfers in
common  areas  such  as  dining  or  activity  rooms,  where  contact  is  anticipated  to  be
shorter in duration. Enhanced Barrier Precautions is primarily intended to apply to care
that  occurs  within  a  resident's  room  where  high-contact  resident  care  activities,
including transfers, are bundled together with other high-contact activity, such as part
of  morning  or  evening  care.  This  extended  contact  with  the  resident  and  their
environment increases the risk of MDRO spreading to staff hands and clothes. Outside
the  resident's  rooms,  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  should  be  followed  when
performing  transfers  and  assisting  during  bathing  in  a  shared/common  shower  room
and  when  working  with  residents  in  the  therapy  gym,  specifically  when  anticipating
close  physical  contact  while  assisting  with  transfers  and  mobility.  Hand  hygiene  is
recommended before and after resident contact.

 Depending  on  the  activity,  therapy  may  be  considered  "high-contact"  resident  care.
Therapists  should  use  gowns  and  gloves  when  working  with  residents  on  Enhanced
Barrier  Precautions  in  the  therapy  gym  or  in  the  resident's  room  if  they  anticipate
prolonged, close body contact where transmission of MDROs to the therapist's clothes is
possible. EBP should not limit a resident's ability to continue their medical therapy, so
while  the  use  of  a  gown  and  gloves  is  generally  discouraged  in  hallways  and  other
common areas, there may be individual circumstances (e.g., therapy that has to occur
outside of the resident's room or therapy gym) that prompt an evaluation for the need
to use PPE outside of the room or gym, depending on the degree of assist/close contact.
As  part  of  Standard  Precautions,  gowns  and  gloves  should  be  removed  and  hand
hygiene performed when moving to work with another resident. Therapists should also
ensure  reusable  therapy  equipment  is  cleaned  and  disinfected  after  each  use  and
surfaces in the therapy gym receive routine cleaning and disinfection.
 The  research  that  was  the  basis  for  the  current  guidance  evaluated  high-contact
resident care activities, not specifically the risk of transmission of MDROs to the hands
or  clothing  of  Environmental  Services  (EVS)  or  housekeeping  personnel.  However,
changing  linen  is  considered  a  high  contact  resident  care  activity;  gowns  and  gloves
should  be  worn  by  EVS  personnel  if  they  are  changing  the  linen  of  residents  on
Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  and  could  be  considered  for  additional  environmental
services  or  housekeeping  responsibilities  that  involve  extensive  contact  with  the
resident or the resident's environment. Gown and glove use by EVS should be based on
facility policy and for anticipated exposures to body fluids, chemicals, or contaminated
surfaces.  It  is  important  to  remember,  gowns  and  gloves  should  be  worn  by  EVS
personnel  when  cleaning  and  disinfecting  the  rooms  of  residents  on  Contact
Precautions.
 No. Signs are intended to signal to individuals entering the room the specific actions
they should take to protect themselves and the resident. To do this effectively, the sign

must contain information about the type of Precautions and the recommended PPE to
be worn when caring for the resident. Generic signs that instruct individuals to speak to
the nurse are not adequate to ensure Precautions are followed. Signs should not include
information  about  the  resident's  diagnosis  or  the  reason  for  the  Precautions  (e.g.,
presence of a resistant pathogen); inclusion of that information would violate HIPAA and
resident dignity. CDC has created examples of signs that can be used by facilities to
communicate information about Transmission-Based and Enhanced Barrier Precautions.
Facilities can use these signs or modify them to create signs that work for their facility.
 You should refer to local and state regulations regarding disposal of medical waste. The
OSHA Bloodborne Pathogen Standard uses the term "regulated waste" to refer to the
following  categories  of  waste  which  require  special  handling,  at  a  minimum:  liquid  or
semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials (OPIM); contaminated items
that would release blood or OPIM in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items
that are caked with dried blood or OPIM and are capable of releasing these materials
during  handling;  contaminated  sharps;  pathological  and  microbiological  wastes
containing blood or OPIM. Based on this definition, most PPE used during resident care,
including  care  of  residents  placed  in  Enhanced  Barrier  or  Transmission-Based
Precautions,  would  not  fall  into  the  category  of  regulated  medical  waste  requiring
disposal  in  a  biohazard  bag,  and  could  be  discarded  as  routine  non-infectious  waste.
Facilities should remember to have an appropriate disposal container available in the
resident  room  to  allow  for  removal  of  PPE  inside  the  room.  However,  local  or  state
regulations may be more restrictive than this federal standard, so you should refer to
those when making decisions. This website provides resources for patients, families and
caregivers on the prevention of infections in nursing homes and assisted living facilities.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/long-term-care-facilities/hcp/prevent-mdro/faqs.html
