A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 All U.S. health care personnel should be screened for tuberculosis (TB) upon hire (i.e.,
preplacement). Annual testing is not recommended unless there is a known exposure or
ongoing transmission at a health care facility. All U.S. health care personnel should be
screened for TB upon hire (i.e., preplacement). TB screening is a process that includes:
Routine serial TB screening or testing at any interval after baseline (e.g., annually) of
health care personnel is not recommended unless there is a known exposure or ongoing
transmission at a healthcare facility.  CDC recommendations do not override or replace
state regulations. State and local regulations may differ to meet local needs.    Contact
your state TB control program for the testing regulations in your state. If health care
personnel  diagnosed  with  latent  TB  infection  do  not  receive  treatment:  Treatment  is
strongly encouraged for health care personnel diagnosed with latent TB infection. Short
course,  rifamycin-based  regimens  are  the  preferred  treatment  options  for  latent  TB
infection  because  they  have  higher  completion  rates.  Health  care  facilities  might
consider using annual TB screening for:  State and local health departments can help
facilities  make  these  decisions.  All  health  care  personnel  should  receive  annual  TB
education.  All  health  care  personnel  with  a  known  exposure  to  TB  disease  should
receive  a  TB  symptom  screen  and  testing.   Health  care  personnel  with  a  previous
negative TB test result should be tested immediately and re-tested 8 to 10 weeks after
the last known exposure. For consistency, use the same type of TB test (e.g., TB blood
test or TB skin test) that was used upon hire (i.e., preplacement) and for any follow-up
testing. Health care personnel with a document history of a positive TB test result do

not  need  to  be  re-tested  after  exposure  to  TB  disease.  They  should  receive  a  TB
symptom screen. If they have symptoms of TB disease, they should be evaluated for TB
disease.  Notify the local health department immediately if TB disease is presumed or
confirmed. Health care settings in the United States should have a TB infection control
plan., including TB screening and testing of health care personnel. Languages Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/tb-healthcare-settings/hcp/screening-testing/frequency.html
