A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Nurses, medical providers, technicians and others who work in dialysis facilities face a
difficult  task  of  managing  the  complex  conditions  affecting  their  patients  while
simultaneously  focusing  on  reducing  the  risk  of  infection  for  these  at-risk  individuals.
The resources on this page include guidance documents and web links to resources on
the prevention of infection in the dialysis setting. The guidelines and recommendations
included  in  this  section  reflect  existing  evidence-based  guidelines  produced  by  the
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  and  the  Healthcare  Infection  Control
Practices Advisory Committee. The 2016 update reviews the current recommendations
on  infection  prevention  and  control  for  dialysis.  Table  1  provides  links  to  current
recommendations for specific topics from the 2001 document. Table 2 identifies topics
not
 included
 in
 the
 2001
 document
 and
 provides
 the
 most
 recent
 CDC
recommendations  on  the  topic.  CENTERS  FOR  DISEASE  CONTROL  AND  PREVENTION
2016 UPDATE TO THE 2001 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREVENTING TRANSMISSION OF
INFECTIONS IN CHRONIC HEMODIALYSIS PATIENTS This document, Centers for Disease
Control  and  Prevention  2016  Update  to  the  2001  Recommendations  for  Preventing
Transmission  of  Infections  among  Chronic  Hemodialysis  Patients  updates  selected
information  and  recommendations  in  the  2001  Guideline,  Recommendations  for
Preventing Transmission of Infections among Chronic Hemodialysis Patients. This 2016
update provides new references/links for information, updated recommendations (Table
1), and pertinent CDC recommendations that were not addressed in the 2001 Guideline
(Table  2).Some  information  and  recommendations  in  the  2001  Guideline  have  been

superseded by information that has led to more recent CDC recommendations. These
topics  include,  but  are  not  limited  to:  Online  2001  version  (MMWR)Printable  2001
version  (MMWR)  with  page  numbers  (sections  and  page  numbers  refer  to  2001
Guideline)  CDC  recommendations  and  information  issued  after  2001  address  some
topics not included in the 2001 Guideline. These topics include, but are not limited to:
Readers are urged to consult the full guidelines for background, rationale, and evidence
behind  each  recommendation.  All  guidelines  are  available  at:  Guidelines  and
Recommendations  The  Centers  for  Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  Survey  and
Certification Program certifies ESRD facilities for inclusion in the Medicare Program by
validating that the care and services of each facility meet specified safety and quality
standards,  called  "Conditions  for  Coverage."  The  CMS  Dialysis  page  provides  basic
information related to survey and certification of dialysis facilities for ESRD surveyors
and dialysis providers. It includes links to applicable laws and regulations and provides
resources  to  support  and  assess  compliance  with  Federal  regulations.  Infections  are
common in people receiving dialysis and can be serious. Take steps to lower your risk
for  infection  before,  during,  and  after  dialysis.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dialysis-safety/hcp/recommendations-resources/index.html
