  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail.  Please note: An erratum has
been 
published for this article. To view the erratum, please click
here.
 Prepared  by  J.  Michael  Miller,  PhD1  Rex  Astles,  PhD2   Timothy  Baszler,  DVM,  PhD3
Kimberle  Chapin,  MD4   Roberta  Carey,  PhD1  Lynne  Garcia,  MS5   Larry  Gray,  PhD6
Davise Larone, PhD7 Michael Pentella, PhD8 Anne Pollock, MT1 Daniel S. Shapiro, MD9
Elizabeth  Weirich,  MS1  Danny  Wiedbrauk,  PhD10  1National  Center  for  Emerging  and
Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC  2Laboratory  Science,  Policy  and  Practice  Program
Office, CDC 3College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
4Lifespan  Academic  Medical  Centers,  Providence,  RI  5LSG  and  Associates,  Santa
Monica,  CA  6TriHealth  Laboratories,  Cincinnati,  OH  7Weill  Medical  College  of  Cornell
University, New York, NY 8University of Iowa Hygienic Laboratory, Iowa City, IA 9Lahey
Clinic, Burlington, MA 10Warde Medical Laboratory, Ann Arbor, MI The material in this
report originated in the National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases,
Beth  P.  Bell,  MD,  MPH,  Director.   Corresponding  preparer:  J.  Michael  Miller,  PhD,
Microbiology Technical Services, LLC, Dunwoody, GA 30338. Telephone: 678-428-6319;
Fax:  770-396-0955;  E-mail:  jmm8@comcast.net.   Summary  Prevention  of  injuries  and
occupational  infections  in  U.S.  laboratories  has  been  a  concern  for  many  years.  CDC
and the National Institutes of Health addressed the topic in their publication Biosafety
in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, now in its 5th edition (BMBL-5). BMBL-5,
however,  was  not  designed  to  address  the  day-to-day  operations  of  diagnostic

laboratories  in  human  and  animal  medicine.  In  2008,  CDC  convened  a  Blue  Ribbon
Panel of laboratory representatives from a variety of agencies, laboratory organizations,
and facilities to review laboratory biosafety in diagnostic laboratories. The members of
this panel recommended that biosafety guidelines be developed to address the unique
operational  needs  of  the  diagnostic  laboratory  community  and  that  they  be  science
based  and  made  available  broadly.  These  guidelines  promote  a  culture  of  safety  and
include recommendations that supplement BMBL-5 by addressing the unique needs of
the  diagnostic  laboratory.  They  are  not  requirements  but  recommendations  that
represent  current  science  and  sound  judgment  that  can  foster  a  safe  working
environment  for  all  laboratorians.  Throughout  these  guidelines,  quality  laboratory
science is reinforced by a common-sense approach to biosafety in day-to-day activities.
Because  many  of  the  same  diagnostic  techniques  are  used  in  human  and  animal
diagnostic  laboratories,  the  text  is  presented  with  this  in  mind.  All  functions  of  the
human and animal diagnostic laboratory — microbiology, chemistry, hematology, and
pathology with autopsy and necropsy guidance — are addressed. A specific section for
veterinary diagnostic laboratories addresses the veterinary issues not shared by other
human  laboratory  departments.  Recommendations  for  all  laboratories  include  use  of
Class  IIA2  biological  safety  cabinets  that  are  inspected  annually;  frequent  hand
washing; use of appropriate disinfectants, including 1:10 dilutions of household bleach;
dependence  on  risk  assessments  for  many  activities;  development  of  written  safety
protocols that address the risks of chemicals in the laboratory; the need for negative
airflow into the laboratory; areas of the laboratory in which use of gloves is optional or
is  recommended;  and  the  national  need  for  a  central  site  for  surveillance  and
nonpunitive  reporting  of  laboratory  incidents/exposures,  injuries,  and  infections.  This
report offers guidance and recommends biosafety practices specifically for human and
animal clinical diagnostic laboratories and is intended to supplement the 5th edition of
Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories (BMBL-5), developed by CDC

and  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  (1).  This  document  was  written  not  to  replace
existing  biosafety  guidelines,  but  to  1)  improve  the  safety  of  activities  in  clinical
diagnostic  laboratories,  2)  encourage  laboratory  workers  to  think  about  safety  issues
they  might  not  previously  have  considered  or  addressed,  and  3)  encourage
laboratorians to create and foster a culture of safety in their laboratories. Should any of
the  guidelines  provided  herein  conflict  with  federal,  state,  or  local  laws  or  regulatory
requirements, the laboratorian should defer to the federal, state, or local requirements.
This  culture  of  safety  is  also  supported  by  the  Clinical  and  Laboratory  Standards
Institute (2). Work in a diagnostic laboratory entails safety considerations beyond the
biological  component;  therefore,  these  guidelines  also  address  a  few  of  the  more
important day-to-day safety issues that affect laboratorians in settings where biological
safety  is  a  major  focus.  According  to  the  U.S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  in  2008,
approximately  328,000  medical  laboratory  technicians  and  technologists  worked  in
human diagnostic laboratories in the United States. An estimated 500,000 persons in all
professions  work  in  human  and  animal  diagnostic  laboratories.  Any  of  these  workers
who have chronic medical conditions or receive immunosuppressive therapy would be
at increased risk for a laboratory-acquired infection (LAI) after a laboratory exposure.
Precise risk for infection after exposure is unknown because determining the source or
the mode of transmission often is difficult. No national surveillance system is available.
LAIs and exposures have been reported since early in the 20th century, but only in the
1970s  were  sufficient  data  available  to  attempt  quantitative  assessments  of  risk.
Recent  MMWR  reports  (3–11)  have  indicated  that  bacteria  account  for  >40%  of
infections,  with  >37  species  reported  as  etiologic  agents  in  LAIs;  however,  other
microbes
 are
 often
 implicated.
 Hepatitis
 B
 has
 been
 the
 most
 frequent
laboratory-acquired viral infection, with a rate of 3.5–4.6 cases per 1000 workers, which
is  two  to  four  times  that  of  the  general  population.  Any  laboratorian  who  collects  or
handles tubes of blood is vulnerable (12). Early surveys of LAIs found that laboratory

personnel were three to nine times more likely than the general population to become
infected  with  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  (13,14).  In  a  1986  survey  of  approximately
4000  workers  in  54  public  health  and  165  hospital  laboratories  in  the  United  States,
3.5/1000 employee infections occurred in hospital laboratories, and 1.4/1000 employee
infections occurred in public health laboratories (15). In a 1994–1995 survey of 25,000
laboratory workers from 397 clinical laboratories in the United Kingdom, the overall rate
of LAI was 18/100,000 employees (16). In a 2005 CDC study of bacterial meningitis in
U.S.  laboratorians,  Neisseria  meningitidis  accounted  for  a  substantial  number  of  LAIs.
The attack rate of this organism in the general population was 13/100,000 persons. The
attack rate in the general population aged 30–59 years (the estimated age range of the
average  laboratorian)  was  0.3  per  100,000.  The  attack  rate  for  microbiologists  (aged
30–59  years)  was  20/100,000  (17).  LAIs  have  also  included  fungal  and  parasitic
infections.  The  most  common  agents  of  laboratory-acquired  fungal  infections  are  the
dimorphic  fungi  Blastomyces,  Histoplasma,  and  Coccidioides  (18,19);  most  reported
infections were caused by inhalation of conidia. Reported parasite-associated LAIs were
caused  primarily  by  Leishmania,  Plasmodium,  Toxoplasma,  Chagas  disease  organism,
and other trypanosomes (20). Of the 52 cases of laboratory-acquired malaria, 56% were
vector borne (from mosquitoes used in research, not clinical laboratories). Most infected
health-care workers acquired infection from needle sticks during preparation of blood
smears  or  while  drawing  blood.  In  clinical  chemistry  laboratories,  data  from  17  New
York hospitals listed needle puncture (103 cases), acid or alkali spills (46), glass cuts
(44), splash in eye (19), and bruises and cuts (45) as the most frequent exposures (21).
Needle  puncture,  glass  cuts,  splash  in  eye,  and  bruises  and  cuts  have  the  highest
potential for infection from microbes. In the hematology laboratory, the major causes of
injuries are likely to be exposure to blood and body fluids; needle sticks, aerosols from
centrifuge or removal of tube stoppers, tube breakage; or contaminated gloves (22). In
non-microbiology  sections  of  the  diagnostic  laboratory,  the  primary  mistake  may  be

assuming that a given specimen contains no infectious agents and then working with
little  attention  to  risk  for  infection.  This  scenario  can  be  particularly  problematic  in
laboratories  developing  new  technologies,  such  as  molecular  and  biochemical
technologies,  and  in  point-of-care  diagnostics  performed  by  staff  unaccustomed  to
testing  that  requires  biosafety  considerations  and  use  of  barrier  techniques  such  as
personal  protective  equipment.  The  risks  and  causes  of  LAIs  have  been  documented.
However,  there  is  a  dearth  of  evidence-based  research  and  publications  focused  on
biosafety; particularly missing are studies documenting safe practices in the day-to-day
operations of diagnostic laboratories.  In 2008, CDC convened a Blue Ribbon Panel of
laboratory  representatives  from  a  variety  of  agencies,  laboratory  organizations,  and
facilities to review laboratory biosafety in diagnostic laboratories. Members of the panel
were either selected by the invited national laboratory organization they represented or
were  invited  by  CDC  because  of  their  roles  in  biosafety  at  the  national  level.  The
organizations  participating  in  the  panel  represented  the  majority  of  laboratory
technologists  in  the  United  States.  In  addition,  some  members  of  the  panel  were
representatives of the biosafety community. The Blue Ribbon Panel recommended that
biosafety  guidelines  be  developed  to  address  the  unique  operational  needs  of  the
diagnostic laboratory community and that they be science based and made available
broadly.  Panel members reviewed the guidelines that were developed and synthesized
by the writing team. Official endorsements by the organizations they represented were
not required, although each representative was required to submit written approval of
the  recommendations.  Edits  and  comments  from  each  participant  were  carefully
considered  and  incorporated  where  appropriate.  The  guidelines  provided  herein  are
synthesized  and  supported  from  systematic  reviews  of  peer-reviewed  publications  of
evidence-based  data  from  which  recommendations  could  be  made,  justifying
common-sense approaches that should be articulated, and where safe procedures have
been described and proven. Because of the lack of evidence-based research in much of

the  current  literature  on  biosafety  practices,  no  attempt  was  made  to  weight  the
evidence  and  resulting  recommendations  (i.e.,  strong  or  weak).  In  the  absence  of
supporting  evidence-based  research  and  documentation,  some  recommendations  are
based on expert opinion by international experts in the field of microbiology and must
be appropriately applied until evidence-based research can substantiate their validity.
The  authors  reviewed  and  approved  their  own  sections  and  also  evaluated  how  their
topics  accurately  reflected  and  supported  the  goals  of  the  entire  document.   Each
section  of  recommendations  was  reviewed  both  within  CDC  and  by  the  relevant
national  organizations  whose  members  would  embrace  these  guidelines.  These
included the College of American Pathologists, Greater New York Hospital Association
Regional  Laboratory  Task  Force,  American  Society  for  Microbiology,  American  Clinical
Laboratory Association, Association of Public Health Laboratories, American Society for
Clinical Laboratory Science, American Society for Clinical Pathology, American Biological
Safety Association, American Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians, and
individual physicians and subject matter experts. Future research in biosafety practices
in  the  laboratory  will  contribute  to  further  recommendations  and  will  substantiate
others  as  well  as  provide  opportunities  to  revise  this  document.   Persons  working  in
clinical diagnostic laboratories are exposed to many risks (1). Whether the patients are
humans or animals and whether laboratorians work in microbiology or elsewhere in the
laboratory, the human and animal diagnostic laboratory is a challenging environment.
The  more  that  laboratorians  become  aware  of  and  adhere  to  recommended,
science-based safety precautions, the lower the risk. The goal of a safety program is to
lower the risk to as close as possible to zero, although zero risk is as yet unattainable as
long  as  patient  specimens  and  live  organisms  are  manipulated.  Protection  of
laboratorians, coworkers, patients, families, and the environment is the greatest safety
concern.  Laboratory  exposures  occur  more  often  than  is  generally  suspected.  Other
laboratory incidents such as minor scrapes or cuts, insignificant spills, or unrecognized

aerosols occur even more frequently and might not cause an exposure that results in
an LAI. In this report, "laboratory exposures" refer to events that put employees at risk
for  an  LAI  and  events  that  result  in  actual  acquisition  of  LAIs.  Except  for  reporting
requirements  imposed  by  CDC's  Select  Agent  Program,  which  deals  with  handling  of
specific,  potentially  hazardous  biological  agents  and  toxins,  no  national  surveillance
system is in place to which medical laboratory exposures and subsequent work-related
infections are reported. Increased attention has been focused on laboratory biosafety
and  biosecurity  since  2001  but  has  been  largely  limited  to  precautions  required  for
agents of bioterrorism. Other laboratory exposures and LAIs continue to occur, almost
always because of a breakdown of established safety protocols. Because of the lack of
an official surveillance mechanism for reporting LAIs and because of the fear of punitive
action by an oversight agency if injuries are reported, the data needed to determine the
extent and cause of LAIs are unavailable. In addition, there is a dearth of science-based
insights  on  prevention  of  LAIs.   The  Blue  Ribbon  Panel  recognizes  the  need  for  a
voluntary,  nonpunitive  surveillance  and  reporting  system  with  the  potential  for
anonymity  to  be  implemented  in  the  United  States.  Such  a  system  would  allow  for
reporting  and  evaluation  of  all  LAIs  and  would  potentially  lead  to  training  and
interventions to facilitate a negligible incidence rate. The five most predominant routes
of LAIs are The first four routes are relatively easy to detect, but they account for <20%
of  all  reported  LAIs  (23,24).  No  distinguishable  exposure  events  were  identified  in
approximately  80%  of  LAIs  reported  before  1978  (24–26).  In  many  cases,  the  only
association was that the infected person worked with a microbiological agent or was in
the  vicinity  of  a  person  handling  a  microbiological  agent.  The  inability  to  identify  a
specific  event  was  also  reported  in  a  more  recent  study  (27),  which  found  that  the
probable sources of LAIs were apparent in only 50% of cases. These data suggest that
unsuspected infectious aerosols can play a large role in LAIs (1,23,24,28). The concept
of a "culture of safety," as described in this report, encourages all human and animal

diagnostic laboratories to promote an organizational culture of systematic assessment
of all work processes and procedures to identify associated risks and implement plans
to mitigate those risks. In addition to the often unknown biohazard risk associated with
handling  diagnostic  specimens,  each  section  of  the  diagnostic  laboratory  has
procedures and processes for handling known infectious agents that convey excessive
risk for exposure and possible infection and/or occupational injury. These risks typically
are  associated  with  design  flaws  or  lack  of  or  inadequacy  of  safety  procedures  and
training (1,2). In addition, the day-to-day operations of a human or animal diagnostic
laboratory  differ  markedly  from  those  of  an  academic  or  research  laboratory  and
require  different  biosafety  guidelines;  these  differences  prompted  the  focus  of  this
report  on  medical  laboratory  communities,  their  occupational  risks,  potential  for
exposure,  and  opportunities  to  mitigate  those  risks.  Successful  establishment  of  a
culture  of  safety  requires  that  laboratory  safety  become  an  integral  and  apparent
priority to the organization, embraced first and foremost by top management and with
the  concomitant  infrastructure  support  required  to  foster  safe  behaviors  among  its
employees (29–31). As required by the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments,
the  College  of  American  Pathologists,  and  other  accrediting  agencies,  a  laboratory
director needs to assume the responsibility for Laboratory design is fundamental to the
safety  of  laboratory  workers,  hospital  staff,  and  patients.  The  Clinical  and  Laboratory
Standards  Institute  document,  Laboratory  Design;  Approved  Guideline  (32),  discusses
laboratory design in detail. Because remediating poorly designed laboratory workspace
is  difficult,  or  even  impossible,  design  warrants  careful  planning  and  consideration  of
safety issues. The following are suggestions to consider in the design or renovation of
the  diagnostic  laboratory.  Although  there  is  no  national  standard  requirement  for  an
amount of space per person working in the laboratory, 300–350 sq. ft/person within a
laboratory department is a reasonable figure to provide a safe work area. Ideally, allow
a  minimum  5-foot  space  between  the  worker  (at  a  laboratory  chair)  and  any  object

behind  the  worker  to  provide  reasonable  maneuverability.  The  laboratory  director  is
ultimately responsible for identifying potential hazards, assessing risks associated with
those  hazards,  and  establishing  precautions  and  standard  procedures  to  minimize
employee exposure to those risks. Because the identity of an infectious agent is initially
unknown  in  the  clinical  laboratory,  the  general  recommendation  is  that  the  biosafety
level  (BSL)-2  standard  and  special  practices  in  Biosafety  in  Microbiological  and
Biomedical  Laboratories,  5th  edition  (1)  be  followed  for  all  work  in  the  clinical
laboratory, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA's) Standard
Precautions  (gloves,  gowns,  and  protective  eyewear)  (33)  and  BSL-2  practices  (2)  be
employed during handling of all blood and body fluids. Other comprehensive resources
are  available  (34,35).  Risk  assessment,  as  outlined  here  and  in  Section  12,  may
determine  that  decreasing  or  increasing  the  BSL  practices  or  facilities  is  warranted
(Figure 1). Qualitative biological risk assessment is a subjective process that involves
professional  judgments.  Because  of  uncertainties  or  insufficient  scientific  data,  risk
assessments  often  are  based  on  incomplete  knowledge  or  information.  Inherent
limitations  of  and  assumptions  made  in  the  process  also  exist,  and  the  perception  of
acceptable  risk  differs  for  everyone.  The  risk  is  never  zero,  and  potential  for  human
error  always  exists.  Identifying  potential  hazards  in  the  laboratory  is  the  first  step  in
performing  a  risk  assessment.  Many  categories  of  microbiological  hazards  are
encountered from the time a specimen is collected until it is disposed of permanently. A
comprehensive  approach  for  identifying  hazards  in  the  laboratory  will  include
information  from  a  variety  of  sources.  Methods  to  ascertain  hazard  information  can
include  benchmarking,  walkabouts,  interviews,  detailed  inspections,  incident  reviews,
workflow  and  process  analysis,  and  facility  design.   No  one  standard  approach  or
correct  method  exists  for  conducting  a  risk  assessment;  However,  several  strategies
are  available,  such  as  using  a  risk  prioritization  matrix,  conducting  a  job  hazard
analysis; or listing potential scenarios of problems during a procedure, task, or activity.

The process involves the following five steps: Identify the hazards associated with an
infectious  agent  or  material.  Identify  the  activities  that  might  cause  exposure  to  the
agent or material. Consider the competencies and experience of laboratory personnel.
Evaluate  and  prioritize  risks  (evaluate  the  likelihood  that  an  exposure  would  cause  a
laboratory-acquired infection [LAI] and the severity of consequences if such an infection
occurs). Develop, implement, and evaluate controls to minimize the risk for exposure.
Standardization of the risk assessment process at an institution can greatly improve the
clarity  and  quality  of  this  process.  Training  staff  in  risk  assessment  is  critical  to
achieving  these  objectives.  2.1.1.  Step  1.  Identify  the  hazards  associated  with  an
infectious agent or material. 2.1.2. Step 2. Identify activities that might cause exposure
to  the  agent  or  material.  Subculturing  positive  blood  culture  bottles,  making  smears
Expelling  air  from  tubes  or  bottles  Withdrawing  needles  from  stoppers  Separating
needles  from  syringes  Aspirating  and  transferring  body  fluids  Harvesting  tissues
Flaming loops Cooling loops in culture media Subculturing and streaking culture media
Expelling last drop from a pipette (including Eppendorff pipettes) Centrifugation Setting
up  cultures,  inoculating  media  Mixing,  blending,  grinding,  shaking,  sonicating,  and
vortexing  specimens  or  cultures  Pouring,  splitting,  or  decanting  liquid  specimens
Removing caps or swabs from culture containers, opening lyophilized cultures, opening
cryotubes  Spilling  infectious  material  Filtering  specimens  under  vacuum  Preparing
isolates for automated identification/susceptibility testing Preparing smears, performing
heat fixing, staining slides Performing catalase test Performing serology, rapid antigen
tests,  wet  preps,  and  slide  agglutinations  Throwing  contaminated  items  into
biohazardous  waste  Cleaning  up  spills  2.1.3.  Step  3.  Consider  the  competencies  and
experience  of  laboratory  personnel.  2.1.4.  Step  4.  Evaluate  and  prioritize  risks.  Risks
are evaluated according to the likelihood of occurrence and severity of consequences
(Table 2). 2.1.5. Step 5. Develop, implement, and evaluate controls to minimize the risk
for exposure. 2.2.1. Containment "Containment" describes safe methods for managing

infectious  materials  in  the  laboratory  to  reduce  or  eliminate  exposure  of  laboratory
workers,  other  persons,  and  the  environment.  BSLs  provide  appropriate  levels  of
containment  needed  for  the  operations  performed,  the  documented  or  suspected
routes of transmission of the infectious agent, and the laboratory function or activities.
The four BSLs, designated 1–4, are based on combinations of laboratory practice and
techniques,  safety  equipment  (primary  barriers),  and  laboratory  facilities  (secondary
barriers).  Each  BSL  builds  on  the  previous  level  to  provide  additional  containment.
Laboratory directors are responsible for determining which BSL is appropriate for work
in  their  specific  laboratories.  Material  Safety  Data  Sheets  (MSDS)  for  chemicals  are
available  from  the  manufacturer,  supplier,  or  an  official  Internet  site.  The  Division  of
Occupational  Health  and  Safety,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  has  promulgated
guidelines  for  handling  genetically  manipulated  organisms  and  has  additional
instructions
 for
 accessing
 MSDS
(http://dohs.ors.od.nih.gov/material_safety_data_main.htm).  Many  safety  procedures,
guidelines,  and  principles  apply  to  all  sections  of  the  diagnostic  laboratory.  The
recommendations presented in this section represent a broad view of safety throughout
the laboratory. More detailed recommendations can be found in 
Biosafety  in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories  (BMBL-5)  and  in  the
World Health Organization's 
Laboratory Biosafety Manual (1,36). Hospitals, clinical laboratories, state and local
health departments, CDC, and the American Society for Microbiology have established
and/or published guidelines to follow when suspected agents of bioterrorism have been
or could be released in the community. However, routine clinical laboratory testing may
provide  the  first  evidence  of  an  unexpected  bioterrorism  event.  Routine  clinical
specimens also may harbor unusual or exotic infectious agents that are dangerous to
amplify  in  culture.  These  agents  are  often  difficult  to  identify,  and  the  routine  bench
technologist might continue work on the culture by passage, repeated staining, nucleic

acid  testing,  neutralization,  and  other  methods.  This  continued  workup  places  the
technologist and others in the laboratory at risk for infection. Ideally, these specimens
are not to be processed or tested in the routine laboratory, and they can be removed
from the testing stream if the suspected agent is known. Relationships with the state
public health laboratory, and subsequently with the Laboratory Response Network, are
critical in this effort. Once the testing process has begun, the bench technologist must
have clear and concise instructions about when to seek assistance from the laboratory
supervisor and/or director. 3.1.1. Leaking containers 3.1.2. Visible contamination of the
outside  of  containers  3.1.3.  Loose  caps  3.1.4.  Operational  procedures  3.1.5.  Manual
removal  of  sealed  caps;  specimen  aliquotting  and  pipetting  3.1.6.  Pneumatic  tube
systems  If  engineering  controls  are  in  place  to  prevent  splashes  or  sprays,  the
requirement for PPE can be modified on the basis of a risk assessment and evidence of
the  effectiveness  of  the  engineering  control  to  prevent  exposure  from  splashes  or
sprays.  Examples  of  engineering  controls  include  use  of  a  BSC,  having  sealed  safety
cups or heads in centrifuges, and negative air flow into the laboratory. 3.2.1. Work at
the  open  bench  CDC  continues  to  recommend  that  sniffing  culture  plates  should  be
prohibited. Isolates of small gram-negative or gram-variable rods (e.g., gram-negative
coccobacilli) should be manipulated within a BSC. 3.2.2. Personal protective equipment
Engineering  controls  (2.1.5.  Step  5)  should  always  be  the  first  line  of  defense  to
minimize exposures. PPE includes a variety of items, such as gloves, laboratory coats,
gowns, shoe covers, boots, respirators, face shields, safety glasses, and goggles, that
are designed to protect the laboratory worker from exposure to physical, biological, and
chemical hazards. Distributing PPE to each employee as needed helps to ensure access
to appropriate PPE. PPE is often used in combination with BSCs and other devices that
contain the agents or materials being handled. In some situations where working in a
BSC is impractical, PPE, including splash shields, may form the primary barrier between
personnel and hazardous materials (1). (See Section 3.1). The Occupational Safety and

Health Administration (OSHA) defines PPE as "appropriate" if it does not permit blood or
other  potentially  infectious  materials  to  pass  through  or  reach  the  employee's  street
clothes, undergarments, skin, eyes, mouth, or other mucous membranes under normal
conditions of use (33). When PPE is necessary What PPE is necessary How to properly
put  on,  take  off,  adjust,  and  wear  PPE  Limitations  of  PPE  Proper  care,  maintenance,
useful  life,  and  disposal  of  PPE  3.4.1.  Good  work  practices  3.4.2.  Bleach  solutions
(sodium  hypochlorite)  (38)  A  clinical  laboratory  must  establish  a  waste  management
plan.  3.5.1.  Decontamination  of  medical  waste  before  transport  and  disposal  3.5.2.
Management  of  discarded  cultures  and  stocks  3.5.3.  Discarding  a  select  agent  3.5.4.
Autoclave safety 3.6.1. General information Under certain circumstances, dry ice can be
an explosion hazard. Dry ice is solidified carbon dioxide (CO) and it is extremely cold
(-109° F [-79° C]). Unlike water-ice, dry ice sublimates (changes directly from solid to
gas)  as  it  warms,  releasing  CO  gas.  CO  vapor  is  considerably  heavier  than  air;  in
confined,  poorly  ventilated  spaces,  it  can  displace  air,  causing  asphyxiation.  3.6.2.
Disposal  of  dry  ice  Compressed  CO  cylinders  are  often  used  to  provide  gases  for  CO
incubators; the risks associated with these incubators are minimal as long as the room
is  well  ventilated.  3.8.1.  Hazards  3.8.2.  Minimizing  hazards  Many  of  these  potential
hazards can be minimized by adoption of safe handling practices. Cryogenic liquids are
liquefied gases that have a normal boiling point below -238°F (-150°C). Liquid nitrogen
is used in the microbiology laboratory to freeze and preserve cells and virus stocks. The
electron microscopy laboratory, frozen section suites, and grossing stations for surgical
pathology frequently use liquid nitrogen; some laboratories also use liquid helium. The
principal hazards associated with handling cryogenic fluids include cold contact burns
and freezing, asphyxiation, explosion, and material embrittlement. 3.9.1. Cold contact
burns and freezing 3.9.2. Asphyxiation hazards 3.9.3. Explosion hazards 3.9.4. Cryotube
explosions 3.9.5. Embrittlement 3.9.6. Infectious disease hazards Slips, trips, and falls
can cause a laboratory worker to drop or spill vessels containing infectious agents or

dangerous  chemicals.  They  can  also  lead  to  skin  punctures  and  abrasions  that  make
laboratory  workers  more  vulnerable  to  LAIs.  Good  housekeeping  is  the  most
fundamental means for reducing slips, trips, and falls. Without good housekeeping, any
other  preventive  measures  (e.g.,  installation  of  sophisticated  flooring,  specialty
footwear,  or  training  on  techniques  of  walking  and  safe  falling)  will  never  be  fully
effective.  3.10.1.  Slips  3.10.2.  Trips  Wear  thermally  resistant  gloves  and  a  laboratory
coat  when  handling  items  stored  at  ultralow  temperatures.  Specimens  stored  at
ultralow  temperatures  are  extremely  cold  [-70°C  to  -85°C]),  and  paradoxically,  direct
contact  with  the  skin  can  cause  severe  burns.  Vacuum-assisted  filtration  devices  and
side-arm  suction  flasks  are  used  routinely  in  the  general  laboratory,  whereas  the
electron  microscopy  laboratory  uses  vacuum-assisted  evaporators,  freeze-driers,
freeze-fracture,  and  sputter  coater  units.  Vacuum-assisted  devices  present  implosion
hazards and risk aerosol generation. 3.13.1. Implosion safety 3.13.2. Aerosol generation
3.13.3.  Aerosol  protection  measures  3.13.4.  Disposal  of  liquid  wastes  from
vacuum-assisted  aspiration  traps  3.14.1.  Punctures  and  cuts  Skin  punctures  and  cuts
can  directly  introduce  an  infectious  agent  into  the  body  and  can  provide  a  route
whereby  a  secondary  agent  can  enter.  Wear  appropriate  gloves  for  this  procedure
(based  on  risk  assessment  and  protection  needed).  Cover  the  broken  container  and
spilled infectious substance with a cloth or with paper towels.
 For the routine BSL-2 laboratory, pour a disinfectant or a fresh 1:10 household
bleach solution over the covered area and leave for a minimum of 20 minutes. It would
take 23 minutes to clear the air of airborne
M. tuberculosis from a spill at 99% removal efficiency if the room had 12 room
air changes per hour, and 35 minutes for this removal with 99.9% efficiency (46). Given
the variability of the number of room air changes per hour in diagnostic laboratories,
the wait time has to be carefully evaluated. The cloth or paper towels and the broken
material should be cleared away into biohazard sharps receptacles. Fragments of glass

are to be handled with forceps, not gloved hands. (Using wadded up tape with forceps
facilitates this procedure). Small HEPA vacuum cleaners are also available for removal
of fine glass particulates. 3.14.2. Ingestion and contact with infectious agents 3.14.3.
Spills and splashes onto skin and mucous membranes 3.14.4. Aerosols and droplets Any
procedure  that  imparts  energy  to  a  microbial  suspension  can  produce  infectious
aerosols  (1,23).  Procedures  and  equipment  frequently  associated  with  aerosol
production  include  pipetting,  mixing  with  a  pipette  or  a  vortex  mixer,  and  use  of
blenders,
 centrifugation,
 and
 ultrasonic
 devices
 (sonicators)
 (1,23,47).
 These
procedures  and  equipment  generate  respirable  particles  that  remain  airborne  for
protracted  periods.  When  inhaled,  these  tiny  particles  can  be  retained  in  the  lungs.
These procedures and equipment also generate larger droplets that can contain larger
quantities  of  infectious  agents.  The  larger  droplets  settle  out  of  the  air  rapidly,
contaminating,  work  surfaces  as  well  as  the  gloved  hands  and  possibly  the  mucous
membranes  of  persons  performing  the  procedure.  Respirable  particles  are  relatively
small  and  do  not  vary  widely  in  size  distribution.  In  contrast,  hand  and  surface
contamination is substantial and varies widely (1,48). The potential risk from exposure
to larger-size droplets requires as much attention in a risk assessment as the risk from
respirable particles. In the microbiology laboratory, all the technical work areas of the
department are considered dirty. The same concepts of demarcation and separation of
molecular testing areas that are described in this section can be used to establish clean
and dirty areas in other parts of the diagnostic laboratory. 3.16.1. Clean areas 3.16.2.
Offices Offices (e.g., of supervisors and laboratory director) that open into the clinical
laboratory represent hybrid areas within the laboratory. These offices are not typically
designed or maintained in a manner that allows for easy or efficient disinfection. 3.16.3.
Dirty areas Whether automated or manual, procedures with the potential for producing
specimen aerosols and droplets (e.g., stopper removal, vortexing, opening or piercing
evacuated  tubes,  using  automatic  sample  dispensers)  require  PPE  and  engineering

controls  designed  to  prevent  exposure  to  infectious  agents.  3.17.1.  Water  baths  and
water  (humidification)  pans  in  CO  incubators  3.17.2.  Centrifuges  and  cytocentrifuges
3.17.3.  Automated  analyzers  3.17.4.  Vacuum-assisted  aspiration  devices  (See  Section
3.13.) 3.17.5. ELISA plate washers in microbiology 3.17.6. Identification, blood culture,
and
 PCR
 instruments
 Bacterial
 identification
 and
 antimicrobial
 susceptibility
instruments,  blood  culture  instruments,  PCR  instruments,  and  other  laboratory
instruments  and  devices  are  to  be  cleaned  or  disinfected  according  to  the
manufacturer's  directions  or  recommendations.  The  routine  and  emergency  cleaning
procedure for each instrument must be a part of the safety component of the procedure
manual.
 Tuberculosis (TB) resulting from exposure to infectious aerosols remains a major risk
for laboratorians. There is no safe level of exposure since exposure to as few as 1–10
organisms can cause disease. An estimated 8%–30% of laboratorians may experience
tuberculin conversions (52). To reduce exposures to 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, a hierarchy of controls must be employed, including safe
work  practices,  use  of  containment  equipment,  and  specially  designed  laboratory
facilities (1). Tuberculosis laboratories need to be separate and isolated from the main
microbiology laboratory. Develop all policies and practices related to safety using a risk
assessment process that is documented in the laboratory's biosafety manual. In most
clinical  laboratories  specimens  are  first  received  in  the  main  microbiology  laboratory
(biosafety level [BSL]-2), where they are logged in and processed for other bacteriologic
testing. The specimens submitted for TB analysis are moved to the TB laboratory for
further processing specific for TB. 4.1.1. Specimen receiving in the main microbiology
laboratory  4.1.2.  Specimen  receiving  in  other  laboratory  sections  4.1.3.  Leaking
containers 4.1.4. Visible contamination on the outside of container Prepare smears in a
BSC because aerosols, droplets and splatters can be generated. Unstained smears may
contain  viable  tubercle  bacilli  and  are  to  be  handled  with  caution.  4.2.1.  Gram  stain

Specimens  submitted  for  routine  cultures,  especially  sputum  and  other  respiratory
specimens, may contain tubercle bacilli and must be handled with care regardless of
whether or not acid-fast bacillus (AFB) cultures were ordered. 4.2.2. Acid-fast stains —
Kinyoun,  Ziehl-Neelsen,  auromine–rhodomine  (fluorescent)  Precautions  and  work
practices  are  selected  with  regard  to  the  potential  quantity  of  tubercule  bacilli
encountered  in  the  procedure  being  performed.  Hence,  specimens  have  a  lower
concentration than a culture, in which the number of organisms is amplified. Because
aerosols are generated whenever energy is imparted into the specimen, all protocols in
the TB laboratory are evaluated through the risk assessment process for the potential
to  generate  aerosols.  Common  aerosol-generating  procedures  are  pouring  liquid
cultures  and  supernatant  fluids,  using  fixed-volume  automatic  pipetters,  and  mixing
liquid  cultures  with  a  pipette.  4.4.1.  Personal  protective  equipment  4.4.2.  Respiratory
protection  4.11.1.  Rapid  testing  (direct  molecular  test  kits)  4.11.2.  Molecular  testing
The source of most laboratory-acquired infections and hazardous exposures that occur
during  autopsy/necropsy  is  unknown,  and  all  autopsies  and  necropsies  are  to  be
considered  risky  (1,56).  5.1.1.  Bloodborne  pathogens  Human-health–care  workers
involved  in  performance  of  autopsies  are  at  high  risk  for  occupationally  acquired
bloodborne  pathogens  because  of  both  the  injuries  sustained  and  the  population
undergoing  autopsy.  Transmission  risk  is  highest  per  exposure  for  hepatitis  B  virus,
then  hepatitis  C  virus  and  human  immunodeficiency  virus,  respectively.  These
infections  have  been  documented  from  autopsies  as  well  as  during  embalming
(1,2,56,60–62).  5.1.2.  Other  infections  Specific  data  for  other  bloodborne  pathogens,
such  as  cytomegalovirus,  are  lacking,  but  infectious  transmission  is  possible  and  risk
may be higher especially for pregnant (serologically negative) or immunocompromised
workers. Assess persons at higher risk for infection on a case-by-case basis and allow
them to consent to participating in the autopsy only after being counseled (2,63). 5.1.3.
Infectious  aerosols  Autopsies/necropsies  of  cadavers  with  suspected  zoonotic  agents

generate potentially infectious aerosols. Although
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the prototypical pathogen most noted to be transmitted
by  aerosolization,  persons  who  had  meningococcemia,  anthrax,  rickettsiosis  and
legionellosis  are  other  examples.  Manipulation  of  infectious  tissue  can  result  in  both
airborne particles in a size (<5
µm)  that  floats  on  air  currents  for  extended  periods  and  can  subsequently  reach  the
pulmonary alveoli and small-droplet particles (>5 
µm)  that  settle  more  quickly.  Contamination  may  occur  from  fluid-aspirating  hoses,
from spraying the cadaver, and from oscillating saws. The aerosols created stay within
the autopsy area and can result in subsequent contact with mouth and eyes, inhalation,
or  ingestion  and  can  contaminate  inanimate  surfaces  such  as  computers,  telephones
and  camera  equipment  (56,57).  5.1.4.  Organisms  that  require  additional  safety
practices  5.1.5.  Other  biosafety  exposures  5.1.6.  Reporting  to  the  mortician  Report
known bloodborne pathogens or other suspected aerosolization danger to the mortician
and  others  potentially  handling  the  body  to  limit  subsequent  transmissions  that  may
occur during transport or embalming (69). 5.1.7. Necropsy remains of animals Dispose
of  animal  cadavers  with  potential  zoonotic  infectious  agents  by  appropriate
decontamination  (e.g.,  incineration,  alkaline  digestion  or  other  methods),  and  do  not
return them to animal owners for private burial. 5.2.1. Inspect the body/carcass 5.2.2.
Safety  guidelines  for  the  suite  Formaldehyde  (3.7%–4.0%)  used  for  specimen
preservation  is  the  most  common  toxic  chemical  to  which  autopsy  workers  are
exposed. The chemical is volatile and toxic and causes irritation to the eyes, mucous
membranes, and skin and is associated with increased risk for all cancers. Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations specify an exposure limit of 0.75
ppm  as  an  8-hour  time-weighted  average,  and  2.0  ppm  for  short-term  (15-minute)
exposures (70). If formaldehyde can be detected by smell, it likely means exposure is
occurring at a concentration beyond acceptable limits. Limit exposure to formaldehyde

in  the  following  manner.  5.5.1.  Safety  equipment  5.5.2.  PPE  for  autopsy/necropsy
personnel 5.6.1. Human autopsy 5.6.2. Human autopsy/animal necropsy The following
guidelines for disinfection and cleaning following an autopsy or necropsy apply to both
types  of  procedures.  Wash  reusable,  nonlaunderable  items  such  as  aprons  with  a
detergent solution, decontaminate with bleach solution, rinse with water and allow to
dry before next use. 5.7.1. Human tissue Either incinerate all pathological waste, since
this  is  considered  hazardous  material  and  is  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of
Transportation  (DOT),  or  transport  pathological  waste  to  on-site  or  off-site  treatment
facilities  in  clearly  labeled,  dedicated,  leakproof  containers  or  carts  that  meet  DOT
requirements.  DOT  sharps  waste  containers  need  to  be  puncture-proof  in  addition  to
meeting these requirements. State, local, and regional regulations may also apply and
need  to  be  addressed.  5.7.2.  Animal  tissue  Dispose  of  all  animal  necropsy  waste
(tissues or postnecropsy cadaver) using an appropriate method as determined by the
case-by-case  risk  analysis  assessment  (incineration,  autoclaving  and  standard  waste
disposal,  rendering,  composting,  cremation,  private  burial).  5.7.3.  Other  waste  Shred
autoclave red-bag waste if appropriate. State, local, and regional regulations may also
apply and need to be addressed. (See Section 3.5, Waste Management.) Clean areas
might include an administrative area and bathrooms with showers. Air from these areas
should be exhausted differently than from the autopsy suite (56,76,77). All other areas
are  considered  dirty,  and  appropriate  PPE  is  required.  5.9.1.  Specimen  receiving  and
log-in 5.9.2. Work at the open bench 5.9.3. Clean versus dirty areas of the laboratory All
of the surgical pathology specialty areas (cytology, histology, grossing or frozen section
rooms)  are  considered  dirty  areas  if  fresh  specimens  or  body  fluids  are  received  or
processed  in  an  open  room  (not  in  a  BSC  or  separately  vented  area).  5.9.4.  Tissue
stains Multiple staining procedures are performed in histology and cytology. The most
common are included here. Some of these stains are prepared with ethanol and some
with  methanol,  which  can  have  an  impact  on  management  options  for  their  waste.

Provide material safety data sheets (MSDS) for each component in the laboratory. 5.9.5.
Fixatives  When  updating  or  renovating  autopsy  and  other  areas  of  the  anatomic
pathology laboratory that process fresh tissue and body fluids, the following should be
considered.  Special  precautions  for  autopsy  and  autopsy  suite  decontamination,
brain-cutting,  and  histologic  tissue  preparation  procedures  are  required  when
processing  cases  of  possible  CJD  (1,56,65,67,86).  5.11.1.  Autopsy  Perform  autopsies
using  BSL-2  precautions  augmented  by  BSL-3  facility  ventilation  and  respiratory
precautions. Wear standard autopsy PPE. Limit the autopsy to brain removal. Restrict
participants  to  only  those  who  are  necessary.  Double-bag  the  brain  and  place  it  in  a
plastic  container  for  freezing  or  fix  it  in  3.7%–4%  formaldehyde  after  sectioning.
Formaldehyde  fixation  occurs  for  10–14  days  before  histologic  sections  are  collected.
5.11.2.  Histologic  preparations  Exposure  to  infectious  parasites  during  diagnostic
procedures  may  result  from  handling  specimens,  drawing  blood,  performing  various
types  of  concentration  procedures,  culturing  organisms,  and  conducting  animal
inoculation studies. Relevant parasites and their possible routes of infection are listed in
Table  7  and  Box  1.  Table  8  contains  information  on  resistance  to  antiseptics  and
disinfectants. 6.1.1. Leaking containers 6.1.2. Loose caps 6.2.1. Trichrome stain 6.2.2.
Hematoxylin  stain  6.2.3.  Iodine  6.2.4.  Acid-fast  stains  (modified)  6.2.5.  Giemsa  stain
6.2.6.  Wright  stain  6.2.7.  Formalin  (HCHO)  6.2.8.  Mercury-based  fixatives  6.2.9.
Zinc-based fixatives (containing formalin) 6.2.10. Copper-based fixatives (containing no
formalin) 6.2.11. Xylene and alcohols 6.4.1. Biological safety cabinet versus fume hood
6.4.2.  Personal  protective  equipment  6.4.3.  Immunization  6.4.4.  Disinfection  General
recommendations for the microbiology laboratory are sufficient for use in the diagnostic
parasitology  section;  these  would  include  guidelines  for  disinfection  of  countertops,
telephones, computers, equipment, and hands-free telephones. General guidelines for
the microbiology laboratory also apply for the parasitology section of the laboratory. No
special  recommendations  are  necessary.  Safety  requirements  for  the  use  of

instruments are the same as those used for a general microbiology laboratory and are
primarily  involved  with  specimen  handling.  Safety  requirements  for  antibody  and
antigen testing are the same as those used for a general microbiology or immunology
laboratory  and  are  primarily  involved  with  specimen  handling.  Although  not  a  strict
requirement, it is recommended that mycology laboratories that culture for filamentous
fungi  and  manipulate  those  organisms  be  separate  and  isolated  from  the  main
microbiology laboratory with negative air pressure moving into the room from the main
laboratory. Direct access to a Class II biological safety cabinet (BSC) is critical for this
activity  whether  mycology  work  is  conducted  in  a  separate  room  or  in  an  isolated
section of the main laboratory. Most mycology diagnostic work can be conducted in the
biosafety level (BSL)-2 laboratory. 7.1.1. Leaking containers Guidelines for the general
microbiology  laboratory  apply  also  for  the  mycology  laboratory.  No  special
recommendations  are  necessary.  7.1.2.  Visible  contamination  on  outside  of  container
Guidelines  for  the  general  microbiology  laboratory  apply  also  for  the  mycology
laboratory. No special recommendations are necessary. 7.1.3. Loose caps Guidelines for
the general microbiology laboratory apply also for the mycology laboratory. No special
recommendations are necessary. 7.2.1. Gram stain The Gram stain is not the optimum
stain  for  fungus,  but  if  used  particularly  for  yeast,  the  same  guidelines  that  apply  to
bacteriology/clinical  microbiology  are  followed  for  mycology.  7.2.2.  Mycology  stains
7.4.1.  Biosafety  cabinet  7.4.2.  Personal  protective  equipment  7.4.3.  Disinfection
Recommendations for the general microbiology laboratory are sufficient for use in the
mycology laboratory; these include guidelines for disinfection of countertops and items
such  as  telephones,  computers,  equipment,  and  hands-free  telephones.  7.4.4.
Decontamination  and  disposal  of  laboratory  waste  Guidelines  for  the  general
microbiology  laboratory  apply  also  for  the  mycology  laboratory.  Instruments  used  for
mycology studies are most commonly those for continuously monitored blood culture
and
 for
 yeast
 identification.
 Follow
 the
 same
 guidelines
 that
 apply
 to

bacteriology/clinical microbiology. Follow the clinical microbiology safety guidelines for
mycology  with  the  additional  advisory  that  mold  isolates  must  be  handled  in  a  BSC
during extraction of nucleic acids. 8.1.1. Biohazards associated with specimen receiving
and log-in The clinical virology laboratory receives a wide variety of clinical specimens
for virus detection. Because the infectious nature of this material is largely unknown,
special  care  must  be  taken  to  prevent  contamination  of  personnel,  the  environment,
and other clinical specimens. 8.1.2. Leaking containers 8.1.3. Visible contamination on
outside  of  container  Specimens  with  a  small  amount  of  contamination  (e.g.,  a  dried
blood  spot)  on  the  outside  of  the  container  are  to  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the
laboratory  director.  The  director  can  examine  the  specimen  and  determine  if  it  is
suitable for testing and whether it constitutes a hazard to laboratory personnel. 8.1.4.
Special  precautions  for  suspicious  specimens  8.2.1.  Alcohols  Ethanol,  methanol,
isopropyl alcohol, and alcohol blends are used in the virology laboratory to fix cells, for
nucleic  acid  extraction  and  precipitation,  and  as  a  disinfectant.  8.2.2.  Antibiotics
Antibiotics  in  routine  use  include  penicillin,  streptomycin,  gentamicin,  ciprofloxacin,
kanamycin, tetracycline, amphotericin B, and neomycin. These antibiotics can be found
in  culture  media  and  viral  transport  media.  Concentrated  antibiotic  mixtures  are
frequently  used  to  increase  the  antibiotic  concentrations  in  samples  containing  large
numbers of bacteria or fungi. Concentrated antibiotic solutions can be purchased at 50
times  (50×)  and  100  times  (100×)  the  working  concentration.  Although  the  risks
associated  with  antibiotic  preparation  and  use  are  relatively  low  in  the  virology
laboratory,
 antibiotic
 preparation
 and
 handling
 has
 been
 associated
 with
hypersensitivity reactions and contact dermatitus (115,116) and asthma (116–120) in
hospital, pharmaceutical, and animal workers. 8.2.3. Bleach solutions (see 3.4.2) 8.2.4.
Cycloheximide Cycloheximide is used as an antibiotic, protein synthesis inhibitor, and
plant growth regulator. In the virology laboratory, cycloheximide is used in
Chlamydia  re-feed  media.  Cycloheximide  is  inactivated  by  alkaline  solutions  (pH

>7.0). Aspirating cycloheximide-containing culture fluids into vacuum traps containing
a  1:10  bleach  solution  will  inactivate  the  chemical.  Most  soaps  and  detergents  are
alkaline, and these agents will also inactivate cycloheximide. 8.2.5. Dimethyl sulfoxide
Dimethyl  sulfoxide  (DMSO)  is  used  as  a  cryoprotectant  when  freezing  cell  cultures.
DMSO  is  a  powerful  solvent  and  can  penetrate  skin  and  latex  gloves.  8.2.6.  Electron
microscopy stains, fixatives, and buffers 8.2.7. Electron microscopy embedding media
(Meth)acrylates  and  epoxy-based  materials  are  frequently  used  to  embed  biological
samples  for  electron  microscopy.  Epoxy  products  include  Epon,  Araldite,  Spurr  resin,
and  Maraglas.  Formvar  (polyvinyl  formal)  is  used  as  a  support  film  for  electron
microscopy  grids  and  for  making  replicas.  Many  of  these  compounds  are  toxic,
carcinogenic  or  potentially  carcinogenic  and  are  known  to  cause  skin  irritation,
dermatitis,  and  skin  sensitization.  Consult  individual  MSDS  documents  for  more
information.  8.2.8.  Ethidium  bromide  Ethidium  bromide  (EtBr)  is  a  DNA  intercalating
agent  that  is  commonly  used  as  a  nonradioactive  marker  for  visualizing  nucleic  acid
bands  in  electrophoresis  and  other  gel-based  separations.  EtBr  is  a  potent  mutagen,
toxic  after  acute  exposure,  and  is  an  irritant  to  the  skin,  eyes,  mouth  and  the  upper
respiratory  tract.  8.2.9.  Evans  blue  Evans  blue  is  used  as  a  counterstain  during
fluorescence microscopy. Evans blue powders and solutions are skin irritants, but there
is no known flammability, carcinogenicity, or teratogenicity warning associated with this
compound.
 8.2.10.
 Guanidinium
 solutions
 Guanidinium
 chloride,
 guanidinium
thiocyanate, and guanidinium isothiocyanate are chaotropic agents used to disrupt cells
and denature proteins (particularly RNases and DNases) during nucleic acid extraction
procedures.  These  chemicals  are  strong  irritants,  and  eye  exposure  can  result  in
redness,  irritation  and  pain.  They  are  toxic  if  ingested  and  may  cause  neurologic
disturbances. If inhaled, guanidinium compounds can cause respiratory tract irritation
coughing, and shortness of breath. 8.2.11. Neutral red Neutral red is a pH indicator and
a vital stain used in some plaque assays. It may be harmful if swallowed, inhaled, or

absorbed  through  the  skin  and  can  cause  irritation  to  the  skin,  eyes,  and  respiratory
tract.
 8.2.12.
 Merthiolate
 (thimerosal)
 Merthiolate,
 or
 thimerosal,
 is
 a
mercury-containing  antiseptic  and  antifungal  agent  used  as  a  preservative  in  some
laboratory solutions. Concentrated thimerosal is very toxic when inhaled, ingested, and
in contact with skin. 8.2.13. Organic solvents 8.2.14. Sodium azide Sodium azide is a
common  preservative  in  many  laboratory  reagents,  including  monoclonal  antibodies,
buffers,  and  enzyme  immunoassay  reagents.  8.3.1.  Cell  lines  8.3.2.  Cell  culture
practices Workers who handle or manipulate human or animal cells and tissues are at
risk for possible exposure to potentially infectious latent and adventitious agents that
may  be  present  in  those  cells  and  tissues.  CDC/National  Institutes  of  Health
recommended  cell  culture  practices  (1)  include  the  following.  8.3.3.  Biohazards
associated  with  cell  culture  reading  8.3.4.  Biohazards  associated  with  liquid  nitrogen
use Liquid nitrogen can become contaminated when ampoules are broken in the dewar,
and  contaminants  can  be  preserved  in  the  nitrogen  (23).  These  potentially  infectious
contaminants  can  contaminate  other  vials  in  the  dewar  and  generate  an  infectious
aerosol  as  the  liquid  nitrogen  evaporates.  Plastic  cryotubes  rated  for  liquid  nitrogen
temperatures are recommended for liquid nitrogen storage because they appear to be
sturdier  than  glass  ampoules  and  are  less  likely  to  break  in  the  nitrogen.  Glass
ampoules are not recommended. Ampoules and cryotubes can explode when removed
from  liquid  nitrogen  creating  infectious  aerosols  and  droplets.  See  Section  3.9  for
additional  information.  No  amount  of  safety  engineering  can  reduce  the  physical,
chemical, and biological risks in a laboratory environment if personal precautions are
not  employed  consistently  and  rigorously.  All  laboratory  workers  and  visitors  are
responsible  for  following  established  procedures  regarding  personal  precautions.
Directors and supervisors should periodically review their biosafety responsibilities (1).
8.4.1. Biological safety cabinet 8.4.2. Personal protective equipment 8.4.3. Disinfection
Disinfection  guidelines  for  the  general  microbiology  laboratory  are  applicable  to  the

virology laboratory (Section 3). Routine clinical laboratory testing may provide the first
evidence of an unexpected bioterrorism event, and routine clinical specimens may also
harbor  unusual  or  exotic  infectious  agents  that  are  dangerous  to  amplify  in  culture.
Early recognition of these possible high-risk organisms is critical, as is adherence to all
fundamentals of laboratory safety. Events that require intervention by a supervisor or
laboratory director are listed (Table 10). Although the majority of events are caused by
inadvertent actions and pose no risk, laboratory technologists and directors should be
aware that multiple high-risk causes are possible. How the laboratory responds to these
trigger  events  will  depend  upon  whether  the  laboratory  has  a  BSL-3  facility  and  the
capabilities of the state and local laboratory response network (LRN). 8.7.1. Fluorescent
antibody testing bench 8.7.2. Suspicious or unusual results 8.7.3. Nucleic acid testing
Diagnostic  electron  microscopy  can  be  a  relatively  simple  and  rapid  method  for
morphologic identification of agents in a specimen. Electron microscopy procedures can
serve  as  a  general  screen  to  detect  novel  organisms  or  organisms  that  have  altered
genetic  or  immunologic  properties  that  render  them  undetectable  by  nucleic  acid  or
immunoassay  protocols  (192).  Electron  microscopy  laboratories  share  many  of  the
physical, chemical, and biological hazards described for the virology laboratory but also
have  some  unique  features.  8.8.1.  Flammable  and  combustible  liquids  The  electron
microscopy laboratory uses a wide variety of flammable solvents, and the use of open
flames  is  discouraged  (see  Section  8.2.13).  8.8.2.  X-ray  hazards  The  electron
microscope  will  generate  dangerous  levels  of  X-rays  within  the  microscope  as
high-energy electrons strike the metal components. Modern electron microscopes have
sufficient shielding and lead-impregnated glass viewing ports that minimize dangers to
the  operator.  However,  modifications  to  the  instrument,  adding  and  removing
accessories, and some maintenance procedures can compromise the shielding. 8.8.3.
Electrical hazards See Section 3.7 for information regarding routine electrical safety in
the electron microscopy laboratory. 8.8.4. Chemical hazards Several heavy metal stains

and  aggressive  fixatives  are  used  in  the  electron  microscopy  laboratory.  See  Section
8.2 and the MSDS materials provided by the manufacturers for guidelines for handling
stains  and  fixatives.  Embedding  and  filmmaking  materials  are  chemical  hazards,  and
many of these materials are dissolved in flammable organic solvents. 8.8.5. Cryogens
and  compressed  gases  The  most  commonly  used  cryogens  used  in  the  electron
microscopy  laboratory  are  liquid  nitrogen  and  liquid  helium.  Compressed  helium,  CO
and nitrogen are also used. Hazards and safety measures associated with these gases
are  summarized  in  Sections  3.8  and  3.9.  8.8.6.  Specialized  equipment  The  electron
microscopy  laboratory  uses  a  number  of  specialized  instruments  whose  use  can  be
hazardous. For example, evaporators, freeze-driers, freeze-fracture, and sputter coater
units  use  vacuum,  and  the  vessels  could  implode.  Implosion  hazards  are  reviewed  in
Section  3.13.1.  8.8.7.  Biological  hazards  The  biological  hazards  of  the  electron
microscopy  laboratory  are  similar  to  those  of  the  virology  laboratory,  and  good
laboratory practices must be followed. Several FDA-approved, rapid immunodiagnostic
tests  for  viral  antigens  and  antibodies  are  available.  Originally  designed  for
point-of-care  or  near  point-of-care  testing,  many  of  these  tests  are  being  used  for
testing  in  clinical  virology  laboratories.  The  following  biosafety  recommendations  are
based  upon  CDC  biosafety  guidance  for  handling  clinical  specimens  or  isolates
containing  2009-H1N1  influenza  A  virus  (194).  Molecular  virology  laboratories  share
many  of  the  physical,  chemical  and  biological  hazards  described  for  the  virology
laboratory, but they also present some unique hazards. 8.10.1. Electrical hazards See
Section 3.7 for information regarding routine electrical safety in the molecular virology
laboratory. Special high-voltage power sources are used in electrophoresis and nucleic
acid sequencing equipment. 8.10.2. Ultraviolet light hazards 8.10.3. Chemical hazards
The chemical hazards unique to the molecular virology laboratory include chloroform,
ethidium bromide (Section 8.2.8) and guanidinium-based extraction reagents (Section
8.2.10).  Avoid  acute  and  long-term  exposure  to  these.  8.10.4.  Biological  hazards  The

biological  hazards  in  the  molecular  virology  laboratory  are  similar  to  those  of  the
virology laboratory, and good laboratory practices must be followed. All specimens of
human and animal origin tested by the chemistry, toxicology, or drug-testing laboratory
may contain infectious agents. It is imperative to understand and minimize the risk of
exposure to patient specimens through surface contact, aerosolization, or penetrating
injury. Risk mitigation of laboratory-acquired infections is discussed in Sections 2 and 3.
Automated  analyzers  frequently  have  added  features  to  help  reduce  operator
exposures,  but  they  do  not  totally  eliminate  the  potential  for  exposure.  A  common
feature in newer systems is closed system sampling. To adequately assess the risk of
active  biohazards  in  analyzer  effluents  or  processes,  risk  analysis  should  begin  with
assessment  of  procedures  that  occur  prior  to  the  use  of  specific  analyzers.  Sample
preparation  protocols  may  fully  inactivate  viruses  and  bacteria  so  that  the  risk  of
biohazardous  aerosol  generation  in  the  analyzer  effluent  is  essentially  zero.  One
example is the use of protein-precipitation techniques or protein denaturing solvents in
liquid chromatography, which would negate biohazard concerns in aerosols or effluents
generated  by  the  analyzer.  9.3.1.  Graphite  furnaces  9.3.2.  Mass  spectrometers
Biosafety  guidelines  for  the  hematology  laboratory  are  the  same  as  those  for  the
microbiology  laboratory  and  are  described  in  Section  3.1.  See  Section  3.2.1.  10.2.1.
Standard operating procedures Standard operating procedures are described in Section
3.1.4.  10.2.2.  Manual  removal  of  sealed  caps  and  specimen  aliquotting/pipetting  See
Section 3.1.5. 10.2.3. Unfixed specimens Guidelines for personal precautions, including
use  of  a  BSC  (Section  3.3),  PPE  (Section  3.2.1),  and  disinfection  (Section  3.4)  are
described in Section 3. See Section 3.5 for guidelines for decontamination and disposal
of laboratory waste. See Section 3.16. Whether automated or manual, procedures with
the  potential  for  producing  specimen  aerosols  and  droplets  (e.g.,  stopper  removal,
vortexing, opening or piercing evacuated tubes, automatic sample dispensers) require
either PPE or engineering controls designed to prevent exposures to infectious agents.

10.6.1. Waterbaths See Section 3.17.1. 10.6.2. Centrifuges See Section 3.17.2. 10.6.3.
Automated  hematology/hemostasis  analyzers  Automated  analyzers  frequently  have
added features to help reduce operator exposures, but these do not totally eliminate
potentials  for  exposure.  A  common  feature  in  newer  systems  is  closed  system
sampling. See Sections 3.17.3, 9.1, and 11.6.3 for additional information. 10.6.4 Flow
cytometers  (see  Section  3.17.3)  Occupational  exposures  in  a  routine  flow  cytometry
(FCM) laboratory arise either from sample handling or, more specifically, from aerosols
and droplets generated by the flow itself. Flow cytometric applications, e.g., phenotypic
analysis, calcium flux evaluations, and apoptosis measurements of unfixed cells, when
performed  using  jet-in-air  flow  cytometers  with  extremely  high  pressure  settings  can
expose  operators  to  potentially  hazardous  aerosols.  10.6.5.  Automated  slide  stainers
10.6.6. Total or semiautomated hematology test systems Consider used testing kits to
be contaminated, and dispose of them appropriately in accordance with applicable local
and  state  environmental  regulations.  10.9.1.  General  recommendations  (200–203)
10.9.2. Dirty versus clean areas in the laboratory See Section 3.16. 10.9.3. Pneumatic
tube  systems  See  Section  3.1.6.  10.9.4.  Personal  precautions  See  Section  3.2.  10.9.5
Disinfection of work space See Section 3.4.1. Regardless of the method, the purpose of
decontamination is to protect the phlebotomist, the patient and the environment, and
anyone who enters a patient room/drawing station or who handles materials that have
been carried into or out of the patient room/drawing station. 10.9.6. Disinfecting patient
room  work  areas  and  drawing  stations  See  Section  3.4.1.  10.9.7.  Documentation  of
training  and  competency  assessment  in  phlebotomy  Assessment  includes  knowledge
of,  and  adherence  to,  any  applicable  hospital  infection  control  policies/procedures  in
patient settings and the concept of Standard Precautions. Many infectious agents are
transmitted  through  transfusion  of  infected  blood;  these  include  hepatitis  B  virus,
hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2, human T-cell lymphotropic
viruses (HTLV-I and II), cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, West Nile virus , dengue virus,

trypanosomiasis,  malaria,  and  variant  Creutzfeldt-Jakob  disease.  The  AABB  provides
information on transfusion-transmitted diseases as well, available at
http://www.aabb.org/Pages/Homepage.aspx. 
 The Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) Bloodborne Pathogen
Standard,  29  CFR  1910.1030  must  be  adhered  to  in  the  blood  bank  laboratory  (33).
Guidelines for receiving and logging specimens and handling specimen containers are
described  in  Section  3.1.  Written  procedures  for  blood  bank  include  specific  work
practices  and  work  practice  controls  to  mitigate  potential  exposures.  Standard
operational procedures (SOPs) and procedure manuals are described in Section 3.1.4.
11.4.1. Unfixed specimens 11.4.2. Biological safety cabinet A Class II biological safety
cabinet (BSC; see Section 3.3) is required for all aerosol-generating processes. 11.4.3.
Personal protective equipment See Section 3.2.2. 11.4.4. Disinfection See Section 3.4.
11.4.5.  Decontamination  and  disposal  of  laboratory  waste  See  Section  3.5  for
discussion,  including  a  waste  management  plan.  See  Section  3.16.  See  Section  3.17.
11.6.1. Refrigerators and freezers For all refrigerators and freezers in the blood bank,
establish  a  cleaning  and  maintenance  protocol  that  will  minimize  contamination  and
extend the life of the equipment and also maintain the sophisticated cooling systems
blood  bank  refrigerators  require  to  provide  uniform  and  quick  temperature  recovery
when needed. (also see Section 3) Most newer blood bank laboratory refrigerators and
freezers are stainless steel and have painted finishes and removable trays, which make
cleaning  and  sanitizing  an  easier  process.  11.6.2.  Automated  blood  bank  analyzers
Automated or semi-automated instruments are now available that are adapted either to
donor  collection  settings  or  patient  transfusion  settings.  Although  these  instruments
have the potential to replace much of the open bench testing in blood banks and donor
collection settings, manual testing is still being used for some antibody detection and
verification procedures and in smaller laboratories. All blood bank automated analyzers
currently  approved  for  use  in  the  United  States  have  added  features  to  help  reduce

operator exposures, but they have not totally eliminated potential for exposure. 11.6.3.
Total  or  semiautomated  test  systems  See  Section  10.6.6.  See  Section  10.7.  Donor
collection and apheresis areas are considered patient care settings, and all applicable
hospital patient care and infection control polices/procedures must be strictly adhered
to. This section provides practical guidelines for work practices that minimize biosafety
hazards  from  veterinary  diagnostic  specimens.  Many  of  the  biosafety  practice
guidelines  for  human  clinical  microbiology  laboratories  are  applicable  in  veterinary
diagnostic laboratories. Similar to human clinical microbiology laboratories, the nature
of  the  work  performed  in  veterinary  diagnostic  laboratories  puts  these  laboratorians,
too,  at  risk  for  laboratory-acquired  infections.  Sixty  percent  of  infectious  diseases  in
humans are due to multihost pathogens that move across species lines (206,207), and
during the past 30 years, 75% of the emerging human pathogen diseases (e.g., West
Nile virus fever, highly pathogenic avian influenza, Lyme disease) have been zoonotic,
i.e.,  transmitted  between  humans  and  animals  (208).  All  nonhuman  diagnostic
specimens are potentially infectious to humans, although the degree of risk is less so
than  with  handling  and  examination  of  human  diagnostic  specimens.  Potential
infectious agents in human diagnostic specimens are by definition human pathogens.
Conversely,  not  all  potential  infectious  agents  in  animal  diagnostic  specimens  are
human  pathogens.  The  key  to  managing  biosafety  risk  in  veterinary  diagnostic
laboratories  depends  not  only  upon  good  general  biosafety  practices  but,  more
importantly, on a practical risk assessment of the "unknown" diagnostic specimen. In
general,  veterinary  diagnostic  laboratories  use  biosafety  level  (BSL)-2  practices  and
facilities  for  general  veterinary  diagnostic  work  and  do  practical  risk  assessment  of
incoming  accessions  to  determine  whether  decreased  (BSL-1)  or  increased  (BSL-3)
biosafety practices or facilities are warranted. Where biosafety risk and practices differ
between  handling  of  human  and  animal  diagnostic  specimens,  those  differences  are
highlighted in this section. 12.2.1. Risk classification Two classifications of risk groups

have been developed to facilitate the assessment of risk from various microbes and to
recommend  appropriate  safety  practices  for  the  handling  of  those  microbes  (1).  The
World  Organization  for  Animal  Health  (OIE)  and  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  list
four groups of biohazardous agents for humans and animals based upon level of risk
and  availability  of  effective  treatment  and  prevention  (Table  12)  (209).  CDC/National
Institutes  of  Health  (CDC/NIH)  guidelines  propose  four  biosafety  levels  and
recommendations  for  appropriate  containment  practices  for  agents  known  to  cause
laboratory-acquired  infections  (Tables  12,13)  (1).  The  two  lists  of  risk  groups  are
roughly  equivalent,  and  neither  makes  allowance  for  persons  who  are  particularly
susceptible  to  infections  by  pre-existing  conditions,  such  as  a  compromised  immune
system  or  pregnancy.  In  both  risk  group  classification  systems,  increasing  risk  levels
(numbers) imply increasing occupational risk from exposure to an agent and the need
for  additional  containment  for  work  with  that  agent.  12.2.2.  Risk  assessment  See
Section  2  for  detailed  risk  assessment  guidelines.  See  Section  3  for  extensive  and
detailed  biosafety  guidelines  generally  applicable  to  all  subdiscipline  areas  within  a
veterinary  diagnostic  laboratory.  12.3.1.  Hand  washing  12.3.2.  Personal  Protective
Equipment  12.3.3.  Staff  training  12.3.4.  Biological  spill  management  12.3.5.
Immunization  See  Section  5  for  detailed  biosafety  guidelines  applicable  to  necropsy,
surgical  pathology,  and  histology  working  areas in  a  veterinary  diagnostic  laboratory.
See Section 6. See Section 7. See Section 8. See Section 9. See Section 10. Biosafety
guidelines  to  be  followed  when  conducting  molecular  diagnostic  testing  (i.e.,
polymerase  chain  reaction  [PCR])  or  using  rapid  tests  such  as  enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) can be specific to the particular testing being conducted.
These  are  discussed  in  Section  3  and  Sections  4,  5,  6,  7,  8  and  10,  which  deal  with
specific  types  of  pathogens  and  testing.  Section  8.10  provides  the  most  thorough
biosafety  guidelines  for  molecular  diagnostic  testing.  See  Section  13  for  detailed
biosafety  guidelines  applicable  to  functions  within  a  veterinary  diagnostic  laboratory

regarding storage, packaging and shipping of infectious or diagnostic specimens. See
Section  15  for  practical  guidelines  regarding  biosafety  training  within  a  veterinary
diagnostic laboratory. See Section 16 for guidelines regarding continual improvement of
biosafety within a veterinary diagnostic laboratory.  Infectious substances in a clinical
microbiology  laboratory  are  encountered  as  fresh  and  processed  patient  specimens,
cultures and subcultures, stored isolates, and serum or plasma. Invariably, all of these
substances must occasionally be stored in some form and for some length of time, and
many  of  these  substances  will  be  manipulated,  relocated,  and  otherwise  touched  by
laboratory  workers.  Therefore,  storage  of  infectious  substances  is  an  important  and
integral  component  of  worker  safety  in  clinical  microbiology  laboratories.  Handle  all
stored  infectious  substances  using  Standard  Precautions  and  aseptic  technique.
Organisms responsible for external contamination of the storage vial will remain viable
during  storage  and  can  be  transmitted  by  manipulating  the  vial.  Note:  The
requirements and regulations governing the transport of infectious substances change
frequently.  Shippers  are  responsible  for  being  aware  of  these  changes,  adhering  to
current  regulations,  obtaining  permits  in  advance  of  shipping,  and  interpreting
applicable  regulations  for  themselves  and  their  facilities.  Persons  shipping  these
substances are advised to check the web sites of the respective appropriate agencies.
13.2.1.  Governing  authorities  and  regulations  13.2.2.  Importance  of  regulations  The
purpose of the regulations is to protect the public, emergency responders, laboratory
workers, and personnel in the transportation industry from accidental exposure to the
infectious  contents  of  the  packages.  An  important  non–safety-related  benefit  of
adherence  to  these  regulations  and  requirements  is  minimizing  the  potential  for
damage to the contents of the package during transport and reducing the exposure of
the  shipper  to  criminal  and  civil  liability  associated  with  improper  shipment  of
dangerous  goods.  13.2.3.  Exceptions  13.2.4.  Specific  regulations  13.2.5.  U.S.  Postal
Service The U.S. Postal Service publishes its own regulations in the USPS Domestic Mail

Manual (96). The USPS regulations for mailing hazardous materials generally adhere to
DOT  regulations;  however,  consult  the  USPS  Domestic  Mail  Manual  for  specific  needs
and  requirements.  13.3.1.  Classification  All  shipped  goods  must  be  classified  using  a
three-step process to define dangerous goods that are shipped by commercial carriers.
Classification  allows  the  shipper  to  select  the  proper  IATA  packing  instructions  and
directions  to  use,  and  provides  information  necessary  to  complete  required
documentation  (a  Shipper's  Declaration  for  Dangerous  Goods)  if  the  substance  is  a
Category  A  infectious  substance.  13.3.2.  Steps  of  classification  13.3.3.  Category  A
infectious  substances  A  Category  A  substance  is  "an  infectious  substance  which  is
transported in a form that, when exposure to it occurs, is capable of causing permanent
disability, or life-threatening or fatal disease to otherwise healthy humans or animals"
(93). 13.3.4. Category B infectious substances A Category B substance is "an infectious
substance that does not meet the criteria for inclusion in Category A" (93). Category B
substances  are  not  in  a  form  generally  capable  of  causing  disability,  life-threatening
illness, or fatal disease. Category B substances must be assigned UN number UN3373
(Biological  Substance,  Category  B).  Following  are  examples  of  possible  Category  B
substances:  13.3.5.  Exempt  human  (or  animal)  specimens  Exempt  human  or  animal
body  site  specimens  are  those  for  which  there  is  "minimal  likelihood  there  are
pathogens  present"  (93).  Examples  of  such  specimens  include  urine  or  serum  to  be
tested for glucose, cholesterol, hormone levels, prostate-specific antigen, and analytes
used  to  evaluate  heart  and  kidney  function.  13.3.6.  Exempt  substances  Many
substances  commonly  encountered  in  clinical  laboratories  are  exempt  from  strict
infectious  substance  shipping  requirements  (Figure  2).  Examples  of  such  substances
are  13.3.7.  Patient  specimens  13.3.8.  Genetically  modified  organisms  Genetically
modified organisms usually meet either Category A or Category B criteria. If this is not
the  case,  the  organism  must  be  classified  as  a  "genetically  modified  microorganism"
(Class  9,  Miscellaneous  Dangerous  Goods)  and  packed  and  shipped  as  such.  13.3.9.

Biological products Virtually all commercially available biological products are exempt
from regulations for packing and shipping infectious substances. Examples of biological
products  include  bacterial  typing  sera,  vaccines,  bacterial  antigens,  antimicrobial
agents,  reagents  for  identifying  bacteria,  and  reagents  used  in  antimicrobial
susceptibility testing. 13.3.10. Infected animal 13.3.11. Medical waste 13.5.1. Packing
instructions and directions 13.5.2. Marking and labeling outer packages 13.5.3. Specific
markings and labels The following list cites the situations requiring a marker or label,
and the specific markings or labels for that situation. 13.6.1. Shipper's Declaration for
Dangerous Goods 13.6.2. Emergency response telephone number 13.6.3. Airbills IATA
carriers are required to prepare airbills to describe air cargo and accompany shipments
in transit. Some dangerous goods shipments, such as Biological Substances Category B
shipments,  require  preparation  of  this  document  but  not  a  Shipper's  Declaration.
Specific preparation instructions are detailed in each IATA package instruction and in
the "Documentation" section of the Dangerous Goods Regulations. Packaging must be
leakproof  when  wet  ice  is  used.  Dry  ice  is  a  Class  9  dangerous  good;  it  must  be
packaged  according  to  PI  954,  and  its  use  requires  completion  of  a  Shipper's
Declaration if it is used to ship a Category A substance. Note: Dry ice is an explosion
hazard  and  must  never  be  placed  into  a  tightly  sealed  container.  Dry  ice  must  be
placed  outside  the  secondary  container,  and  the  outer  packaging  must  permit  the
release  of  CO.  The  risk  of  acquiring  a  laboratory-associated  infection  (LAI)  after
physically contacting a microorganism (an "exposure") in the workplace is real, always
present, and an integral part of working in a diagnostic laboratory, and in particular the
clinical  microbiology  laboratory.  The  potential  for  an  exposure  exists  whenever  a
laboratorian manipulates and transports microorganisms, processes and stores patient
specimens, and operates instruments used in the process. Diagnostic laboratories can
be safe places to work if standard and appropriate safe work practices and procedures
are  easily  accessible,  understood  by  employees,  enforced,  and  followed.  These

procedures  are  to  be  properly  outlined  in  an  exposure  control  plan  and  laboratory
manuals.  These  plans  are  composed  of  essential  elements  related  to  preventing  an
exposure, and, equally important, they describe employer and employee involvement
and  responsibilities  before  and  after  an  exposure.  Appropriate  actions  taken  after  an
exposure can greatly reduce or even eliminate the chance that an exposure will result
in  an  LAI.  Well-designed  plans  with  the  full  support  of  the  director  and  higher
management  can  reduce  workers'  chances  of  exposures  to  microorganisms  and  can
help ensure a culture of safety in diagnostic laboratories. 14.1.1. Exposure control plan
14.1.2. Documentation of potential exposures 14.1.3. Emergency response equipment
and  facilities  14.1.4.  Immunizations  The  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices,  in  addition  to  recommending  immunization  of  health-care  personnel  with
vaccines recommended for all adults (influenza, measles/mumps/rubella, varicella, and
tetanus/diphtheria/pertussis), recommends meningococcal or hepatitis B vaccination for
those at risk for occupational exposure (211,217,218). 14.1.5. Education of employees
It  is  the  responsibility  of  laboratory  employees  to  do  the  following:  14.3.1.
Determination  of  the  extent  of  exposure  14.3.2.  Documentation  of  exposures  14.3.3.
Consultation  with  employee  health  clinicians  The  employee  and  the  supervisor  of  an
employee  who  has  experienced  a  potential  exposure  are  to  contact  the  employee
health  physician  or  nurse  and  discuss  the  exposure.  These  clinicians  are  the  persons
most  likely  to  provide  advice  regarding  timely  chemoprophylaxis  and  to  able  to
administer  appropriate  antimicrobial  agents.  14.3.4.  Counseling  exposed  employees
14.3.5.  Exposure  to  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  14.3.6.  Exposure  to  Neisseria
meningitidis  14.3.7.  Exposure  to  bloodborne  pathogens  Biosafety  education  efforts
begin even before an employee begins working in the laboratory. The employer must
develop  an  accurate  job  description  so  that  the  employee  understands  the  job
responsibilities.  Knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  needed  for  the  job  are  to  be  defined.
Evaluate incoming employees to see if they meet these criteria. Develop a mentoring

plan and fill any training gaps before employees are placed in a position that would put
them at risk for exposure. Evaluate and document the employees' competency before
they  are  allowed  to  work  independently.  Educational  opportunities  to  reinforce  safe
behaviors  must  be  ongoing  and  supported  by  all  levels  of  management  and  staff.  In
accordance with Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requirements,
education  about  the  risks  of  exposure  to  infectious  agents  begins  with  a  new
employee's first orientation to the laboratory or assignment to technical work and is to
be specific to the tasks the employee performs. Training must include an explanation of
the use and limitations of methods that will reduce or prevent exposure to infectious
materials. These include engineering controls, work practices, and personal protective
equipment.  Annual  retraining  for  these  employees  must  be  provided  within  1  year  of
their  original  training  and  should  emphasize  information  on  new  engineering  controls
and practices. Annual safety training offers a chance to review key biosafety measures
that  may  be  forgotten  during  everyday  work  pressures.  The  responsibility  for
overseeing the safety education of laboratory personnel must be clearly assigned. This
responsibility may be delegated to the biosafety officer or other staff member who has
been  given  additional  training  through  specialized  courses  or  work  experience  and
whose competency to perform the training has been verified. Because laboratory tests
might  be  performed  outside  a  traditional  laboratory  setting  (e.g.,  doctor's  office,
outpatient  clinic,  community  setting),  these  recommendations  for  training  and
education must be adapted to suit the employees performing the tests and the person
who  is  overseeing  them.  Employee  training  can  be  accomplished  by  any  of  several
methods,  and  nearly  all  of  these  can  be  adapted  or  combined  to  fit  the  needs  of
employees in a particular laboratory. There is no one "official" set of questions for an
annual  safety  checklist.  Although  many  common  activities  might  be  performed  by  all
personnel, customize the list to reflect the actual job duties. Analyze each work station
for  the  type  of  biosafety  risks  associated  with  it,  and  target  the  checklist  to  each  of

these risks. If practical, ask individual laboratorians to draft their own checklists for the
duties they perform, and have their list reviewed by their supervisor and safety officer.
Employee  training  and  competency  assessment  should  be  documented  for  the
following: Integrate continuous quality improvement for biosafety with the continuous
quality  improvement  for  the  entire  laboratory.  The  12  quality  system  essentials,  as
defined by the Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute, provide a comprehensive basis
and  reference  for  continuous  quality  improvement  (222).  More  detailed  and  specific
biosafety  considerations  have  been  listed  for  each  of  these  elements  (Table  17).  We
acknowledge  the  assistance  of  Tanya  Graham,  DVM,  South  Dakota  State  University,
Brookings,  SD;  Larry  Thompson,  DVM,  PhD,  Nestle  Purina  Pet  Care,  St.  Louis,  MO;  R.
Ross Graham, DVM, PhD, Merrick and Company; Corrine Fantz, PhD, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA; Thomas Burgess, PhD, and Quest Diagnostics, Tucker, GA. We appreciate
the review and input into the document provided by the Office of Health and Safety,
CDC; American Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians; American Biological
Safety
 Association;
 College
 of
 American
 Pathologists;
 American
 Society
 for
Microbiology; Association of Public Health Laboratories; and subject matter experts at
CDC.  FIGURE 1. Risk assessment process for biologic hazards Alternate Text: The figure
is a flow chart that presents the risk assessment process for a biologic hazard
                      
TABLE 1. Laboratory activities associated with exposure to infectious agents Routes of
exposure/transmission  Activities/practices  Ingestion/oral  •  Pipetting  by  mouth  •
Splashing  infectious  material  •  Placing  contaminated  material  or  fingers  in  mouth  •
Eating,  drinking,  using  lipstick  or  lip  balm  Percutaneous  inoculation/nonintact  skin  •
Manipulating needles and syringes • Handling broken glass and other sharp objects •
Using scalpels to cut tissue for specimen processing • Waste disposal (containers with
improperly  disposed  sharps  )  Direct  contact  with  mucous  membranes  •  Splashing  or
spilling  infectious  material  into  eye,  mouth,  nose  •  Splashing  or  spilling  infectious

material onto intact and nonintact skin • Working on contaminated surfaces • Handling
contaminated  equipment  (i.e.,  instrument  maintenance)  •  Inappropriate  use  of  loops,
inoculating  needles,  or  swabs  containing  specimens  or  culture  material  •  Bites  and
scratches from animals and insects • Waste disposal • Manipulation of contact lenses
Inhalation  of  aerosols  •  Manipulating  needles,  syringes,  and  sharps  •  Manipulating
inoculation needles, loops, and pipettes • Manipulating specimens and cultures • Spill
cleanup Source: Sewell DL. Laboratory-associated infections and biosafety. Clin Micobiol
Rev 1995;8:389–405 (18).  
TABLE  2.  Risk  prioritization  of  selected  routine  laboratory  tasks  Task  or  activity
Exposure risk Potential hazard Likelihood Consequence Risk rating Subculturing blood
culture  bottle  Needle  stick  —  percutaneous  inoculation  Likely  Infection;  medical
treatment  High  Aerosols  —  inhalation  Moderate  Infection;  medical  treatment  Medium
Splash  —  direct  contact  with  mucous  membranes  Moderate  Infection;  medical
treatment High Centrifugation Aerosols — inhalation Likely Infection; medical treatment
High  Performing  Gram  stain  Aerosols  from  flaming  slides  Moderate  Colonization;
infection Moderate Preparing AFB smear only Aerosols from sputum or slide preparation
Likely Illness; medical treatment; disease High Performing catalase testing Aerosols —
mucous membrane exposure Unlikely Colonization; infection Low AFB culture work-up
Aerosols — inhalation Likely Illness; medical treatment; disease High Abbreviation: AFB
= acid-fast bacillus.  
TABLE  3.  Example  of  job  safety  analysis  for  laboratorians  working  in  diagnostic
laboratories: hazards and controls Task or activity Hazards and recommended controls
Potential  hazard  Engineering  controls  Administrative/work  practices  PPE  Subculturing
blood  culture  bottle  Needle  stick—percutaneous  inoculation  Safer  sharps;  retractable
needles;  puncture-resistant  sharps  container  No  recapping;  immediate  disposal  into
sharps  container  Gloves;  gown  or  lab  coat  Aerosols—inhalation  BSC  or  splash  shield
Work inside BSC or behind splash shield Face protection if not in BSC; gloves; gown or

lab coat with knit cuffs Splash—direct contact with mucous membranes BSC or splash
shield
 Work inside BSC or behind splash shield Face protection if not in BSC; gloves;
gown  or  lab  coat  Centrifugation  Aerosols—inhalation  BSC;  removable  rotors;  safety
cups; O-rings on buckets; plastic tubes; splash shield Spin in BSC, or load and unload
rotor in BSC; check O-rings and tubes for wear; no glass tubes; wait for centrifuge to
stop before opening Face protection if not in BSC; gloves; gown or lab coat with knit
cuffs Performing Gram stain Aerosols from flaming slides Slide warmer Air dry or use
slide  warmer  Lab  coat;  gloves  (optional)  Preparing  AFB  smear  only  Aerosols  from
sputum  or  slide  prep  Work  in  BSC;  sputum  decontaminant;  slide  warmer  Use  slide
warmer in BSC; dispose of slide in tuberculocidal disinfectant Lab coat; gloves Catalase
testing Aerosols— mucous membrane exposure BSC; disposable tube Work in BSC or
perform  in  disposable  tube  Lab  coat;  gloves;  eye  protection  AFB  culture  work-up
Aerosols—inhalation  BSL-3  laboratory  optimal;  BSL-2  laboratory  with  BSC  minimal  All
work  in  BSC  using  BSL-3  practices*  Solid-front  gown  with  cuffed  sleeves;  gloves;
respirator if warranted Abbreviations: 
PPE= personal protective equipment; BSC = biological safety cabinet; AFB =
acid-fast bacillus; BSL = biosafety level. 
 *  BSL-3  Practices  include  BSL-2  practice  plus:  restricted  access;  all  work
performed in a BSC (additional PPE); and decontamination of all waste before disposal.  
TABLE  4.  Summary  of  recommended  biosafety  levels  (BSL)  for  infectious  agents  BSL
Agents Practices Primary barriers and safety equipment Secondary barriers (facilities) 1
Not  known  to  consistently  cause  diseases  in  healthy  adults  Standard  microbiological
practices None required Laboratory bench and sink required 2 • Agents associated with
human disease • Routes of transmission include percutaneous injury, ingestion, mucous
membrane exposure BSL-1 practice plus: • Limited access • Biohazard warning signs •
"Sharps" precautions • Biosafety manual defining any needed waste contamination or

medical  surveillance  policies  Primary  barriers:  •  Class  I  or  II  BSC  or  other  physical
containment  devices  used  for  all  manipulations  of  agents  that  cause  splashes  or
aerosols of infectious materials PPE: • Protective laboratory clothing; gloves; respiratory
protection as needed BSL-1 plus: • Autoclave available 3 • Indigenous or exotic agents
with  potential  for  aerosol  transmission  •  Disease  may  have  serious  or  lethal
consequences BSL-2 practice plus: • Controlled access • Decontamination of all waste •
Decontamination  of  laboratory  clothing  before  laundering  •  Obtaining  baseline  serum
from  staff  Primary  barriers:  •  Class  I  or  II  BSC  or  other  physical  containment  devices
used for all open manipulation of agents PPE: • Protective laboratory clothing; gloves;
respiratory  protection  as  needed  BSL-2  plus:  •  Physical  separation  from  access
corridors  •  Self-closing,  double-door  access  •  Exhaust  air  not  recirculated  •  Negative
airflow into laboratory Abbreviation: 
BSC = biological safety cabinet; PPE = personal protective equipment.  
TABLE 5. Comparison of biological safety cabinet characteristics BSC Class
 Face velocity 
 Venting 
 Applications 
 Nonvolatile toxic chemicals and radionuclides
 Volatile toxic chemicals and radionuclides
 I 75  Outside or into the room through HEPA filter
 Yes  When  exhausted  outdoors*†  II–A1  75   30%  vented  through  HEPA  filter
back into the room or to outside through a canopy unit
 Yes (minute amounts) No II–A2 100 Similar to II-A1, but has 100 lfpm intake
air  velocity  Yes  When  exhausted  outdoors  (minute  amounts)*†  II–B1  100  Exhaust
cabinet  air  must  pass  through  a  HEPA  filter  then  through  a  dedicated  duct  to  the
outside.
 Yes Yes (minute amounts)*† II–B2 100 No recirculation; total exhaust to the

outside  through  a  HEPA  filter  Yes  Yes  (small  amounts)*†  III  N/A   Exhaust  air  passes
through  two  HEPA  filters  in  series  and  is  exhausted  to  the  outside  via  a  hard
connection.
 Yes Yes (small amounts)*† Abbreviations: 
BSC = biological safety cabinet; HEPA = high efficiency particulate air; lfpm =
linear  feet  per  minute  Source:  CDC/National  Institutes  of  Health.  Biosafety  in
microbiological and biomedical laboratories. 5th ed.
(1). * Installation may require a special duct to the outside, an in-line charcoal filter, and
a spark-proof (explosion-proof) motor and other electrical components in the cabinet.
Discharge  of  a  Class  I  or  Class  II,  Type  A2  cabinet  into  a  room  should  not  occur  if
volatile chemicals are used. 
† In no instance should the chemical concentration approach the lower explosion limits
of the compounds.  
TABLE 6. Air changes per hour (ACH) and time required for removal efficiencies of 99%
and 99.9% of airborne contaminants* ACH Minutes required for removal efficiency† 99%
99.9% 2 138 207 4 69 104 6 46 69 12 23 35 15 18 28 20 7 14 50 3 6 400 <1 1 Source:
Guidelines for preventing transmission of 
Mycobacterium  tuberculosis.  MMWR  2005  (46).  *  This  table  can  be  used  to
estimate the time necessary to clear the air of airborne 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis after the source patient leaves the area or when
aerosol-producing procedures are complete. 
† Time in minutes to reduce the airborne concentration by 99% or 99.9%.  
TABLE 7. Possible parasite transmission in a health-care setting (diagnostic laboratory)
Organism*
 Mode
 of
 transmission
 Comments
 Protozoa
 (intestinal)
 Entamoeba
histolytica† (C) Accidental ingestion of infective cysts, trophozoites, oocysts or spores in
food or water contaminated with fecal material; also direct transfer of stool material via
fomites  (fecal–oral  transmission)  Transmission  becomes  more  likely  when  fresh  stool

specimens are being processed and examined. Submission of fecal specimens in stool
preservatives (commercially available vials) would decrease risks. Entamoeba dispar
(C) Entamoeba coli
(C) Entamoeba hartmanni
(C) Endolimax nana
(C) Iodamoeba bütschlii
(C)  Blastocystis  hominis†  (C)  Giardia  lamblia†  (C)  Gloves,  using  capped
centrifuge  tubes  and  working  in  biological  safety  cabinet  would  decrease  risk  of
acquiring 
Cryptosporidium infections. Not recommended: Use of potassium dichromate
as collection fluid (not a fecal preservative) and use of sugar flotation on fresh stool.
Dientamoeba fragilis† (T) Cryptosporidium 
spp.†
(O) Cyclospora cayetanensis†
(O) Isospora belli† 
(O)  Microsporidia†  (S)  Protozoa  (other  body  sites)  Free-living  amebae
(Acanthamoeba,  Naegleria,  Balamuthia,  Sappinia)  Accidental  inhalation  of  fluids
containing organisms; accidental transmission of organisms to eyes via contaminated
hands  Gloves  and  transfer  of  liquid  materials  within  a  biological  safety  cabinet  are
recommended  when  working  with  cultures  and  patient  specimens.  Trichomonas
vaginalis Accidental transmission of organisms to eyes, (e.g.) via contaminated aerosols
or hands Same as for free-living amebae Helminths (intestinal) Enterobius vermicularis
(E)  Inhalation/ingestion  of  infective  eggs  Very  common  in  children,
asymptomatic Strongyloides stercoralis
(IL)  Skin  penetration  of  infective  larvae  from  stool  material  Exposure
possible/likely when working with fresh stool cultures/concentrates for larval recovery
Hymenolepis nana (E) Ingestion of infective eggs (fecal-oral) Ingestion of infective eggs

in fresh stool can lead to the adult worm in humans. Taenia solium
(E) Inhalation/ingestion of infective eggs could lead to cysticercosis. Exposure
very  likely  when  working  with  unpreserved  gravid  proglottids  (ink  injection  for
speciation  of  worm).  Blood/tissue  protozoa  Leishmania  spp.  Direct  contact  or
inoculation of infectious material from patient lesion; accidental inoculation of material
from  culture  or  animal  inoculation  studies.  Culture  forms/organisms  from  hamster
would be infectious. Trypanosoma spp. Same as for Leishmania 
spp.  Cultures,  special  concentration  techniques  represent  possible  means  of
exposure. Plasmodium spp. Accidental inoculation could transmit any of the five species
(P.  vivax,  P.  ovale,  P.  falciparum,  P.  malariae,  P.  knowlesi)  Blood  should  always  be
handled carefully; avoid open cuts. Toxoplasma gondii Inhalation/ingestion of oocysts in
cat  feces  (veterinary  situation);  accidental  inoculation  of  tachyzoites  from  tissue
culture, tube of blood, animal isolation (mouse peritoneal cavity) Although many people
already have antibodies to 
Toxoplasma,  indicating  past  exposure,  laboratory  incidents  have  been
documented  in  which  illness  was  due  to  large  infecting  dose.  Ectoparasites  Pediculus
spp. Specimens submitted on hair could be easily transmitted in the laboratory. Careful
handling,  fixation  of  the  arthropods  would  prevent  any  potential  problems  with
transmission. Sarcoptes scabiei Transmission via skin scraping or other means would be
possible  but  unlikely.  Careful  handling,  preparation  of  specimens  with  potassium
hydroxide  (KOH)  tend  to  prevent  any  problems.  Dipterous  fly  larvae  (Myiasis)
Transmission  could  occur  anywhere.  Protection  from  flies  would  solve  the  potential
problem. Abbreviations: 
C  =  cyst;  T  =  trophozoite;  O  =  oocyst;  IL  =  infective  larvae;  E  =  egg;  S  =
spore * Not every possible parasite is included in the table; those mentioned represent
the most likely transmission possibilities. 
† Potentially pathogenic intestinal protozoa.  

BOX  1.  Potential  exposures  to  laboratory-acquired  parasitic  infections  Parenteral  or
aerosolization • Recapping a needle • Removing a needle from the syringe • Leaving a
needle on the counter, point up • Dropping a syringe • Breaking hematocrit tube while
pressing  the  end  into  clay  •  Performing  venipuncture  on  agitated  patient  •  Sudden
animal  movement  during  an  inoculation  procedure  •  Creation  of  aerosols  during
tapeworm  proglottid  injection  •  Creation  of  aerosols  while  working  with  cultures
(bacteria, viruses, fungi, blood parasites, free-living amebae) Animal or vector bites •
Bitten by an infected animal (e.g., mouse or hamster) • Bitten by infected mosquito or
tick  (e.g.,  mosquito  colony)  Skin  exposure  •  Not  wearing  gloves  during  procedure  •
Failure to wear laboratory coat (closed sleeves, closed front over clothes) • Accidentally
touching face or eyes during handling of infectious materials • Exposure of eyes, nose,
or  mouth  to  potential  aerosols  Ingestion  •  Mouth  pipetting  •  Sprayed  with  inoculum
droplets from coughing or regurgitating animal Other reasons for potential exposures •
Working in disorganized laboratory bench setting • Working too fast • Failure to receive
proper training • Assumption that agent is not infectious to humans • Assumption that
agent(s) are no longer viable • Using defective equipment  
TABLE 8. Resistance of parasites and other organisms to antiseptics and disinfectants
(from  most  to  least  resistant)  Type  of  organism  Examples  Prions  Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease, Bovine spongiform encephalopathy Coccidia Cryptosporidium 
spp. Microsporidial spores Enterocytozoon, 
Encephalitozoon, Pleistophora, Trachipleistophora Bacterial spores Bacillus, 
Clostridium difficile Mycobacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
M.  avium  Cysts  Giardia  lamblia  Small  nonenveloped  viruses  Poliovirus
Trophozoites Acanthamoeba
 Gram-negative bacteria (nonsporulating) Pseudomonas Fungi Candida, 
Aspergillus
 Large
 nonenveloped
 viruses
 Enteroviruses,
 Adenovirus
Gram-positive  bacteria  Staphylococcus  aureus,  Enterococcus  Lipid  enveloped  viruses

Human immunodeficiency virus, Hepatitis B virus  
TABLE 9. Selected adventitious agents associated with cell cultures, organs and tissues
that could be used to generate cell cultures, and cell culture reagents Infectious agent
Source References Adenovirus Human kidney, pancreas, some adenovirus transformed
cell lines, rhesus monkey kidney cells (130–134) Bovine viruses 
 Bovine rhinotracheitis virus Bovine diarrhea virus Parainfluenza type 3 Bovine
enterovirus Bovine herpesvirus Bovine syncytial virus Bovine serum, fetal bovine serum
(substantially  lower  risk  today  due  to  ultrafiltration  of  bovine  serum)  (135)
Cytomegalovirus  Kidney,  human  foreskin,  monkey  kidney  cells  (133,134,136)
Epstein-Barr  virus  (EBV)  Some  lymphoid  cell  lines  and  EBV-transformed  cell  lines,
human  kidney  (137)  Hepatitis  B  virus  Human  blood,  liver  (138)  Herpes  simplex  virus
Human kidney (139,140) Herpesvirus group Monkey kidney cells (133,134) Human or
simian immunodeficiency virus 
 Blood cells, serum, plasma, solid organs from infected humans or monkeys
(141–143) HTLV-1 Human kidney, liver (144–147) Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
 Multiple cell lines, mouse tissue (148–150) Mycoplasmas Many cell cultures
(151) Myxovirus (SV5) Monkey kidney cells (133,152) Porcine parvovirus Fetal porcine
kidney cells, trypsin preparations (153) Rabies virus Human cornea, kidney, liver, iliac
vessel  conduit  (154–163)  Simian  adenoviruses  Rhesus,  cynomologous,  and  African
green monkey kidney cells (133,164) Simian foamy virus 
 Rhesus,
 cynomologous,
 and
 African
 green
 monkey
 kidney
 cells
(133,134,152,165) Simian  virus 40 (SV40) Rhesus monkey  kidney  cells (135,166,167)
Simian viruses 1–49 Rhesus monkey kidney cells (133,135,165) Swine torque teno virus
Trypsin,  swine-origin  biological  components  (168)  Squirrel  monkey  retrovirus  Multiple
cell lines, commercial interferon preparations (169,170) West Nile virus Human blood,
heart, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas (171–191)  
TABLE  10.  Trigger  events  requiring  supervisor  or  laboratory  director  notification  or

intervention  Event  Typical  causes  High-risk  causes  Specimen  processing/login  bench
Specimen brought in by law enforcement official with a chain-of-custody form Assault
case  workup  Potential  BT/BC  specimen  Suspect  agent  is  on  the  Do  Not  Test/Do  Not
Process  list  Clerical  mistake  at  order  entry  Might  be  from  a  patient  with  a  high-risk
infection  Unusual  (nonbiological)  or  unapproved  specimen  type  or  container  Clerical
mistake at order entry; inappropriate order • Powders, environmental samples, animal
specimens,  clothing,  food  samples,  inanimate  objects  could  contain  BT/BC  agents.  •
Might represent an attempt to introduce a BT/BC agent into the laboratory. Fluorescent
antibody bench Dim staining when controls and other positive specimens stain normally
Decreased  antigen  expression  in  cells  Cross-reaction  with  another  infectious  agent
Unusual staining pattern Added wrong antibody to well; antibodies ran together during
incubation  •  Altered  virus  or  genetic/antigenic  variant  •  Cross-reaction  with  another
agent  Staining  unusual  cell  types  Added  wrong  antibody  to  well;  antibodies  ran
together during incubation Infectious agent with altered host range; cross-reaction with
another  agent  Cell  culture  bench  CPE  pattern  and  cell  tropism  are  unusual
Unusual/unexpected pathogen; BT/BC agent in specimen Familiar CPE pattern but in an
unusual cell type Genetic drift; subspecies present 
 Unusual/unexpected  pathogen;  BT/BC  agent  in  specimen  Unexpected
CPE/HAd  pattern  from  the  indicated  specimen  source  Clerical  error  when  entering
source Unusual/unexpected pathogen; BT/BC agent in specimen Confirmation protocols
do  not  work  Genetic  or  antigenic  drift  Unusual/unexpected  pathogen;  BT/BC  agent  in
specimen Nucleic acid testing Altered melting curve shape, too many peaks, altered 
T  when  controls  and  other  patient  curves  are  normal  Genetic  variation  in
agent;  poor  extraction;  primer  dimers  Unusual/unexpected  pathogen;  more  than  one
agent present; chimeric, recombinant or reassortant pathogen Change in the slope of
the amplification curve Genetic variation in agent; poor extraction; specimen inhibition
Unusual/unexpected  pathogen;  chimeric,  recombinant  or  reassortant  pathogen

Abbreviations: 
BT  =  bioterrorism;  BC  =  biocrime;  CPE  =  cytopathic  effects;  HAd  =
hemadsorption; 
Tmelting temperature.  
TABLE 11. List of compounds incompatible with household bleach (sodium hypochorite) 
 Incompatible material* 
 Possible  result  from  mixing  Acids  and  acidic  compounds†  such  as:  alum
(aluminum sulfate) aluminum chloride ferrous or ferric chloride ferrous or ferric sulfate
nitric  acid  hydrochloric  acid  (HCl)  sulfuric  acid  hydrofluoric  acid  fluorosilicic  acid
phosphoric acid brick and concrete cleaners chlorinated solutions of ferrous sulfate 
 Release of chlorine gas, might occur violently. 
 Chemicals  and  cleaning  compounds  containing  ammonia†  such  as:
ammonium hydroxide ammonium chloride ammonium silicofluoride ammonium sulfate
quaternary  ammonium  salts  (quats)  urea   •  Formation  of  explosive  compounds.  •
Release of chlorine or other noxious gases. 
 Organic  chemicals  and  chemical  compounds†  such  as:  fuels  and  fuel  oils
amines methanol organic polymers propane ethylene glycol insecticides, solvents and
solvent-based cleaning compounds 
 •  Formation  of  chlorinated  organic  compounds.  •  Formation  of  explosive
compounds. • Release of chlorine gas, may occur violently. 
 Metals§ such as: copper nickel vanadium cobalt iron molybdenum  Release of
oxygen gas, generally does not occur violently. Could cause overpressure/rupture of a
closed system. 
 Hydrogen peroxide 
 Release of oxygen gas, might occur violently. 
 Reducing agents such as: sodium sulfite sodium bisulfite sodium hydrosulfite
sodium thiosulfate

 Evolution of heat, might cause splashing or boiling. 
 Oxidizing agents such as: sodium chlorite 
 Release of chlorine dioxide, chlorine, and oxygen gas. Increased rate as pH is
lowered. 
 Avoid direct contact with sunlight or UV light 
 Release  of  oxygen  gas,  generally  does  not  occur  violently.  Could  cause
overpressure/rupture of a closed system. 
 Source: The Chlorine Institute, Inc., Arlington, VA. Reprinted with permission.
* List is not all-inclusive. 
†  Some  of  these  compounds  can  be  found  in  common  household,  automotive,  and
industrial  products,  such  as  window,  drain,  toilet  bowl,  and  surface  cleaners,
degreasers,  antifreeze,  and  water  treatment  or  swimming  pool  chemicals.  Consult
product labels, product manufacturers, sodium hypochlorite suppliers, or the Chlorine
Institute for information. 
§ Avoid piping and material handling equipment containing stainless steel, aluminum,
carbon steel, chrome steel, brass, bronze, Inconel, Monel, or other common metals.  
TABLE  12.  OIE  risk  groups  and  CDC/NIH  biosafety  level  (BSL)  classifications  Level
Characterization OIE risk group 1 Unlikely to cause disease; not considered infectious 2
Moderate  individual  and  low  community  risk;  unlikely  to  cause  serious  disease  or  be
transmitted;  effective  treatment  and  prevention  available  3  High  individual  and
community  risk;  causes  serious  infections  but  not  readily  transmitted;  effective
treatment  and  prevention  usually  available  4  High  individual  and  community  risk;
readily  transmitted  and  no  effective  treatment  or  prevention  available  CDC/NIH  BSL
Class 1 Well-characterized agents not known to consistently cause disease in healthy
adult humans; minimal potential hazard to laboratory personnel and the environment 2
Agents  of  moderate  potential  hazard  to  personnel  and  the  environment  3  Indigenous
and  exotic  agents  that  cause  serious  or  potentially  lethal  disease  as  a  result  of

exposure  by  the  inhalation  route  4  Dangerous  and  exotic  agents  that  pose  a  high
individual risk of aerosol-transmitted laboratory infections and life-threatening disease
Abbreviations: 
OIE  =  World  Organization  for  Animal  Health;  NIH  =  National  Institutes  of
Health Source: Adapted from Biosafety and biosecurity in the veterinary microbiology
laboratory  and  animal  facilities.  In:  OIE  manual  for  diagnostic  tests  and  vaccines  for
terrestrial  animals,  6th  Edition.  2008  (209);  and  CDC/National  Institutes  of  Health.
Biosafety in microbiological and biomedical laboratories. 5th ed. 2007 (1).  
TABLE 13. CDC/NIH BSL practices and equipment BSL Practices Safety equipment and
facilities  1  Standard  microbiological  practices  None  required  2  •  BSL-1  practices  •
Limited  access  •  Display  biohazard  signs  •  Sharps  precautions  •  Staff  trained  with
pathogens  •  Safety  manual  available  •  BSC  used  for  specimen  processing  and  work
producing  aerosols  or  splashes  •  PPE  (coats,  gloves,  face  shields)  as  needed  •
Autoclave  available  3  •  BSL-2  practices  •  Controlled  access  •  Collect  baseline  serum
from personnel • BSL-2 equipment/facilities • BSC used for work with all specimens and
cultures • PPE (gowns and masks) as needed • Negative pressure airflow • Self-closing
double  doors  •  Exhaust  air  not  recirculated  4  •  BSL-3  practices  •  Change  clothing
before  entering  •  Shower  on  exit  •  Decontaminate  all  waste  on  exit  •  BSL-3
equipment/facilities  •  Separate  building  or  facility  •  BSC  and  full-body,  air-supplied
positive pressure suit for all procedures • Specialized ventilation and decontamination
system Abbreviations: 
NIH  =  National  Institutes  of  Health;  BSL  =  biosafety  level;  BSC  =  biological
safety  cabinet;  PPE  =  personal  protective  equipment.  Source:  Adapted  from
CDC/National  Institutes  of  Health.  Biosafety  in  microbiological  and  biomedical
laboratories. 5th ed. 2007 (1).  
BOX  2.  Examples  of  common  zoonotic  microorganisms  in  risk  groups  2  and  3*  that
might be present in the veterinary diagnostic laboratory Group 2 • Viruses: Influenza

viruses  types  A,  B,  C;  Newcastle  disease  virus;  parapoxvirus  (Orf);  West  Nile  virus  •
Bacteria: 
Alcaligenes spp., Arizona spp., Campylobacter spp., 
Chlamydophila psittaci (nonavian), Clostridium tetani, 
Clostridium botulinum, Corynebacterium spp., 
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, Escherichia coli, 
Haemophilus spp., Leptospira spp., 
Listeria monocytogenes, Moraxella spp., 
Mycobacterium avium, Pasteurella spp., 
Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp., Salmonella spp., 
Staphylococcus spp., Yersinia enterocolitica, 
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis • Fungi: Aspergillus fumigatus, 
Microsporum spp., Trichophyton spp., 
Blastomyces dermatitidis (tissues), Coccidioides immitis (tissues), 
Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma capsulatum (tissues), 
Sporothrix schenkii Group 3 • Viruses: Rabies virus; equine encephalomyelitis
virus  (eastern,  western,  Venezuelan);  Japanese  encephalitis  virus;  louping  ill  virus  •
Bacteria: 
Bacillus anthracis, Burkholderia mallei, 
Brucella spp., Chlamydophila psittaci (avian strains only), 
Coxiella  burnetii,  Mycobacterium  bovis  •  Fungi:  Blastomyces  dermatitidis
spores (cultures only), 
Coccidioides immitis spores (cultures only), 
Histoplasma  capsulatum  spores  (cultures  only)  Source:  Adapted  from  OIE
manual of diagnostic tests and vaccines for terrestrial animals, 6th edition. 2008 (209).
* As defined by the World Organization for Animal Health (see Table 12).  
BOX  3.  High-consequence  livestock  pathogens  and  select  agents  Livestock  African

horse  sickness  virus  African  swine  fever  virus  Akabane  virus  Avian  influenza  virus
(highly pathogenic) Bluetongue virus (exotic) Bovine spongiform encephalopathy Camel
pox  virus  Classic  swine  fever  virus  Foot-and-mouth  disease  virus  Goat  pox  virus
Japanese  encephalitis  virus  Lumpy  skin  disease  virus  Menangle  virus  Mycoplasma
capricolum
 subspecies
 Mycoids
 small
 colony
 (MmmSC)
 (contagious
 bovine
pleuropneumonia)  Peste  des  petits  ruminants  virus  Rinderpest  virus  Sheep  pox  virus
Swine  vesicular  disease  virus  Vesicular  stomatitis  virus  (exotic)—Indiana  subtypes
VSV-IN2,
 VSV-IN3
 Virulent
 Newcastle
 disease
 virus
 US
 Department
 of
Agriculture/Department of Health and Human Services overlap agents Bacillus anthracis
Brucella  abortus  Brucella  melitensis  Brucella  suis  Burkholderia  mallei  Burkholderia
pseudomallei  Hendra  virus  Nipah  virus  Rift  Valley  fever  virus  Venezuelan  equine
encephalitis virus Source: Adapted from USDA/APHIS select agent and toxin list, 2010.
(http://www.aphis.usda.gov/programs/ag_selectagent/ag_bioterr_toxinlist).  
TABLE 14. Rabies pre-exposure prophylaxis guide — United States, 2008 Risk category
Nature  of  risk  Typical  populations  Pre-exposure  recommendations  Continuous  Virus
present  continuously,  often  in  high  concentrations.  Specific  exposures  likely  to  go
unrecognized. Bite, nonbite, or aerosol exposure. Rabies research laboratory workers;
rabies biologics production workers. Primary course. Serologic testing every 6 months;
booster  vaccination  if  antibody  titer  is  below  acceptable  level.*  Frequent  Exposure
usually  episodic,  with  source  recognized,  but  exposure  also  might  be  unrecognized.
Bite,  nonbite,  or  aerosol  exposure.  Rabies  diagnostic  laboratory  workers,  cavers,
veterinarians and staff, and animal-control and wildlife workers in areas where rabies is
enzootic.  All  persons  who  frequently  handle  bats.  Primary  course.  Serologic  testing
every  2  years;  booster  vaccination  if  antibody  titer  is  below  acceptable  level.*
Infrequent  (greater  than  population  at  large)  Exposure  nearly  always  episodic  with
source  recognized.  Bite  or  nonbite  exposure.  Veterinarians  and  animal-control  staff
working with terrestrial animals in areas where rabies is uncommon to rare. Veterinary

students.  Travelers  visiting  areas  where  rabies  is  enzootic  and  immediate  access  to
appropriate  medical  care  including  biologics  is  limited.  Primary  course.  No  serologic
testing  or  booster  vaccination.  Rare  (population  at  large)*  Exposure  always  episodic
with source recognized. Bite or nonbite exposure. Minimum acceptable antibody level is
complete  virus  neutralization  at  a  1:5  serum  dilution  by  the  rapid  fluorescent  focus
inhibition test. A booster dose should be administered if the titer falls below this level.
U.S.  population  at  large,  including  persons  in  areas  where  rabies  is  epizootic.  No
vaccination necessary. Source: CDC. Human rabies prevention — United States, 2008.
MMWR  2008  (212).  *  Minimum  acceptable  antibody  level  is  complete  virus
neutralization at a 1:5 serum dilution by the rapid fluorescent focus inhibition test. A
booster dose should be administered if the titer falls below this level.  
TABLE 15. Types and classifications of IATA division 6.2 infectious substances Type of
infectious  substance  IATA  classification  Category  A  substance  Category  A  Category  B
substance Category B* Patient specimen Meets Category A criteria 
 Category A Meets Category B criteria 
 Category B Does not meet Category A or B criteria Exempt human or animal
specimen  Exempt  human  or  animal  specimen  Exempt  human  or  animal  specimen
Genetically modified microorganism Meets Category A criteria 
 Category A Meets Category B criteria 
 Category  B  Does  not  meet  Category  A  or  B  criteria  Genetically  modified
organism Exempt substance None Biological product† 
 None Infected animal†
 None Medical waste† None Abbreviation: 
IATA: International Air Transport Association * The proper shipping name for
Category  B  substances  is  Biological  Substance,  Category  B.  †Substance  is  not
addressed in detail in these guidelines.  FIGURE 2. Algorithm for classifying infectious
substance  for  shipment  Alternate  Text:  The  figure  is  a  flow  chart  that  presents  the

process for classifying an infectious substance for shipment.
                  
TABLE 16. Summary of packing requirements for exempt human specimens, Category B
substances,  and  Category  A  substances  Packing  requirement  Specimen/substance
Exempt  human  specimens*  Category  B†  Category  A§  Inner  containers  Leakproof
primary and secondary containers Yes Yes Yes Pressure-resistant primary or secondary
container —¶ Yes Yes Absorbent between primary and secondary containers** Yes Yes
Yes  List  of  contents  between  secondary  container  and  outer  package  —  Yes  Yes
Positively sealed primary container — No Yes Outer container Rigid outer packaging —
Yes  Yes  Strict  manufacturing  specifications  None††  Few  Many  Name  and  number  of
responsible person — Yes§§ Yes Markings and labels Yes¶¶ Less More Quantity limits for
either passenger or cargo aircraft Maximum for each primary container — 1 L (1 kg) 50
mL (50 g) Total maximum for outer package — 4 L (4 kg) 50 mL (50 g) Documentation
Shipper's Declaration for Dangerous Goods — No Yes Emergency response telephone
number — No Yes Costs Cost of labor and materials to pack substance Least More Most
*
The  International  Air  Transport  Association  (IATA)  and  the  US  Department  of
Transportation (DOT) provide only minimal standards (i.e., no detailed and numbered
packing instructions) for packing and shipping exempt human specimens. 
† Packing instructions 650. 
§ Packing instructions 620. 
¶ Requirement not specified by IATA or DOT. **
Not required for solid substances such as tissue and solid agar media cultures or slant. 
†† IATA states that this should be "of adequate strength for its intended capacity, mass,
and intended use." 
§§ May be placed either on the outer package or on the air waybill. 
¶¶ Only "Exempt Human Specimen" or "Exempt Animal Specimen" is required.  FIGURE

3.  A  completely  labeled  outer  package.  The  primary  container  inside  the  package
contains  a  Biological  Substance,  Category  B  infectious  substance  and  is  packed
according to PI 650 Abbreviation: PI = packing instructions. Alternate Text: The figure is
a  diagram  of  a  shipping  package  with  the  appropriate  labeling  for  a  Category  B
infectious substance.
                      FIGURE 4. A completely labeled outer package. The primary container
inside contains a liquid Category A infectious substance and is packed according to PI
620 Abbreviation: PI = packing instructions. Alternate Text: The figure is a diagram of a
shipping  package  with  the  appropriate  labeling  for  a  liquid  Category  A  infectious
substance.
                      
TABLE  17.  Quality  system  essentials  (QSE),  definition,  and  related  biosafety
considerations  QSE  no.  QSE  Definition  Biosafety  considerations  1  Organization
Organizational  structure  of  responsibility  is  defined.  Clear  reporting  structure  is
established for 24/7 reporting of safety incidents. Each staff member knows whom to
consult  for  biosafety  reporting  at  all  times.  A  chain  of  responsibility  for  overall
compliance  leads  directly  to  the  head  of  the  organizational  unit.  2  Documents  and
records Process and procedure documents are written and maintained. All incidents and
"near misses" are recorded. All safety practices and policies are written, reviewed and
approved  and  available  on  all  shifts  to  all  personnel  and  management.  Document
control  ensures  that  the  most  current  policies  are  in  use  and  available.  Vaccination
records and safety training records are appropriately completed, maintained and easily
recovered. 3 Facilities and safety The physical environment and space are appropriate
for  the  work  being  done.  Facilities  are  designed  and  constructed  with  safety  controls
and  minimize  the  risk  of  injury  and  occupational  illness.  Safe  work  practices  are
followed at all times. 4 Personnel Laboratory personnel follow prescribed policies and
procedures  according  to  their  job  descriptions.  Personnel  have  received  appropriate

safety training at orientation, annually, and when their duties change. Documentation
of biosafety training and continuous education is maintained in their personnel file and
linked  to  their  annual  review.  Training  requirements  are  part  of  the  annual  resource
planning  process.  5  Equipment  Instruments  and  equipment  are  used  appropriately  to
carry out laboratory functions. All biohazard risks associated with operating instruments
are  clearly  defined  in  SOPs.  Personnel  are  aware  of  procedures  to  decontaminate
equipment prior to maintenance or being decommissioned. 6 Purchasing and inventory
Processes and procedures for purchasing necessary supplies and materials are adhered
to.  Appropriate  safety  supplies  (masks,  gloves,  gowns,  biohazard  disposal  bags  and
containers) and vendors are identified and documented. Sufficient inventory of safety
supplies is available so that personnel do not compromise their personal safety or the
safety of others. 7 Process control Workflow is defined to meet customer expectations
and  ensure  the  quality  of  the  service.  Biohazard  risks  associated  with  operational
procedures are clearly defined and referenced in SOPs. Regulatory standards are met
and procedures are mapped out with quality and safety as priority goals. 8 Information
management  Flow  of  information  is  effective  and  complies  with  legal  and  regulatory
requirements.  Reporting  of  incidents  and  responses  back  to  the  employee  are
documented.  Retention  of  documents  meets  legal  requirements.  9  Occurrence
management  Information  that  results  from  laboratory  errors  or  other  events  is
identified and analyzed. 
 All  noncompliance  with  established  safety  procedures  and  policies  is
documented.  All  incidents  are  reported  to  Employee  Health;  all  "near-misses"  are
recorded  so  that  systems  can  be  improved.  A  reporting  mechanism  exists  to  enable
reports to be categorized to type of error so that corrective actions can be established.
10 Assessment Effectiveness of the of the system is assessed. Audits of the biosafety
risks and policies are performed annually to initiate improved methods and engineering
controls.

 11 Customer service Expectations of the customer are met or exceeded. The
requirements  for  biosafety  are  met  and  personnel  are  satisfied  with  policies,  work
practices  and  engineering  controls  to  protect  them.  Biological  samples,  reagents  and
other  items  shipped  to  reference  laboratories  ("customers")  are  clearly  labeled  for
biosafety hazards.
 12  Process  Improvement  Systemic  review  of  processes  identifies  areas  for
improvement. 
 Systematic  review  of  occurrence  reports  as  well  as  risks  and  interventions
informs  management  planning  for  systematic  improvements.  Abbreviation:  SOP  =
standard operating procedure. 
 Source: Adapted from Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Application
of
 a
 quality
 management
 system
 model
 for
 laboratory
 services;
 approved
guideline—third  edition  (CLSI  document  GP26-A3)  2004  (222).  Blue  Ribbon  Panel  for
Issues  of  Clinical  Laboratory  Safety  Kathleen  G.  Beavis,  MD,  College  of  American
Pathologists, Chicago, Illinois; Ellen Jo Baron, PhD, Stanford, California; William R. Dunn,
MS, Greater New York Hospital Association Regional Laboratory Task Force, New York,
New  York;  Larry  Gray,  PhD,  American  Society  for  Microbiology,  Cincinnati,  Ohio;  Bill
Homovec,  MPH,  American  Clinical  Laboratory  Association,  Burlington,  North  Carolina;
Michael Pentella, PhD, Association of Public Health Laboratories, Iowa City, Iowa; Bruce
Ribner, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; William A. Rutala, PhD, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Daniel
S.  Shapiro,  MD,  Burlington,  Massachusetts;  Lisa  A.  Skodack-Jones,  MT,  Salt  Lake  City,
Utah;  Christine  Snyder,  American  Society  for  Clinical  Laboratory  Science,  Helena,
Montana; Robert L. Sunheimer, MS, American Society for Clinical Pathology, Syracuse,
New  York;  Christina  Z.  Thompson,  MS,  American  Biological  Safety  Association,
Greenfield,  Indiana.  CDC  Staff:  Nancy  L.  Anderson,  MMSc;  Rex  Astles,  PhD;  D.  Joe
Boone, PhD; David S. Bressler, MS; Roberta Carey, PhD; Casey Chosewood, MD; Mitchell
L. Cohen, MD; Judy Delaney, MS; Thomas L. Hearn, DrPH; Kathleen F. Keyes, MS; Davis

Lupo, PhD; Robert Martin, DrPH; Alison C. Mawle, PhD; Terra McConnel; J. Michael Miller,
PhD; Shana Nesby, DVM; Janet K. Nicholson, PhD; John P. O'Connor, MS; Anne Pollock;
John C. Ridderhof, DrPH; Pamela Robinson; Elizabeth G. Weirich, MS; Ae S. Youngpairoj.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/su6101a1.htm
