A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Many diseases and conditions are spread
by not washing hands with soap and clean, running water.
 CDC recommends cleaning hands in a specific way to avoid getting sick and spreading
germs  to  others.  The  recommendations  for  effective  handwashing  and  use  of  hand
sanitizer was developed based on data from a number of studies.
Learn  more  about  the  science  behind  how  to  wash  your  hands  and  why  clean  hands
help keep you stay healthy. Feces (poop) from people or animals is an important source
of  germs  like  Salmonella,  E.  coli  O157,  and  norovirus  that  cause  diarrhea,  and  it  can
spread some respiratory infections like adenovirus and hand-foot-mouth disease. These
kinds of germs can get onto hands after people use the toilet or change a diaper, but
also in less obvious ways, like after handling raw meats that have invisible amounts of
animal poop on them. A single gram of human feces—which is about the weight of a
paper  clip—can  contain  one  trillion  germs.  Germs  can  also  get  onto  hands  if  people
touch any object that has germs on it because someone coughed or sneezed on it or
was  touched  by  some  other  contaminated  object.  When  these  germs  get  onto  hands
and are not washed off, they can be passed from person to person and make people
sick. Handwashing with soap removes germs from hands. This helps prevent infections
because: Teaching people about handwashing helps them and their communities stay
healthy. Handwashing education in the community: About 1.8 million children under the
age of 5 die each year from diarrheal diseases and pneumonia, the top two killers of
young children around the world. Preventing sickness reduces the amount of antibiotics
people use and the likelihood that antibiotic resistance will develop. Handwashing can
prevent  about  30%  of  diarrhea-related  sicknesses  and  about  20%  of  respiratory
infections (e.g., colds). Antibiotics often are prescribed unnecessarily for these health
issues.  Reducing  the  number  of  these  infections  by  washing  hands  frequently  helps

prevent  the  overuse  of  antibiotics—the  single  most  important  factor  leading  to
antibiotic  resistance  around  the  world.  Handwashing  can  also  prevent  people  from
getting sick with germs that are already resistant to antibiotics and that can be difficult
to  treat.  Why?  Because  hands  could  become  re-contaminated  if  placed  in  a  basin  of
standing water that has been contaminated through previous use, clean running water
should  be  used.  However,  washing  with  non-potable  water  when  necessary  may  still
improve health. The temperature of the water does not appear to affect germ removal;
however,  warmer  water  may  cause  more  skin  irritation  and  is  more  environmentally
costly. Turning off the faucet after wetting hands saves water, and there are few data
to prove whether significant numbers of germs are transferred between hands and the
faucet. Using soap to wash hands is more effective than using water alone because the
surfactants  in  soap  lift  soil  and  microbes  from  skin,  and  people  tend  to  scrub  hands
more thoroughly when using soap, which further removes germs. To date, studies have
shown  that  there  is  no  added  health  benefit  for  consumers  (this  does  not  include
professionals in the healthcare setting) using soaps containing antibacterial ingredients
compared with using plain soap. As a result, FDA issued a final rule in September 2016
that 19 ingredients in common "antibacterial" soaps, including triclosan, were no more
effective than non-antibacterial soap and water and thus these products are no longer
able  to  be  marketed  to  the  general  public.  This  rule  does  not  affect  hand  sanitizers,
wipes,  or  antibacterial  products  used  in  healthcare  settings.  Why?  Lathering  and
scrubbing hands creates friction, which helps lift dirt, grease, and microbes from skin.
Microbes  are  present  on  all  surfaces  of  the  hand,  often  in  particularly  high
concentration  under  the  nails,  so  the  entire  hand  should  be  scrubbed.  Why?
Determining the optimal length of time for handwashing is difficult because few studies
about the health impacts of altering handwashing times have been done. Of those that
exist, nearly all have measured reductions in overall numbers of microbes, only a small
proportion of which can cause illness, and have not measured impacts on health. Solely

reducing numbers of microbes on hands is not necessarily linked to better health. The
optimal  length  of  time  for  handwashing  is  also  likely  to  depend  on  many  factors,
including  the  type  and  amount  of  soil  on  the  hands  and  the  setting  of  the  person
washing  hands.  For  example,  surgeons  are  likely  to  come  into  contact  with
disease-causing germs and risk spreading serious infections to vulnerable patients, so
they may need to wash hands longer than someone preparing their own lunch at home.
Nonetheless, evidence suggests that washing hands for about 15-30 seconds removes
more germs from hands than washing for shorter periods. Accordingly, many countries
and global organizations have adopted recommendations to wash hands for about 20
seconds  (some  recommend  an  additional  20-30  seconds  for  drying):  Why?  Soap  and
friction help lift dirt, grease, and microbes—including disease-causing germs—from skin
so  they  can  then  be  rinsed  off  of  hands.  Rinsing  the  soap  away  also  minimizes  skin
irritation. Because hands could become re-contaminated if rinsed in a basin of standing
water that has been contaminated through previous use, clean running water should be
used. While some recommendations include using a paper towel to turn off the faucet
after hands have been rinsed, this practice leads to increased use of water and paper
towels, and there are no studies to show that it improves health. Why? Germs can be
transferred more easily to and from wet hands; therefore, hands should be dried after
washing.  However,  the  best  way  to  dry  hands  remains  unclear  because  few  studies
about hand drying exist, and the results of these studies conflict. Additionally, most of
these  studies  compare  overall  concentrations  of  microbes,  not  just  disease-causing
germs, on hands following different hand-drying methods. Nonetheless, studies suggest
that using a clean towel or air-drying hands are best. Having clean hands is one of the
best ways to avoid getting sick and prevent the spread of germs to others. Languages
Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/clean-hands/data-research/facts-stats/index.html
