Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. There are three RSV vaccines licensed for use in adults ages
60  years  and  older  in  the  United  States:  GSK’s  AREXVY,  Moderna’s  mRESVIA,  and
Pfizer’s  ABRYSVO.  For  additional  details  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for RSV vaccination, see Adult RSV ACIP
Vaccine  Recommendations.  CDC  recommends  a  single  dose  of  RSV  vaccines  for:
Epidemiologic evidence indicates that all adults ages 75 or older and adults ages 60-74
with  certain  risk factors are at increased  risk of severe RSV. The following  conditions
increase  the  risk  of  severe  RSV:  As  well  as:  *Frailty  is  a  multidimensional  geriatric
syndrome  and  reflects  a  state  of  increased  vulnerability  to  adverse  health  outcomes.
Although there is no consensus definition, one frequently used tool is the Fried frailty
phenotype in which frailty is defined as a clinical syndrome with three or more of the
following symptoms present: unintentional weight loss (10 lbs [4.5 kg] in the past year),
self-reported  exhaustion,  weakness  (grip  strength),  slow  walking  speed,  and  low
physical  activity.  †Retirement  communities  and  independent  living  communities  for
seniors are not considered long-term care facilities. Adults 60-74 living in these facilities
may  still  be  recommended  to  receive  RSV  vaccination  if  they  have  certain  medical
conditions listed above. For patients who have not already received an RSV vaccine and
decide to get one, CDC encourages healthcare providers to maximize the benefit of RSV
vaccination  by  giving  them  their  RSV  vaccine  in  late  summer  or  early  fall.  The  RSV
vaccine is not currently an annual vaccine, meaning eligible adults do not need to get a
dose every RSV season. Currently, CDC recommends only a single dose of RSV vaccine
for all adults ages 75 and older and adults ages 60-74 with increased risk of severe RSV
disease.  Additional  surveillance  and  evaluation  activities  are  ongoing  to  determine
whether adults might benefit from receiving additional RSV vaccine doses in the future.

So far, RSV vaccines appear to provide some protection for at least two RSV seasons.
GSK’s AREXVY should not be administered to a person with a history of severe allergic
reaction,  such  as  anaphylaxis,  to  any  component  of  this  vaccine.  Information  about
GSK’s  AREXVY  can  be  found  in  the  manufacturer’s  package  insert.  Pfizer’s  ABRYSVO
should not be administered to a person with a history of severe allergic reaction, such
as anaphylaxis, to any component of this vaccine. Information about Pfizer’s ABRYSVO
can be found in the manufacturer’s package insert. Moderna’s mRESVIA should not be
administered to a person with a history of severe allergic reaction, such as anaphylaxis,
to any component of this vaccine. Information about Moderna’s mRESVIA can be found
in  the  manufacturer’s  package  insert.  To  learn  more,  see  ACIP  Contraindications
Guidelines for Immunization, General Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization. There
are three RSV vaccines licensed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in
U.S. adults ages 60 and older: GSK’s AREXVY consists of a recombinant RSV F protein
antigen (based on the RSV-A subtype), stabilized in the prefusion conformation (preF),
and AS01E adjuvant. The AS01 adjuvant system is the same used in GSK’s recombinant
zoster  vaccine  (RZV,  Shingrix),  but  at  a  lower  dose.  The  vaccine  is  supplied  as  a
single-dose  vial  of  120  μg  of  lyophilized  preF  antigen  component  to  be  reconstituted
with  the  accompanying  vial  of  AS01E  adjuvant  suspension  component.  A  single  dose
after  reconstitution  is  0.5  mL.  Consult  the  package  insert  for  proper  storage  and
handling  details,  shelf  life,  and  reconstitution  instructions:  Package  Insert  –  AREXVY
(fda.gov). In June 2024, FDA licensed AREXVY for use in people ages 50–59 who are at
increased  risk  of  RSV  lower  respiratory  tract  disease.  ACIP  did  not  hold  a  vote  to
recommend  AREXVY  for  people  ages  50–59.  At  this  time,  ACIP  concluded  more
information is needed to determine the best policy option for the use of RSV vaccines in
people ages 50–59. CDC will continue to monitor the effectiveness and safety of these
vaccines in people ages 60 and older and is committed to re-evaluating potential RSV
vaccine recommendations for people ages 50–59 when additional information becomes

available. Pfizer’s ABRYSVO consists of a recombinant RSV F protein antigen (based on
both  the  RSV-A  and  RSV-B  subtypes),  stabilized  in  the  prefusion  conformation  (preF).
The  vaccine  is  supplied  as  a  single-dose  vial  of  120  μg  of  lyophilized  preF  antigen
component  (60  μg  from  RSV-A,  60  μg  from  RSV-B)  to  be  reconstituted  with  the
accompanying vial of sterile water diluent component. A single dose after reconstitution
is  approximately  0.5  mL.  Consult  the  package  insert  for  proper  storage  and  handling
details, shelf life, and reconstitution instructions: Package Insert – ABRYSVO (fda.gov).
Moderna’s mRESVIA consists of a single 0.5 mL-dose vial containing 50 μg of nucleoside
modified  mRNA  encoding  the  RSV  F  glycoprotein  (monovalent,  based  on  the  RSV-A
subtype), stabilized in the prefusion conformation (pre-F protein).  Consult the package
insert  for  proper  storage  and  handling  details,  shelf  life,  and  more:  Package  Insert  –
MRESVIA  (fda.gov).  Protein  Subunit  Vaccines  (GSK’s  AREXVY  and  Pfizer’s  ABRYSVO)
During  clinical  trials,  RSV  vaccines  for  people  ages  60  and  older  reduced  the  risk  of
symptomatic lower respiratory tract disease by 80%-90% in the first season after RSV
vaccination. While the protection provided by RSV vaccines wanes over time, they still
offer  significant  protection  against  serious  RSV  illness  for  at  least  2  years.  CDC  data
from  the  first  season  of  use  showed  that  RSV  vaccine  provided  protection  against
hospitalization,  critical  illness  (ICU  admission  and  death),  and  emergency  department
visits  among  people  ages  60  and  older.  During  2023-2024:  Ongoing  monitoring  is
needed  to  assess  RSV  vaccine  effectiveness  beyond  the  first  season  after  vaccine
receipt and in different risk groups as RSV vaccine coverage increases. mRNA Vaccine
(Moderna’s  mRESVIA)  A  summary  of  Moderna’s  large  phase  2/3  randomized,  blinded
placebo-controlled  clinical  trial  in  participants  ages  60  and  older  can  be  found  in  the
manufacturer’s package insert. GSK’s AREXVY In clinical trials, most adults ages 60 and
older  who  received  the  GSK  RSV  vaccine  experienced  vaccine-related  reactions.  The
most common reactions in the large phase 3 clinical trial were pain at the injection site
(61%),  fatigue  (34%),  myalgia  (29%),  and  headache  (27%)  (1).  Grade  3  reactions

(severe enough to prevent normal daily activities) occurred in 4% of vaccine recipients.
Across  all  clinical  trials  in  adults  ages  60  and  older,  inflammatory  neurologic  events
were reported in three of 17,922 participants within 42 days after receipt of the GSK
RSV vaccine (2). All three events occurred in trials without a placebo arm. The reported
cases included one case of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) with symptom onset 9 days
postvaccination  in  an  open-label  phase  3  clinical  trial  and  two  cases  of  acute
disseminated  encephalomyelitis  (ADEM)  among  participants  in  a  randomized  phase  3
coadministration  study.  The  two  ADEM  cases  were  reported  in  participants  after
concomitant  receipt  of  the  GSK  RSV  vaccine  and  standard  dose  seasonal  influenza
vaccine;  symptom  onset  occurred  7  and  22  days  postvaccination,  and  one  case  was
fatal. In both ADEM cases, the diagnosis was based on symptoms and clinical findings
only; diagnostic testing (including brain imaging, cerebrospinal fluid testing, and nerve
conduction studies) was not performed, leading to uncertainty in the diagnoses. Both
ADEM cases were reported from the same study site. The site investigator later revised
the  diagnosis  from  ADEM  to  hypoglycemia  and  dementia  in  the  fatal  case,  and  from
ADEM to stroke in the non-fatal case. In the large phase 3 clinical trial, a higher number
of  participants  who  received  the  GSK  RSV  vaccine  than  those  who  received  placebo
reported  atrial  fibrillation  within  30  days  after  injection  (10  vs.  4  participants)  (2).
However, due to the small number of these events, it is not known at this time whether
they  occurred  due  to  chance,  or  whether  RSV  vaccination  increases  the  risk  of  atrial
fibrillation.  Pfizer’s  ABRYSVO  In  clinical  trials  among  adults  ages  60  and  older,
vaccine-related  reactions  were  common  among  participants  who  received  the  Pfizer
RSV vaccine. The most common reactions in the large phase 3 clinical trial were fatigue
(16%),  headache  (13%),  and  pain  at  the  injection  site  (11%)  (4).  Grade  3  reactions
(severe  enough  to  prevent  normal  daily  activities)  occurred  in  approximately  1%  of
vaccine  recipients.  Across  all  clinical  trials  in  adults  ages  60  and  older,  inflammatory
neurologic  events  were  reported  in  three  of  20,255  participants  within  42  days  after

receipt  of  the  Pfizer  RSV  vaccine  (2).  The  events  included  one  case  of  GBS  with
symptom  onset  14  days  postvaccination,  one  case  of  Miller  Fisher  syndrome  (a  GBS
variant) with symptom onset 10 days postvaccination; and one case of undifferentiated
motor-sensory axonal polyneuropathy with worsening of preexisting symptoms 21 days
postvaccination. In the large phase 3 clinical trial, a higher number of participants who
received  the  Pfizer  RSV  vaccine  than  those  who  received  placebo  reported  atrial
fibrillation within the 30 days after injection (10 vs. 4 participants) (2). However, due to
the small number of these events, it is not known at this time whether they occurred
due  to  chance,  or  whether  RSV  vaccination  increases  the  risk  of  atrial  fibrillation.
Ongoing Studies and Surveillance Preliminary safety surveillance data from the Vaccine
Adverse  Event  Reporting  System  (VAERS)  (co-managed  by  CDC  and  FDA)  and  the
Vaccine  Safety  Datalink  (VSD),  as  well  as  from  a  partnership  between  FDA  and  the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), suggest a potential increased risk of
GBS  after  vaccination  in  older  adults.  Due  to  uncertainties  and  limitations,  these
analyses  cannot  establish  if  there  is  an  increased  risk  for  GBS  after  RSV  vaccination.
CDC and FDA are conducting population-based active surveillance to monitor for GBS
following  RSV  vaccination.  Additional  analyses  using  these  surveillance  data  are
underway  and  will  provide  more  information  about  whether  there  is  an  association
between RSV vaccines and GBS. If a risk if present, these analyses may also be able to
determine its magnitude. Due to the small number of inflammatory neurologic events in
the  clinical  trials  and  the  preliminary  nature  of  the  post-licensure  safety  surveillance
results  regarding  GBS,  it  is  not  known  at  this  time  whether  RSV  vaccination  is
associated with increased risk of GBS or other neurologic adverse events. According to
FDA post-marketing requirements and commitments, both manufacturers will conduct
safety  studies  to  evaluate  the  risk  of  neurologic  adverse  events  and  atrial  fibrillation
following RSV vaccination. During the June 2024 ACIP meeting, CDC and FDA presented
new  data  from  ongoing  safety  monitoring  which  continue  to  suggest  a  potential

increased  risk  of  GBS  after  RSV  vaccination  with  the  two  protein  subunit  vaccines
(AREXVY by GSK and ABRYSVO by Pfizer). However, at this time, more data are needed
to  determine  if  there  is  an  increased  risk  of  Guillain-Barré  Syndrome  after  RSV
vaccination.  CDC  will  continue  to  monitor  adverse  events  following  RSV  vaccination
through its vaccine safety surveillance systems. This information will be updated with
results from post-marketing safety studies and from vaccine safety surveillance, as they
become available. For more information on vaccine safety, see Vaccine Information and
Safety Studies | Vaccine Safety | CDC. Adverse events after RSV vaccination should be
reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), even if it is not clear
that the vaccine caused the adverse event. Information on how to submit a report to
VAERS
 is
 available
 at
 https://vaers.hhs.gov/index.html
 or
 by
 telephone
 at
1-800-822-7967. Moderna’s mRESVIA In clinical trials among adults ages 60 and older,
vaccine-related  reactions  were  common  among  participants  who  received  mRESVIA.
The most common reactions in the large phase 3 clinical trial were pain at the injection
site  (56%),  fatigue  (31%),  headache  (27%),  and  myalgia  (26%),  arthralgia  (22%),
axillary  (underarm)  swelling  or  tenderness  (15%),  and  chills  (12%).  See  the
manufacturer’s package insert for more safety information about mRESVIA. As with all
vaccines,  CDC  and  FDA  will  conduct  routine  post-licensure  safety  surveillance  for
adverse events following vaccination with mRESVIA. References Proper vaccine storage
and handling practices play an important role in protecting individuals and communities
from  vaccine-preventable  diseases.  For  general  recommendations  and  guidance,  see
Vaccine  Storage  and  Handling.  Provided  below  is  guidance  specific  to  RSV  vaccines.
GSK’s AREXVY: GSK’s vaccine is supplied in two vials that must be reconstituted prior to
administration. One vial is a lyophilized antigen component and the second is a liquid
diluent
 adjuvant
 suspension.
 You
 MUST
 use
 the
 diluent
 provided
 by
 the
manufacturer.  Refer  to  the  manufacturer’s  package  insert  for  specific  instructions  on
reconstituting  the  vaccine:  Package  Insert  –  AREXVY  (fda.gov).  Before  reconstitution:

After  reconstitution:  Pfizer’s  ABRYSVO:  Pfizer’s  vaccine  is  supplied  in  a  kit  with  three
components:  a  vial  of  Lyophilized  Antigen  Component  (a  sterile  white  powder),  a
prefilled syringe containing Sterile Water Diluent Component, and a vial adapter. Refer
to  the  manufacturer’s  package  insert  for  specific  instructions  on  reconstituting  the
vaccine:
 Package
 Insert
 –
 ABRYSVO
 (fda.gov).
 Before
 reconstitution:
 After
reconstitution: Moderna’s mRESVIA: During storage, minimize exposure to room light,
and avoid exposure to direct sunlight and ultraviolet light. Refer to the manufacturer’s
package  insert  for  specific  instructions  on  storage  and  thawing:  Package  Insert  –
mRESVIA (fda.gov). Frozen Storage  Store frozen between -40°C to -15°C (-40°F to 5°F).
Storage after Thawing  Storage at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F):  Storage at 8°C to 25°C
(46°F  to  77°F):   This  page  provides  a  summary  of  guidance  for  administering
FDA-licensed  RSV  vaccines  for  use  in  U.S.  adults  ages  60  and  older  RSV  vaccines,
including route, number of doses, and co-administration with other vaccines. Do not use
any  RSV  vaccine  beyond  the  expiration  date  printed  on  the  label.  Administer  RSV
vaccine intramuscularly. The preferred site of administration is the deltoid region of the
upper  arm.  Do  not  administer  RSV  vaccine  intravenously,  intradermally,  or
subcutaneously. Coadministration of RSV vaccines with other adult vaccines during the
same visit is acceptable. Available data on immunogenicity of coadministration of RSV
vaccines  and  other  vaccines  are  currently  limited.  Coadministration  of  RSV  and
seasonal  influenza  vaccines  met  noninferiority  criteria  for  immunogenicity  with  the
exception  of  the  FluA/Darwin  H3N2  strain  when  the  GSK  RSV  vaccine  was
coadministered  with  adjuvanted  quadrivalent  inactivated  influenza  vaccine.  RSV  and
influenza  antibody  titers  were  somewhat  lower  with  coadministration;  however,  the
clinical  significance  of  this  is  unknown.  Administering  RSV  vaccine  with  one  or  more
other vaccines at the same visit might increase local or systemic reactogenicity. Data
are only available for coadministration of RSV and influenza vaccines, and evidence is
mixed  regarding  increased  reactogenicity.  Data  are  lacking  on  the  safety  of

coadministration  with  other  vaccines  that  might  be  recommended  for  persons  in  this
age  group,  such  as  COVID-19  vaccines;  pneumococcal  vaccines;  adult  tetanus,
diphtheria,  and  pertussis  vaccines;  and  the  recombinant  zoster  vaccine  (the
recombinant zoster vaccine and GSK’s RSV vaccine contains the same adjuvant). When
deciding whether to coadminister other vaccines with an RSV vaccine, providers should
consider whether the patient is up to date with currently recommended vaccines, the
feasibility  of  the  patient  returning  for  additional  vaccine  doses,  risk  for  acquiring
vaccine-preventable  disease,  vaccine  reactogenicity  profiles,  and  patient  preferences.
Post-licensure  efficacy  and  safety  monitoring  of  coadministered  RSV  vaccines  with
other vaccines will further direct guidance. References and Resources

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/rsv/hcp/older-adults.html
