A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  The  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:
Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings 2007 builds upon a
series  of  isolation  and  infection  prevention  documents  promulgated  since  1970.   The
previous documents are summarized and referenced in Table 1 and in Part I of the 1996
Guideline for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals1. The objectives of this guideline are to
This  guideline  is  designed  for  use  by  individuals  who  are  charged  with  administering
infection control programs in hospitals and other healthcare settings. The information
also  will  be  useful  for  other  healthcare  personnel,  healthcare  administrators,  and
anyone needing information about infection control measures to prevent transmission
of infectious agents. Commonly used abbreviations are provided in Abbreviations Used
in the Guideline and terms used in the guideline are defined in the Glossary. Med-line
and Pub Med were used to search for relevant studies published in English, focusing on
those published since 1996. Much of the evidence cited for preventing transmission of
infectious  agents  in  healthcare  settings  is  derived  from  studies  that  used
"quasi-experimental designs", also referred to as nonrandomized, pre- post-intervention
study  designs  2.  Although  these  types  of  studies  can  provide  valuable  information
regarding  the  effectiveness  of  various  interventions,  several  factors  decrease  the
certainty  of  attributing  improved  outcome  to  a  specific  intervention.  These  include:
difficulties  in  controlling  for  important  confounding  variables;  the  use  of  multiple
interventions  during  an  outbreak;  and  results  that  are  explained  by  the  statistical
principle  of  regression  to  the  mean,  (e.g.,  improvement  over  time  without  any
intervention) 3. Observational studies remain relevant and have been used to evaluate
infection  control  interventions  4,  5.  The  quality  of  studies,  consistency  of  results  and
correlation  with  results  from  randomized,  controlled  trials  when  available  were
considered  during  the  literature  review  and  assignment  of  evidence-based  categories

(See  Part  IV:  Recommendations)  to  the  recommendations  in  this  guideline.  Several
authors  have  summarized  properties  to  consider  when  evaluating  studies  for  the
purpose of determining if the results should change practice or in designing new studies
2, 6, 7. This guideline contains four changes in terminology from the 1996 guideline:
This guideline, like its predecessors, focuses primarily on interactions between patients
and  healthcare  providers.  The  Guidelines  for  the  Prevention  of  MDRO  Infection  were
published  separately  in  November  2006,  and  are  available  online  at  Management  of
Multidrug-Resistant Organisms In Healthcare Settings. Several other HICPAC guidelines
to  prevent  transmission  of  infectious  agents  associated  with  healthcare  delivery  are
cited; e.g., Guideline for Hand Hygiene, Guideline for Environmental Infection Control,
Guideline  for  Prevention  of  Healthcare-Associated  Pneumonia,  and  Guideline  for
Infection Control in Healthcare Personnel 11, 14, 16, 17. In combination, these provide
comprehensive guidance on the primary infection control measures for ensuring a safe
environment for patients and healthcare personnel. This guideline does not discuss in
detail  specialized  infection  control  issues  in  defined  populations  that  are  addressed
elsewhere,  (e.g.,  Recommendations  for  Preventing  Transmission  of  Infections  among
Chronic  Hemodialysis  Patients  ,  Guidelines  for  Preventing  the  Transmission  of
Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  in  Health-Care  Facilities  2005,  Guidelines  for  Infection
Control  in  Dental  Health-Care  Settings  and  Infection  Control  Recommendations  for
Patients  with  Cystic  Fibrosis  12,  18-20.  An  exception  has  been  made  by  including
abbreviated guidance for a Protective Environment used for allogeneic HSCT recipients
because  components  of  the  Protective  Environment  have  been  more  completely
defined  since  publication  of  the  Guidelines  for  Preventing  Opportunistic  Infections
Among HSCT Recipients in 2000 and the Guideline for Environmental Infection Control
in  Healthcare  Facilities  11,  15.  Transmission  of  infectious  agents  within  a  healthcare
setting  requires  three  elements:  a  source  (or  reservoir)  of  infectious  agents,  a
susceptible  host  with  a  portal  of  entry  receptive  to  the  agent,  and  a  mode  of

transmission  for  the  agent.  This  section  describes  the  interrelationship  of  these
elements in the epidemiology of HAIs. Infectious agents transmitted during healthcare
derive  primarily  from  human  sources  but  inanimate  environmental  sources  also  are
implicated  in  transmission.  Human  reservoirs  include  patients  20-28,  healthcare
personnel  29-3517,  36-39,  and  household  members  and  other  visitors  40-45.  Such
source  individuals  may  have  active  infections,  may  be  in  the  asymptomatic  and/or
incubation  period  of  an  infectious  disease,  or  may  be  transiently  or  chronically
colonized  with  pathogenic  microorganisms,  particularly  in  the  respiratory  and
gastrointestinal tracts. The endogenous flora of patients (e.g., bacteria residing in the
respiratory or gastrointestinal tract) also are the source of HAIs 46-54. Infection is the
result of a complex interrelationship between a potential host and an infectious agent.
Most of the factors that influence infection and the occurrence and severity of disease
are  related  to  the  host.  However,  characteristics  of  the  host-agent  interaction  as  it
relates  to  pathogenicity,  virulence  and  antigenicity  are  also  important,  as  are  the
infectious dose, mechanisms of disease production and route of exposure 55. There is a
spectrum  of  possible  outcomes  following  exposure  to  an  infectious  agent.  Some
persons  exposed  to  pathogenic  microorganisms  never  develop  symptomatic  disease
while others become severely ill and even die. Some individuals are prone to becoming
transiently  or  permanently  colonized  but  remain  asymptomatic.  Still  others  progress
from  colonization  to  symptomatic  disease  either  immediately  following  exposure,  or
after a period of asymptomatic colonization. The immune state at the time of exposure
to an infectious agent, interaction between pathogens, and virulence factors intrinsic to
the  agent  are  important  predictors  of  an  individuals'  outcome.  Host  factors  such  as
extremes
 of
 age
 and
 underlying
 disease
 (e.g.,
 diabetes
 56,
 57),
 human
immunodeficiency  virus/acquired  immune  deficiency  syndrome  [HIV/AIDS]  58,  59,
malignancy, and transplants 18, 60, 61 can increase susceptibility to infection as do a
variety  of  medications  that  alter  the  normal  flora  (e.g.,  antimicrobial  agents,  gastric

acid  suppressants,  corticosteroids,  antirejection  drugs,  antineoplastic  agents,  and
immunosuppressive drugs). Surgical procedures and radiation therapy impair defenses
of  the  skin  and  other  involved  organ  systems.  Indwelling  devices  such  as  urinary
catheters,  endotracheal  tubes,  central  venous  and  arterial  catheters  62-64  and
synthetic  implants  facilitate  development  of  HAIs  by  allowing  potential  pathogens  to
bypass  local  defenses  that  would  ordinarily  impede  their  invasion  and  by  providing
surfaces for development of biofilms that may facilitate adherence of microorganisms
and  protect  from  antimicrobial  activity  65.  Some  infections  associated  with  invasive
procedures result from transmission within the healthcare facility; others arise from the
patient's  endogenous  flora  46-50.  High-risk  patient  populations  with  noteworthy  risk
factors for infection are discussed further in Sections I.D, I.E., and I.F. Several classes of
pathogens can cause infection, including bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, and prions.
The modes of transmission vary by type of organism and some infectious agents may
be  transmitted  by  more  than  one  route:  some  are  transmitted  primarily  by  direct  or
indirect  contact,  (e.g.,  Herpes  simplex  virus  [HSV],  respiratory  syncytial  virus,
Staphylococcus  aureus),  others  by  the  droplet,  (e.g.,  influenza  virus,  B.  pertussis)  or
airborne  routes  (e.g.,  M.  tuberculosis).  Other  infectious  agents,  such  as  bloodborne
viruses  (e.g.,  hepatitis  B  and  C  viruses  [HBV,  HCV]  and  HIV  are  transmitted  rarely  in
healthcare settings, via percutaneous or mucous membrane exposure. Importantly, not
all infectious agents are transmitted from person to person. These are distinguished in
Appendix A. The three principal routes of transmission are summarized below. The most
common  mode  of  transmission,  contact  transmission  is  divided  into  two  subgroups:
direct  contact  and  indirect  contact.  I.B.3.a.i.  Direct  contact  transmission.  Direct
transmission occurs when microorganisms are transferred from one infected person to
another person without a contaminated intermediate object or person. Opportunities for
direct  contact  transmission  between  patients  and  healthcare  personnel  have  been
summarized in the Guideline for Infection Control in Healthcare Personnel, 1998 17 and

include:  I.B.3.a.ii.  Indirect  contact  transmission.  Indirect  transmission  involves  the
transfer of an infectious agent through a contaminated intermediate object or person.
In  the  absence  of  a  point-source  outbreak,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  how  indirect
transmission  occurs.  However,  extensive  evidence  cited  in  the  Guideline  for  Hand
Hygiene  in  Health-Care  Settings  suggests  that  the  contaminated  hands  of  healthcare
personnel are important contributors to indirect contact transmission 16. Examples of
opportunities  for  indirect  contact  transmission  include:  Clothing,  uniforms,  laboratory
coats,  or  isolation  gowns  used  as  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE),  may  become
contaminated with potential pathogens after care of a patient colonized or infected with
an infectious agent, (e.g., MRSA 88, VRE 89, and C. difficile 90. Although contaminated
clothing has not been implicated directly in transmission, the potential exists for soiled
garments  to  transfer  infectious  agents  to  successive  patients.  I.B.3.b.  Droplet
transmission. Droplet transmission is, technically, a form of contact transmission, and
some infectious agents transmitted by the droplet route also may be transmitted by the
direct  and  indirect  contact  routes.  However,  in  contrast  to  contact  transmission,
respiratory droplets carrying infectious pathogens transmit infection when they travel
directly  from  the  respiratory  tract  of  the  infectious  individual  to  susceptible  mucosal
surfaces of the recipient, generally over short distances, necessitating facial protection.
Respiratory droplets are generated when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks
91, 92 or during procedures such as suctioning, endotracheal intubation, 93-96, cough
induction  by  chest  physiotherapy  97  and  cardiopulmonary  resuscitation  98,  99.
Evidence  for  droplet  transmission  comes  from  epidemiological  studies  of  disease
outbreaks  100-103,  experimental  studies  104  and  from  information  on  aerosol
dynamics  91,  105.  Studies  have  shown  that  the  nasal  mucosa,  conjunctivae  and  less
frequently the mouth, are susceptible portals of entry for respiratory viruses 106. The
maximum distance for droplet transmission is currently unresolved, although pathogens
transmitted by the droplet route have not been transmitted through the air over long

distances, in contrast to the airborne pathogens discussed below. Historically, the area
of  defined  risk  has  been  a  distance  of  ≤3  feet  around  the  patient  and  is  based  on
epidemiologic and simulated studies of selected infections 103, 104. Using this distance
for  donning  masks  has  been  effective  in  preventing  transmission  of  infectious  agents
via  the  droplet  route.  However,  experimental  studies  with  smallpox  107,  108  and
investigations during the global SARS outbreaks of 2003 101 suggest that droplets from
patients with these two infections could reach persons located 6 feet or more from their
source.  It  is  likely  that  the  distance  droplets  travel  depends  on  the  velocity  and
mechanism by which respiratory droplets are propelled from the source, the density of
respiratory  secretions,  environmental  factors  such  as  temperature  and  humidity,  and
the  ability  of  the  pathogen  to  maintain  infectivity  over  that  distance  105.  Thus,  a
distance of ≤3 feet around the patient is best viewed as an example of what is meant
by "a short distance from a patient" and should not be used as the sole criterion for
deciding when a mask should be donned to protect from droplet exposure. Based on
these considerations, it may be prudent to don a mask when within 6 to 10 feet of the
patient or upon entry into the patient's room, especially when exposure to emerging or
highly virulent pathogens is likely. More studies are needed to improve understanding
of  droplet  transmission  under  various  circumstances.  Droplet  size  is  another  variable
under  discussion.  Droplets  traditionally  have  been  defined  as  being  >5  µm  in  size.
Droplet  nuclei,  particles  arising  from  desiccation  of  suspended  droplets,  have  been
associated with airborne transmission and defined as ≤5 µm in size,105 a reflection of
the  pathogenesis  of  pulmonary  tuberculosis  which  is  not  generalizeable  to  other
organisms.  Observations  of  particle  dynamics  have  demonstrated  that  a  range  of
droplet sizes, including those with diameters of 30µm or greater, can remain suspended
in the air 109. The behavior of droplets and droplet nuclei affect recommendations for
preventing transmission. Whereas fine airborne particles containing pathogens that are
able to remain infective may transmit infections over long distances, requiring AIIR to

prevent its dissemination within a facility; organisms transmitted by the droplet route
do  not  remain  infective  over  long  distances,  and  therefore  do  not  require  special  air
handling  and  ventilation.  Examples  of  infectious  agents  that  are  transmitted  via  the
droplet  route  include  Bordetella  pertussis  110,  influenza  virus  23,  adenovirus  111  ,
rhinovirus 104, Mycoplasma pneumoniae 112, SARS-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV)
21,  96,  113,  group  A  streptococcus  114,  and  Neisseria  meningitidis  95,  103,  115.
Although  respiratory  syncytial  virus  may  be  transmitted  by  the  droplet  route,  direct
contact  with  infected  respiratory  secretions  is  the  most  important  determinant  of
transmission and consistent adherence to Standard plus Contact Precautions prevents
transmission  in  healthcare  settings  24,  116,  117.  Rarely,  pathogens  that  are  not
transmitted  routinely  by  the  droplet  route  are  dispersed  into  the  air  over  short
distances.  For  example,  although  S.  aureus  is  transmitted  most  frequently  by  the
contact route, viral upper respiratory tract infection has been associated with increased
dispersal  of  S.  aureus  from  the  nose  into  the  air  for  a  distance  of  4  feet  under  both
outbreak  and  experimental  conditions  and  is  known  as  the  "cloud  baby"  and  "cloud
adult"  phenomenon118-120.  I.B.3.c.  Airborne  transmission.  Airborne  transmission
occurs  by  dissemination  of  either  airborne  droplet  nuclei  or  small  particles  in  the
respirable size range containing infectious agents that remain infective over time and
distance
 (e.g.,
 spores
 of
 Aspergillus
 spp,
 and
 Mycobacterium
 tuberculosis).
Microorganisms  carried  in  this  manner  may  be  dispersed  over  long  distances  by  air
currents and may be inhaled by susceptible individuals who have not had face-to-face
contact  with  (or  been  in  the  same  room  with)  the  infectious  individual  121-124.
Preventing the spread of pathogens that are transmitted by the airborne route requires
the use of special air handling and ventilation systems (e.g., AIIRs) to contain and then
safely  remove  the  infectious  agent  11,  12.  Infectious  agents  to  which  this  applies
include  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  124-127,  rubeola  virus  (measles)  122,  and
varicella-zoster  virus  (chickenpox)  123.  In  addition,  published  data  suggest  the

possibility that variola virus (smallpox) may be transmitted over long distances through
the air under unusual circumstances and AIIRs are recommended for this agent as well;
however, droplet and contact routes are the more frequent routes of transmission for
smallpox 108, 128, 129. In addition to AIIRs, respiratory protection with NIOSH certified
N95  or  higher  level  respirator  is  recommended  for  healthcare  personnel  entering  the
AIIR to prevent acquisition of airborne infectious agents such as M. tuberculosis 12. For
certain other respiratory infectious agents, such as influenza 130, 131 and rhinovirus
104,  and  even  some  gastrointestinal  viruses  (e.g.,  norovirus  132  and  rotavirus  133  )
there  is  some  evidence  that  the  pathogen  may  be  transmitted  via  small-particle
aerosols,  under  natural  and  experimental  conditions.  Such  transmission  has  occurred
over  distances  longer  than  3  feet  but  within  a  defined  airspace  (e.g.,  patient  room),
suggesting that it is unlikely that these agents remain viable on air currents that travel
long distances. AIIRs are not required routinely to prevent transmission of these agents.
Additional issues concerning examples of small particle aerosol transmission of agents
that are most frequently transmitted by the droplet route are discussed below. I.B.3.d.
Emerging  issues  concerning  airborne  transmission  of  infectious  agents.  I.B.3.d.i.
Transmission  from  patients.  The  emergence  of  SARS  in  2002,  the  importation  of
monkeypox  into  the  United  States  in  2003,  and  the  emergence  of  avian  influenza
present  challenges  to  the  assignment  of  isolation  categories  because  of  conflicting
information and uncertainty about possible routes of transmission. Although SARS-CoV
is transmitted primarily by contact and/or droplet routes, airborne transmission over a
limited distance (e.g., within a room), has been suggested, though not proven 134-141.
This is true of other infectious agents such as influenza virus 130 and noroviruses 132,
142, 143. Influenza viruses are transmitted primarily by close contact with respiratory
droplets  23,  102  and  acquisition  by  healthcare  personnel  has  been  prevented  by
Droplet Precautions, even when positive pressure rooms were used in one center 144
However, inhalational transmission could not be excluded in an outbreak of influenza in

the passengers and crew of a single aircraft 130. Observations of a protective effect of
UV lights in preventing influenza among patients with tuberculosis during the influenza
pandemic  of  1957-'58  have  been  used  to  suggest  airborne  transmission  145,  146.  In
contrast  to  the  strict  interpretation  of  an  airborne  route  for  transmission  (i.e.,  long
distances beyond the patient room environment), short distance transmission by small
particle  aerosols  generated  under  specific  circumstances  (e.g.,  during  endotracheal
intubation) to persons in the immediate area near the patient has been demonstrated.
Also, aerosolized particles <100 µm can remain suspended in air when room air current
velocities  exceed  the  terminal  settling  velocities  of  the  particles  109.  SARS-CoV
transmission  has  been  associated  with  endotracheal  intubation,  noninvasive  positive
pressure ventilation, and cardio-pulmonary resuscitation 93, 94, 96, 98, 141. Although
the  most  frequent  routes  of  transmission  of  noroviruses  are  contact  and  food  and
waterborne  routes,  several  reports  suggest  that  noroviruses  may  be  transmitted
through aerosolization of infectious particles from vomitus or fecal material 142, 143,
147, 148. It is hypothesized that the aerosolized particles are inhaled and subsequently
swallowed. Roy and Milton proposed a new classification for aerosol transmission when
evaluating  routes  of  SARS  transmission:  This  conceptual  framework  can  explain  rare
occurrences of airborne transmission of agents that are transmitted most frequently by
other routes (e.g., smallpox, SARS, influenza, noroviruses). Concerns about unknown or
possible routes of transmission of agents associated with severe disease and no known
treatment often result in more extreme prevention strategies than may be necessary;
therefore, recommended precautions could change as the epidemiology of an emerging
infection is defined and controversial issues are resolved. I.B.3.d.ii. Transmission from
the  environment.  Some  airborne  infectious  agents  are  derived  from  the  environment
and do not usually involve person-to-person transmission. For example, anthrax spores
present in a finely milled powdered preparation can be aerosolized from contaminated
environmental  surfaces  and  inhaled  into  the  respiratory  tract  150,  151.  Spores  of

environmental fungi (e.g., Aspergillus spp.) are ubiquitous in the environment and may
cause  disease  in  immunocompromised  patients  who  inhale  aerosolized  (e.g.,  via
construction  dust)  spores  152,  153.  As  a  rule,  neither  of  these  organisms  is
subsequently
 transmitted
 from
 infected
 patients.
 However,
 there
 is
 one
well-documented report of person-to-person transmission of Aspergillus sp. in the ICU
setting  that  was  most  likey  due  to  the  aerosolization  of  spores  during  wound
debridement  154.  A  Protective  Environment  refers  to  isolation  practices  designed  to
decrease  the  risk  of  exposure  to  environmental  fungal  agents  in  allogeneic  HSCT
patients  11,  14,  15,  155-158.  Environmental  sources  of  respiratory  pathogens  (eg.
Legionella)  transmitted  to  humans  through  a  common  aerosol  source  is  distinct  from
direct patient-to-patient transmission. I.B.3.e. Other sources of infection. Transmission
of infection from sources other than infectious individuals include those associated with
common  environmental  sources  or  vehicles  (e.g.,  contaminated  food,  water,  or
medications  (e.g.,  intravenous  fluids).  Although  Aspergillus  spp.  have  been  recovered
from
 hospital
 water
 systems
 159,
 the
 role
 of
 water
 as
 a
 reservoir
 for
immunosuppressed patients remains uncertain. Vectorborne transmission of infectious
agents  from  mosquitoes,  flies,  rats,  and  other  vermin  also  can  occur  in  healthcare
settings.  Prevention  of  vector  borne  transmission  is  not  addressed  in  this  document.
Several infectious agents with important infection control implications that either were
not discussed extensively in previous isolation guidelines or have emerged recently are
discussed  below.  These  are  epidemiologically  important  organisms  (e.g.,  C.  difficile),
agents
 of
 bioterrorism,
 prions,
 SARS-CoV,
 monkeypox,
 noroviruses,
 and
 the
hemorrhagic  fever  viruses.  Experience  with  these  agents  has  broadened  the
understanding  of  modes  of  transmission  and  effective  preventive  measures.  These
agents  are  included  for  purposes  of  information  and,  for  some  (i.e.,  SARS-CoV,
monkeypox),  because  of  the  lessons  that  have  been  learned  about  preparedness
planning  and  responding  effectively  to  new  infectious  agents.  Any  infectious  agents

transmitted in healthcare settings may, under defined conditions, become targeted for
control  because  they  are  epidemiologically  important.  C.  difficile  is  specifically
discussed  below  because  of  wide  recognition  of  its  current  importance  in  U.S.
healthcare  facilities.  In  determining  what  constitutes  an  "epidemiologically  important
organism",  the  following  characteristics  apply:  C.  difficile  is  a  spore-forming  gram
positive anaerobic bacillus that was first isolated from stools of neonates in 1935 165
and identified as the most commonly identified causative agent of antibiotic-associated
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis in 1977 166. This pathogen is a major cause of
healthcare-associated diarrhea and has been responsible for many large outbreaks in
healthcare  settings  that  were  extremely  difficult  to  control.  Important  factors  that
contribute  to  healthcare-associated  outbreaks  include  environmental  contamination,
persistence  of  spores  for  prolonged  periods  of  time,  resistance  of  spores  to  routinely
used  disinfectants  and  antiseptics,  hand  carriage  by  healthcare  personnel  to  other
patients,  and  exposure  of  patients  to  frequent  courses  of  antimicrobial  agents  167  .
Antimicrobials most frequently associated with increased risk of C. difficile include third
generation cephalosporins, clindamycin, vancomycin, and fluoroquinolones. Since 2001,
outbreaks and sporadic cases of C. difficile with increased morbidity and mortality have
been observed in several U.S. states, Canada, England and the Netherlands 168-172.
The same strain of C. difficile has been implicated in these outbreaks 173. This strain,
toxinotype III, North American PFGE type 1, and PCR-ribotype 027 (NAP1/027) has been
found  to  hyperproduce  toxin  A  (16  fold  increase)  and  toxin  B  (23  fold  increase)
compared with isolates from 12 different pulsed-field gel electrophoresis PFGE types. A
recent  survey  of  U.S.  infectious  disease  physicians  found  that  40%  perceived  recent
increases  in  the  incidence  and  severity  of  C.  difficile  disease174.  Standardization  of
testing methodology and surveillance definitions is needed for accurate comparisons of
trends  in  rates  among  hospitals  175.  It  is  hypothesized  that  the  incidence  of  disease
and apparent heightened transmissibility of this new strain may be due, at least in part,

to  the  greater  production  of  toxins  A  and  B,  increasing  the  severity  of  diarrhea  and
resulting  in  more  environmental  contamination.  Considering  the  greater  morbidity,
mortality,  length  of  stay,  and  costs  associated  with  C.  difficile  disease  in  both  acute
care and long term care facilities, control of this pathogen is now even more important
than previously. Prevention of transmission focuses on syndromic application of Contact
Precautions for patients with diarrhea, accurate identification of patients, environmental
measures (e.g., rigorous cleaning of patient rooms) and consistent hand hygiene. Use of
soap and water, rather than alcohol based handrubs, for mechanical removal of spores
from  hands,  and  a  bleach-containing  disinfectant  (5000  ppm)  for  environmental
disinfection,  may  be  valuable  when  there  is  transmission  in  a  healthcare  facility.  See
Appendix  A  for  specific  recommendations.  In  general,  MDROs  are  defined  as
microorganisms – predominantly bacteria – that are resistant to one or more classes of
antimicrobial agents176. Although the names of certain MDROs suggest resistance to
only  one  agent  (e.g.,  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  [MRSA],  vancomycin
resistant  enterococcus  [VRE]),  these  pathogens  are  usually  resistant  to  all  but  a  few
commercially available antimicrobial agents. This latter feature defines MDROs that are
considered  to  be  epidemiologically  important  and  deserve  special  attention  in
healthcare  facilities177.  Other  MDROs  of  current  concern  include  multidrug-resistant
Streptococcus  pneumoniae  (MDRSP)  which  is  resistant  to  penicillin  and  other
broad-spectrum  agents  such  as  macrolides  and  fluroquinolones,  multidrug-resistant
gram-negative  bacilli  (MDR-  GNB),  especially  those  producing  extended  spectrum
beta-lactamases (ESBLs); and strains of S. aureus that are intermediate or resistant to
vancomycin  (i.e.,  VISA  and  VRSA)178-197  198.  MDROs  are  transmitted  by  the  same
routes as antimicrobial susceptible infectious agents. Patient-to-patient transmission in
healthcare settings, usually via hands of HCWs, has been a major factor accounting for
the increase in MDRO incidence and prevalence, especially for MRSA and VRE in acute
care facilities199-201. Preventing the emergence and transmission of these pathogens

requires  a  comprehensive  approach  that  includes  administrative  involvement  and
measures  (e.g.,  nurse  staffing,  communication  systems,  performance  improvement
processes to ensure adherence to recommended infection control measures), education
and  training  of  medical  and  other  healthcare  personnel,  judicious  antibiotic  use,
comprehensive  surveillance  for  targeted  MDROs,  application  of  infection  control
precautions  during  patient  care,  environmental  measures  (e.g.,  cleaning  and
disinfection
 of
 the
 patient
 care
 environment
 and
 equipment,
 dedicated
single-patient-use  of  non-critical  equipment),  and  decolonization  therapy  when
appropriate.  The  prevention  and  control  of  MDROs  is  a  national  priority  –  one  that
requires that all healthcare facilities and agencies assume responsibility and participate
in  community-wide  control  programs176,  177.  A  detailed  discussion  of  this  topic  and
recommendations for prevention was published in 2006 may be found at Management
of  Multidrug-Resistant  Organisms  in  Healthcare  Settings  (2006).  CDC  has  designated
the agents that cause anthrax, smallpox, plague, tularemia, viral hemorrhagic fevers,
and  botulism  as  Category  A  (high  priority)  because  these  agents  can  be  easily
disseminated  environmentally  and/or  transmitted  from  person  to  person;  can  cause
high mortality and have the potential for major public health impact; might cause public
panic
 and
 social
 disruption;
 and
 require
 special
 action
 for
 public
 health
preparedness202.  General  information  relevant  to  infection  control  in  healthcare
settings for Category A agents of bioterrorism is summarized in Table 3. Consult [This
link  is  no  longer  active:  www.bt.cdc.gov.  Similar  information  may  be  found  at  CDC
Emergency  Preparedness  and  Response:  Bioterrorism  Accessed  May  2016.]  for
additional,  updated  Category  A  agent  information  as  well  as  information  concerning
Category  B  and  C  agents  of  bioterrorism  and  updates.  Category  B  and  C  agents  are
important but are not as readily disseminated and cause less morbidity and mortality
than  Category  A  agents.  Healthcare  facilities  confront  a  different  set  of  issues  when
dealing  with  a  suspected  bioterrorism  event  as  compared  with  other  communicable

diseases.  An  understanding  of  the  epidemiology,  modes  of  transmission,  and  clinical
course of each disease, as well as carefully drafted plans that provide an approach and
relevant  websites  and  other  resources  for  disease-specific  guidance  to  healthcare,
administrative, and support personnel, are essential for responding to and managing a
bioterrorism  event.  Infection  control  issues  to  be  addressed  include:  The  response  is
likely  to  differ  for  exposures  resulting  from  an  intentional  release  compared  with
naturally occurring disease because of the large number persons that can be exposed
at the same time and possible differences in pathogenicity. A variety of sources offer
guidance  for  the  management  of  persons  exposed  to  the  most  likely  agents  of
bioterrorism.  Federal  agency  websites  (e.g.,  [This  link  is  no  longer  active:
www.usamriid.army.mil/publications/index.html.  Similar  information  may  be  found  at
USAMRIID: Biodefense Solutions to Protect our Nation Accessed May 2016.], [This link is
no longer active: www.bt.cdc.gov. Similar information may be found at CDC Emergency
Preparedness and Response: Bioterrorism Accessed May 2016.]). and state and county
health department web sites should be consulted for the most up-to-date information.
Sources  of  information  on  specific  agents  include:  anthrax  203;  smallpox  204-206;
plague 207, 208; botulinum toxin 209; tularemia 210; and hemorrhagic fever viruses:
211, 212. Vaccination of personnel in preparation for a possible smallpox exposure has
important infection control implications 213-215. These include the need for meticulous
screening for vaccine contraindications in persons who are at increased risk for adverse
vaccinia  events;  containment  and  monitoring  of  the  vaccination  site  to  prevent
transmission in the healthcare setting and at home; and the management of patients
with vaccinia-related adverse events 216, 217. The pre-event U.S. smallpox vaccination
program  of  2003  is  an  example  of  the  effectiveness  of  carefully  developed
recommendations  for  both  screening  potential  vaccinees  for  contraindications  and
vaccination  site  care  and  monitoring.  Approximately  760,000  individuals  were
vaccinated  in  the  Department  of  Defense  and  40,000  in  the  civilian  or  public  health

populations  from  December  2002  to  February  2005,  including  approximately  70,000
who  worked  in  healthcare  settings.  There  were  no  cases  of  eczema  vaccinatum,
progressive  vaccinia,  fetal  vaccinia,  or  contact  transfer  of  vaccinia  in  healthcare
settings or in military workplaces 218, 219. Outside the healthcare setting, there were
53  cases  of  contact  transfer  from  military  vaccinees  to  close  personal  contacts  (e.g.,
bed  partners  or  contacts  during  participation  in  sports  such  as  wrestling  220).  All
contact  transfers  were  from  individuals  who  were  not  following  recommendations  to
cover  their  vaccination  sites.  Vaccinia  virus  was  confirmed  by  culture  or  PCR  in  30
cases,  and  two  of  the  confirmed  cases  resulted  from  tertiary  transfer.  All  recipients,
including  one  breast-fed  infant,  recovered  without  complication.  Subsequent  studies
using  viral  culture  and  PCR  techniques  have  confirmed  the  effectiveness  of
semipermeable dressings to contain vaccinia 221-224. This experience emphasizes the
importance  of  ensuring  that  newly  vaccinated  healthcare  personnel  adhere  to
recommended vaccination-site care, especially if they are to care for high-risk patients.
Recommendations  for  pre-event  smallpox  vaccination  of  healthcare  personnel  and
vaccinia-related  infection  control  recommendations  are  published  in  the  MMWR  216,
225  with  updates  posted  on  the  CDC  bioterrorism  web  site  205.  Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease (CJD) is a rapidly progressive, degenerative, neurologic disorder of humans with
an  incidence  in  the  United  States  of  approximately  1  person/million  population/year
226,  227  (Creutzfeldt-Jakob  Disease,  Classic  (CJD)  [Current  version  of  this  document
may  differ  from  original.]).  CJD  is  believed  to  be  caused  by  a  transmissible
proteinaceous  infectious  agent  termed  a  prion.  Infectious  prions  are  isoforms  of  a
host-encoded glycoprotein known as the prion protein. The incubation period (i.e., time
between  exposure  and  and  onset  of  symptoms)  varies  from  two  years  to  many
decades.  However,  death  typically  occurs  within  1  year  of  the  onset  of  symptoms.
Approximately  85%  of  CJD  cases  occur  sporadically  with  no  known  environmental
source  of  infection  and  10%  are  familial.  Iatrogenic  transmission  has  occurred  with

most resulting from treatment with human cadaveric pituitary-derived growth hormone
or gonadotropin 228, 229, from implantation of contaminated human dura mater grafts
230  or  from  corneal  transplants  231).  Transmission  has  been  linked  to  the  use  of
contaminated
 neurosurgical
 instruments
 or
 stereotactic
 electroencephalogram
electrodes 232, 233 , 234 , 235. Prion diseases in animals include scrapie in sheep and
goats,  bovine  spongiform  encephalopathy  (BSE,  or  "mad  cow  disease")  in  cattle,  and
chronic  wasting  disease  in  deer  and  elk  236.  BSE,  first  recognized  in  the  United
Kingdom  (UK)  in  1986,  was  associated  with  a  major  epidemic  among  cattle  that  had
consumed  contaminated  meat  and  bone  meal.  The  possible  transmission  of  BSE  to
humans causing variant CJD (vCJD) was first described in 1996 and subsequently found
to be associated with consumption of BSE-contaminated cattle products primarily in the
United  Kingdom.  There  is  strong  epidemiologic  and  laboratory  evidence  for  a  causal
association between the causative agent of BSE and vCJD 237. Although most cases of
vCJD  have  been  reported  from  the  UK,  a  few  cases  also  have  been  reported  from
Europe, Japan, Canada, and the United States. Most vCJD cases worldwide lived in or
visited  the  UK  during  the  years  of  a  large  outbreak  of  BSE  (1980-96)  and  may  have
consumed  contaminated  cattle  products  during  that  time  (Creutzfeldt-Jakob  Disease,
Classic  (CJD)  [Current  version  of  this  document  may  differ  from  original.]).  Although
there  has  been  no  indigenously  acquired  vCJD  in  the  United  States,  the  sporadic
occurrence  of  BSE  in  cattle  in  North  America  has  heightened  awareness  of  the
possibility  that  such  infections  could  occur  and  have  led  to  increased  surveillance
activities.
 Updated
 information
 may
 be
 found
 on
 the
 following
 website:
Creutzfeldt-Jakob  Disease,  Classic  (CJD)  [Current  version  of  this  document  may  differ
from original.]. The public health impact of prion diseases has been reviewed 238. vCJD
in humans has different clinical and pathologic characteristics from sporadic or classic
CJD 239, including the following: Similar to sporadic CJD, there have been no reported
cases  of  direct  human-to-human  transmission  of  vCJD  by  casual  or  environmental

contact, droplet, or airborne routes. Ongoing blood safety surveillance in the U.S. has
not  detected  sporadic  CJD  transmission  through  blood  transfusion  241-243.  However,
bloodborne transmission of vCJD is believed to have occurred in two UK patients 244,
245. The following FDA websites provide information on steps that are being taken in
the  US  to  protect  the  blood  supply  from  CJD  and  vCJD:  [This  link  is  no  longer  active:
http://www.fda.gov/cber/gdlns/cjdvcjd.htm.  Similar  information  may  be  found  at
Guidance for Industry: Revised Preventive Measuresexternal icon, accessed May 2016.];
[This  link  is  no  longer  active:  http://www.fda.gov/cber/gdlns/cjdvcjdq&a.htm.  Similar
information may be found at Questions and Answers on Guidance for Industry: Revised
Preventive Measuresexternal icon, accessed May 2016.]. Standard Precautions are used
when  caring  for  patients  with  suspected  or  confirmed  CJD  or  vCJD.  However,  special
precautions  are  recommended  for  tissue  handling  in  the  histology  laboratory  and  for
conducting  an  autopsy,  embalming,  and  for  contact  with  a  body  that  has  undergone
autopsy  246.  Recommendations  for  reprocessing  surgical  instruments  to  prevent
transmission  of  CJD  in  healthcare  settings  have  been  published  by  the  World  Health
Organization  (WHO)  and  are  currently  under  review  at  CDC.  Questions  concerning
notification  of  patients  potentially  exposed  to  CJD  or  vCJD  through  contaminated
instruments and blood products from patients with CJD or vCJD or at risk of having vCJD
may  arise.  The  risk  of  transmission  associated  with  such  exposures  is  believed  to  be
extremely low but may vary based on the specific circumstance. Therefore consultation
on  appropriate  options  is  advised.  The  United  Kingdom  has  developed  several
documents that clinicians and patients in the US may find useful ([This link is no longer
active:
 http://www.hpa.org.uk/
 infections/topics_az/cjd/information_documents.htm.
Similar  information  may  be  found  at  Health  Protection  Agency:  Creutzfeldt-Jakob
Disease  (CJD)external  icon,  accessed  May  2016.]).  SARS  is  a  newly  discovered
respiratory disease that emerged in China late in 2002 and spread to several countries
135,  140;  Mainland  China,  Hong  Kong,  Hanoi,  Singapore,  and  Toronto  were  affected

significantly. SARS is caused by SARS CoV, a previously unrecognized member of the
coronavirus  family  247,  248.  The  incubation  period  from  exposure  to  the  onset  of
symptoms is 2 to 7 days but can be as long as 10 days and uncommonly even longer
249.  The  illness  is  initially  difficult  to  distinguish  from  other  common  respiratory
infections.  Signs  and  symptoms  usually  include  fever  >38.0°C  and  chills  and  rigors,
sometimes  accompanied  by  headache,  myalgia,  and  mild  to  severe  respiratory
symptoms. Radiographic finding of atypical pneumonia is an important clinical indicator
of  possible  SARS.  Compared  with  adults,  children  have  been  affected  less  frequently,
have milder disease, and are less likely to transmit SARS-CoV 135, 249-251. The overall
case fatality rate is approximately 6.0%; underlying disease and advanced age increase
the  risk  of  mortality  (WHO  Update  49  –  SARS  case  fatality  ratio,  incubation
periodexternal  icon).  Outbreaks  in  healthcare  settings,  with  transmission  to  large
numbers  of  healthcare  personnel  and  patients  have  been  a  striking  feature  of  SARS;
undiagnosed,  infectious  patients  and  visitors  were  important  initiators  of  these
outbreaks 21, 252-254. The relative contribution of potential modes of transmission is
not precisely known. There is ample evidence for droplet and contact transmission 96,
101,  113;  however,  opportunistic  airborne  transmission  cannot  be  excluded  101,
135-139,  149,  255.  For  example,  exposure  to  aerosol-generating  procedures  (e.g.,
endotracheal  intubation,  suctioning)  was  associated  with  transmission  of  infection  to
large  numbers  of  healthcare  personnel  outside  of  the  United  States  93,  94,  96,  98,
253.Therefore, aerosolization of small infectious particles generated during these and
other  similar  procedures  could  be  a  risk  factor  for  transmission  to  others  within  a
multi-bed  room  or  shared  airspace.  A  review  of  the  infection  control  literature
generated  from  the  SARS  outbreaks  of  2003  concluded  that  the  greatest  risk  of
transmission  is  to  those  who  have  close  contact,  are  not  properly  trained  in  use  of
protective  infection  control  procedures,  do  not  consistently  use  PPE;  and  that  N95  or
higher  respirators  may  offer  additional  protection  to  those  exposed  to  aerosol-

generating procedures and high risk activities 256, 257. Organizational and individual
factors  that  affected  adherence  to  infection  control  practices  for  SARS  also  were
identified 257. Control of SARS requires a coordinated, dynamic response by multiple
disciplines  in  a  healthcare  setting  9.  Early  detection  of  cases  is  accomplished  by
screening persons with symptoms of a respiratory infection for history of travel to areas
experiencing  community  transmission  or  contact  with  SARS  patients,  followed  by
implementation of Respiratory Hygiene/Cough Etiquette (i.e., placing a mask over the
patient's  nose  and  mouth)  and  physical  separation  from  other  patients  in  common
waiting areas.The precise combination of precautions to protect healthcare personnel
has not been determined. At the time of this publication, CDC recommends Standard
Precautions,  with  emphasis  on  the  use  of  hand  hygiene,  Contact  Precautions  with
emphasis on environmental cleaning due to the detection of SARS CoV RNA by PCR on
surfaces  in  rooms  occupied  by  SARS  patients  138,  254,  258,  Airborne  Precautions,
including  use  of  fit-tested  NIOSH-approved  N95  or  higher  level  respirators,  and  eye
protection  259.  In  Hong  Kong,  the  use  of  Droplet  and  Contact  Precautions,  which
included  use  of  a  mask  but  not  a  respirator,  was  effective  in  protecting  healthcare
personnel113.  However,  in  Toronto,  consistent  use  of  an  N95  respirator  was  slightly
more  protective  than  a  mask  93.  It  is  noteworthy  that  there  was  no  transmission  of
SARS-CoV  to  public  hospital  workers  in  Vietnam  despite  inconsistent  use  of  infection
control measures, including use of PPE, which suggests other factors (e.g., severity of
disease,  frequency  of  high  risk  procedures  or  events,  environmental  features)  may
influence  opportunities  for  transmission  260.  SARS-CoV  also  has  been  transmitted  in
the  laboratory  setting  through  breaches  in  recommended  laboratory  practices.
Research  laboratories  where  SARS-CoV  was  under  investigation  were  the  source  of
most cases reported after the first series of outbreaks in the winter and spring of 2003
261, 262. Studies of the SARS outbreaks of 2003 and transmissions that occurred in the
laboratory  re-affirm  the  effectiveness  of  recommended  infection  control  precautions

and highlight the importance of consistent adherence to these measures. Lessons from
the  SARS  outbreaks  are  useful  for  planning  to  respond  to  future  public  health  crises,
such  as  pandemic  influenza  and  bioterrorism  events.  Surveillance  for  cases  among
patients  and  healthcare  personnel,  ensuring  availability  of  adequate  supplies  and
staffing,  and  limiting  access  to  healthcare  facilities  were  important  factors  in  the
response  to  SARS  that  have  been  summarized  9.  Guidance  for  infection  control
precautions  in  various  settings  is  available  at  [This  link  is  no  longer  active:
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars.  Similar  information  may  be  found  at  CDC  Severe  Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), accessed May 2016.]. Monkeypox is a rare viral disease
found  mostly  in  the  rain  forest  countries  of  Central  and  West  Africa.  The  disease  is
caused  by  an  orthopoxvirus  that  is  similar  in  appearance  to  smallpox  but  causes  a
milder disease. The only recognized outbreak of human monkeypox in the United States
was detected in June 2003 after several people became ill following contact with sick
pet prairie dogs. Infection in the prairie dogs was subsequently traced to their contact
with a shipment of animals from Africa, including giant Gambian rats 263. This outbreak
demonstrates the importance of recognition and prompt reporting of unusual disease
presentations  by  clinicians  to  enable  prompt  identification  of  the  etiology;  and  the
potential  of  epizootic  diseases  to  spread  from  animal  reservoirs  to  humans  through
personal and occupational exposure 264. Limited data on transmission of monkeypox
are  available.  Transmission  from  infected  animals  and  humans  is  believed  to  occur
primarily  through  direct  contact  with  lesions  and  respiratory  secretions;  airborne
transmission from animals to humans is unlikely but cannot be excluded, and may have
occurred in veterinary practices (e.g., during administration of nebulized medications to
ill prairie dogs 265). Among humans, four instances of monkeypox transmission within
hospitals have been reported in Africa among children, usually related to sharing the
same  ward  or  bed  266,  267.  Additional  recent  literature  documents  transmission  of
Congo  Basin  monkeypox  in  a  hospital  compound  for  an  extended  number  of

generations 268. There has been no evidence of airborne or any other person-to-person
transmission of monkeypox in the United States, and no new cases of monkeypox have
been identified since the outbreak in June 2003 269. The outbreak strain is a clade of
monkeypox distinct from the Congo Basin clade and may have different epidemiologic
properties (including human-to-human transmission potential) from monkeypox strains
of the Congo Basin 270; this awaits further study. Smallpox vaccine is 85% protective
against Congo Basin monkeypox 271. Since there is an associated case fatality rate of
≤10%,  administration  of  smallpox  vaccine  within  4  days  to  individuals  who  have  had
direct  exposure  to  patients  or  animals  with  monkeypox  is  a  reasonable  consideration
272.  For  the  most  current  information,  see  CDC  Monkeypox  [Current  version  of  this
document may differ from original.]. Noroviruses, formerly referred to as Norwalk-like
viruses,  are  members  of  the  Caliciviridae  family.  These  agents  are  transmitted  via
contaminated food or water and from person-to-person, causing explosive outbreaks of
gastrointestinal disease 273. Environmental contamination also has been documented
as a contributing factor in ongoing transmission during outbreaks 274, 275. Although
noroviruses  cannot  be  propagated  in  cell  culture,  DNA  detection  by  molecular
diagnostic techniques has facilitated a greater appreciation of their role in outbreaks of
gastrointestinal  disease  276.  Reported  outbreaks  in  hospitals  132,  142,  277,  nursing
homes  275,  278-283,  cruise  ships  284,  285,  hotels  143,  147,  schools  148,  and  large
crowded  shelters  established  for  hurricane  evacuees  286,  demonstrate  their  highly
contagious  nature,  the  disruptive  impact  they  have  in  healthcare  facilities  and  the
community, and the difficulty of controlling outbreaks in settings where people share
common  facilites  and  space.  Of  note,  there  is  nearly  a  5  fold  increase  in  the  risk  to
patients  in  outbreaks  where  a  patient  is  the  index  case  compared  with  exposure  of
patients  during  outbreaks  where  a  staff  member  is  the  index  case  287.  The  average
incubation  period  for  gastroenteritis  caused  by  noroviruses  is  12-48  hours  and  the
clinical course lasts 12-60 hours 273. Illness is characterized by acute onset of nausea,

vomiting, abdominal cramps, and/or diarrhea. The disease is largely self-limited; rarely,
death  caused  by  severe  dehydration  can  occur,  particularly  among  the  elderly  with
debilitating health conditions. The epidemiology of norovirus outbreaks shows that even
though  primary  cases  may  result  from  exposure  to  a  fecally-contaminated  food  or
water,  secondary  and  tertiary  cases  often  result  from  person-to-person  transmission
that is facilitated by contamination of fomites 273, 288 and dissemination of infectious
particles, especially during the process of vomiting 132, 142, 143, 147, 148, 273, 279,
280.  Widespread,  persistent  and  inapparent  contamination  of  the  environment  and
fomites can make outbreaks extremely difficult to control 147, 275, 284.These clinical
observations  and  the  detection  of  norovirus  DNA  on  horizontal  surfaces  5  feet  above
the  level  that  might  be  touched  normally  suggest  that,  under  certain  circumstances,
aerosolized  particles  may  travel  distances  beyond  3  feet  147.  It  is  hypothesized  that
infectious  particles  may  be  aerosolized  from  vomitus,  inhaled,  and  swallowed.  In
addition,  individuals  who  are  responsible  for  cleaning  the  environment  may  be  at
increased risk of infection. Development of disease and transmission may be facilitated
by the low infectious dose (i.e., <100 viral particles) 289 and the resistance of these
viruses  to  the  usual  cleaning  and  disinfection  agents  (i.e.,  may  survive  ≤10  ppm
chlorine) 290-292. An alternate phenolic agent that was shown to be effective against
feline calicivirus was used for environmental cleaning in one outbreak 275, 293. There
are  insufficient  data  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  alcohol-based  hand  rubs  against
noroviruses  when  the  hands  are  not  visibly  soiled  294.  Absence  of  disease  in  certain
individuals during an outbreak may be explained by protection from infection conferred
by the B histo-blood group antigen 295. Consultation on outbreaks of gastroenteritis is
available through CDC's Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases 296. The hemorrhagic
fever viruses are a mixed group of viruses that cause serious disease with high fever,
skin rash, bleeding diathesis, and in some cases, high mortality; the disease caused is
referred to as viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF). Among the more commonly known HFVs

are Ebola and Marburg viruses (Filoviridae), Lassa virus (Arenaviridae), Crimean-Congo
hemorrhagic fever and Rift Valley Fever virus (Bunyaviridae), and Dengue and Yellow
fever  viruses  (Flaviviridae)  212,  297.  These  viruses  are  transmitted  to  humans  via
contact with infected animals or via arthropod vectors. While none of these viruses is
endemic  in  the  United  States,  outbreaks  in  affected  countries  provide  potential
opportunities for importation by infected humans and animals. Furthermore, there are
concerns  that  some  of  these  agents  could  be  used  as  bioweapons  212.
Person-to-person  transmission  is  documented  for  Ebola,  Marburg,  Lassa  and
Crimean-Congo  hemorrhagic  fever  viruses.  In  resource-limited  healthcare  settings,
transmission  of  these  agents  to  healthcare  personnel,  patients  and  visitors  has  been
described  and  in  some  outbreaks  has  accounted  for  a  large  proportion  of  cases
298-300.  Transmissions  within  households  also  have  occurred  among  individuals  who
had  direct  contact  with  ill  persons  or  their  body  fluids,  but  not  to  those  who  did  not
have  such  contact  301.  Evidence  concerning  the  transmission  of  HFVs  has  been
summarized 212, 302. Person-to-person transmission is associated primarily with direct
blood and body fluid contact. Percutaneous exposure to contaminated blood carries a
particularly high risk for transmission and increased mortality 303, 304. The finding of
large numbers of Ebola viral particles in the skin and the lumina of sweat glands has
raised concern that transmission could occur from direct contact with intact skin though
epidemiologic evidence to support this is lacking 305. Postmortem handling of infected
bodies is an important risk for transmission 301, 306, 307. In rare situations, cases in
which  the  mode  of  transmission  was  unexplained  among  individuals  with  no  known
direct contact , have led to speculation that airborne transmission could have occurred
298.  However,  airborne  transmission  of  naturally  occurring  HFVs  in  humans  has  not
been seen. In one study of airplane passengers exposed to an in-flight index case of
Lassa fever, there was no transmission to any passengers308. In the laboratory setting,
animals  have  been  infected  experimentally  with  Marburg  or  Ebola  viruses  via  direct

inoculation of the nose, mouth and/or conjunctiva 309, 310 and by using mechanically
generated  virus-containing  aerosols  311,  312.  Transmission  of  Ebola  virus  among
laboratory primates in an animal facility has been described 313. Secondarily infected
animals were in individual cages and separated by approximately 3 meters. Although
the  possibility  of  airborne  transmission  was  suggested,  the  authors  were  not  able  to
exclude droplet or indirect contact transmission in this incidental observation. Guidance
on  infection  control  precautions  for  HVFs  that  are  transmitted  person-to-person  have
been published by CDC 1, 211 and by the Johns Hopkins Center for Civilian Biodefense
Strategies  212.  The  most  recent  recommendations  at  the  time  of  publication  of  this
document were posted on the CDC website on 5/19/05 314. Inconsistencies among the
various recommendations have raised questions about the appropriate precautions to
use  in  U.S.  hospitals.  In  less  developed  countries,  outbreaks  of  HFVs  have  been
controlled  with  basic  hygiene,  barrier  precautions,  safe  injection  practices,  and  safe
burial  practices  299,  306.  The  preponderance  of  evidence  on  HFV  transmission
indicates  that  Standard,  Contact  and  Droplet  Precautions  with  eye  protection  are
effective  in  protecting  healthcare  personnel  and  visitors  who  may  attend  an  infected
patient. Single gloves are adequate for routine patient care; double-gloving is advised
during  invasive  procedures  (e.g.,  surgery)  that  pose  an  increased  risk  for  blood
exposure. Routine eye protection (i.e. goggles or face shield) is particularly important.
Fluid-resistant gowns should be worn for all patient contact. Airborne Precautions are
not required for routine patient care; however, use of AIIRs is prudent when procedures
that  could  generate  infectious  aerosols  are  performed  (e.g.,  endotracheal  intubation,
bronchoscopy, suctioning, autopsy procedures involving oscillating saws). N95 or higher
level  respirators  may  provide  added  protection  for  individuals  in  a  room  during
aerosol-generating procedures (Table 3, Appendix A). When a patient with a syndrome
consistent  with  hemorrhagic  fever  also  has  a  history  of  travel  to  an  endemic  area,
precautions are initiated upon presentation and then modified as more information is

obtained  (Table  2).  Patients  with  hemorrhagic  fever  syndrome  in  the  setting  of  a
suspected bioweapon attack should be managed using Airborne Precautions, including
AIIRs,  since  the  epidemiology  of  a  potentially  weaponized  hemorrhagic  fever  virus  is
unpredictable. Numerous factors influence differences in transmission risks among the
various  healthcare  settings.  These  include  the  population  characteristics  (e.g.,
increased  susceptibility  to  infections,  type  and  prevalence  of  indwelling  devices),
intensity of care, exposure to environmental sources, length of stay, and frequency of
interaction between patients/residents with each other and with HCWs. These factors,
as  well  as  organizational  priorities,  goals,  and  resources,  influence  how  different
healthcare  settings  adapt  transmission  prevention  guidelines  to  meet  their  specific
needs  315,  316.  Infection  control  management  decisions  are  informed  by  data
regarding institutional experience/epidemiology, trends in community and institutional
HAIs,  local,  regional,  and  national  epidemiology,  and  emerging  infectious  disease
threats.  Infection  transmission  risks  are  present  in  all  hospital  settings.  However,
certain  hospital  settings  and  patient  populations  have  unique  conditions  that
predispose  patients  to  infection  and  merit  special  mention.  These  are  often  sentinel
sites for the emergence of new transmission risks that may be unique to that setting or
present opportunities for transmission to other settings in the hospital. Intensive care
units  (ICUs)  serve  patients  who  are  immunocompromised  by  disease  state  and/or  by
treatment  modalities,  as  well  as  patients  with  major  trauma,  respiratory  failure  and
other  life-threatening  conditions  (e.g.,  myocardial  infarction,  congestive  heart  failure,
overdoses, strokes, gastrointestinal bleeding, renal failure, hepatic failure, multi-organ
system failure, and the extremes of age). Although ICUs account for a relatively small
proportion  of  hospitalized  patients,  infections  acquired  in  these  units  accounted  for
>20% of all HAIs 317. In the National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance (NNIS) system,
26.6%  of  HAIs  were  reported  from  ICU  and  high  risk  nursery  (NICU)  patients  in  2002
(NNIS,  unpublished  data).  This  patient  population  has  increased  susceptibility  to

colonization and infection, especially with MDROs and Candida sp. 318, 319, because of
underlying diseases and conditions, the invasive medical devices and technology used
in their care (e.g., central venous catheters and other intravascular devices, mechanical
ventilators,  extracorporeal  membrane  oxygenation  (ECMO),  hemodialysis/-filtration,
pacemakers, implantable left ventricular assist devices), the frequency of contact with
healthcare  personnel,  prolonged  length  of  stay,  and  prolonged  exposure  to
antimicrobial  agents  320-331.  Furthermore,  adverse  patient  outcomes  in  this  setting
are more severe and are associated with a higher mortality 332. Outbreaks associated
with  a  variety  of  bacterial,  fungal  and  viral  pathogens  due  to  common-source  and
person-to-person  transmissions  are  frequent  in  adult  and  pediatric  ICUs  31,  333-336,
337&, 338. Burn wounds can provide optimal conditions for colonization, infection, and
transmission of pathogens; infection acquired by burn patients is a frequent cause of
morbidity and mortality 320, 339, 340. In patients with a burn injury involving ≥30% of
the  total  body  surface  area  (TBSA),  the  risk  of  invasive  burn  wound  infection  is
particularly  high  341,  342.  Infections  that  occur  in  patients  with  burn  injury  involving
<30%
 TBSA
 are
 usually
 associated
 with
 the
 use
 of
 invasive
 devices.
Methicillin-susceptible  Staphylococcus  aureus,  MRSA,  enterococci,  including  VRE,
gram-negative  bacteria,  and  candida  are  prevalent  pathogens  in  burn  infections  53,
340,  343-350  and  outbreaks  of  these  organisms  have  been  reported  351-354.  Shifts
over  time  in  the  predominance  of  pathogens  causing  infections  among  burn  patients
often  lead  to  changes  in  burn  care  practices  343,  355-358.  Burn  wound  infections
caused  by  Aspergillus  sp.  or  other  environmental  molds  may  result  from  exposure  to
supplies  contaminated  during  construction  359  or  to  dust  generated  during
construction  or  other  environmental  disruption  360.  Hydrotherapy  equipment  is  an
important environmental reservoir of gram-negative organisms. Its use for burn care is
discouraged  based  on  demonstrated  associations  between  use  of  contaminated
hydrotherapy equipment and infections. Burn wound infections and colonization, as well

as  bloodstream  infections,  caused  by  multidrug-resistant  P.  aeruginosa  361,  A.
baumannii  362,  and  MRSA  352  have  been  associated  with  hydrotherapy;  excision  of
burn wounds in operating rooms is preferred. Advances in burn care, specifically early
excision  and  grafting  of  the  burn  wound,  use  of  topical  antimicrobial  agents,  and
institution  of  early  enteral  feeding,  have  led  to  decreased  infectious  complications.
Other  advances  have  included  prophylactic  antimicrobial  usage,  selective  digestive
decontamination  (SDD),  and  use  of  antimicrobial-coated  catheters  (ACC),  but  few
epidemiologic studies and no efficacy studies have been performed to show the relative
benefit of these measures 357. There is no consensus on the most effective infection
control practices to prevent transmission of infections to and from patients with serious
burns (e.g., single-bed rooms 358, laminar flow 363 and high efficiency particulate air
filtration [HEPA] 360 or maintaining burn patients in a separate unit without exposure to
patients  or  equipment  from  other  units  364).  There  also  is  controversy  regarding  the
need  for  and  type  of  barrier  precautions  for  routine  care  of  burn  patients.  One
retrospective study demonstrated efficacy and cost effectiveness of a simplified barrier
isolation protocol for wound colonization, emphasizing handwashing and use of gloves,
caps,  masks  and  plastic  impermeable  aprons  (rather  than  isolation  gowns)  for  direct
patient  contact  365.  However,  there  have  been  no  studies  that  define  the  most
effective  combination  of  infection  control  precautions  for  use  in  burn  settings.
Prospective  studies  in  this  area  are  needed.  Studies  of  the  epidemiology  of  HAIs  in
children  have  identified  unique  infection  control  issues  in  this  population  63,  64,
366-370. Pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) patients and the lowest birthweight babies
in  the  high-risk  nursery  (HRN)  monitored  in  the  NNIS  system  have  had  high  rates  of
central
 venous
 catheter-associated
 bloodstream
 infections
 64,
 320,
 369-372.
Additionally,  there  is  a  high  prevalence  of  community-acquired  infections  among
hospitalized  infants  and  young  children  who  have  not  yet  become  immune  either  by
vaccination or by natural infection. The result is more patients and their sibling visitors

with transmissible infections present in pediatric healthcare settings, especially during
seasonal  epidemics  (e.g.,  pertussis  36,  40,  41,  respiratory  viral  infections  including
those  caused  by  RSV  24,  influenza  viruses  373,  parainfluenza  virus  374,  human
metapneumovirus  375,  and  adenoviruses  376;  rubeola  [measles]  34,  varicella
[chickenpox]  377,  and  rotavirus  38,  378).  Close  physical  contact  between  healthcare
personnel  and  infants  and  young  children  (eg.  cuddling,  feeding,  playing,  changing
soiled  diapers,  and  cleaning  copious  uncontrolled  respiratory  secretions)  provides
abundant opportunities for transmission of infectious material. Practices and behaviors
such  as  congregation  of  children  in  play  areas  where  toys  and  bodily  secretions  are
easily  shared  and  family  members  rooming-in  with  pediatric  patients  can  further
increase the risk of transmission. Pathogenic bacteria have been recovered from toys
used  by  hospitalized  patients  379;  contaminated  bath  toys  were  implicated  in  an
outbreak  of  multidrug-resistant  P.  aeruginosa  on  a  pediatric  oncology  unit  80.  In
addition,  several  patient  factors  increase  the  likelihood  that  infection  will  result  from
exposure to pathogens in healthcare settings (e.g., immaturity of the neonatal immune
system,  lack  of  previous  natural  infection  and  resulting  immunity,  prevalence  of
patients  with  congenital  or  acquired  immune  deficiencies,  congenital  anatomic
anomalies,  and  use  of  life-saving  invasive  devices  in  neontal  and  pediatric  intensive
care  units)  63.  There  are  theoretical  concerns  that  infection  risk  will  increase  in
association  with  innovative  practices  used  in  the  NICU  for  the  purpose  of  improving
developmental outcomes, Such factors include co-bedding 380 and kangaroo care 381
that may increase opportunity for skin-to-skin exposure of multiple gestation infants to
each other and to their mothers, respectively; although infection risk smay actually be
reduced  among  infants  receiving  kangaroo  care  382.  Children  who  attend  child  care
centers 383, 384 and pediatric rehabilitation units 385 may increase the overall burden
of
 antimicrobial
 resistance
 (eg.
 by
 contributing
 to
 the
 reservoir
 of
community-associated  MRSA  [CA-MRSA])  386-391.  Patients  in  chronic  care  facilities

may have increased rates of colonization with resistant GNBs and may be sources of
introduction of resistant organisms to acute care settings 50. Healthcare is provided in
various settings outside of hospitals including facilities, such as long-term care facilities
(LTCF) (e.g., nursing homes), homes for the developmentally disabled, settings where
behavioral  health  services  are  provided,  rehabilitation  centers  and  hospices392.  In
addition,  healthcare  may  be  provided  in  nonhealthcare  settings  such  as  workplaces
with  occupational  health  clinics,  adult  day  care  centers,  assisted  living  facilities,
homeless  shelters,  jails  and  prisons,  school  clinics  and  infirmaries.  Each  of  these
settings has unique circumstances and population risks to consider when designing and
implementing an infection control program. Several of the most common settings and
their particular challenges are discussed below. While this Guideline does not address
each  setting,  the  principles  and  strategies  provided  may  be  adapted  and  applied  as
appropriate.  The  designation  LTCF  applies  to  a  diverse  group  of  residential  settings,
ranging  from  institutions  for  the  developmentally  disabled  to  nursing  homes  for  the
elderly  and  pediatric  chronic-care  facilities  393-395.  Nursing  homes  for  the  elderly
predominate  numerically  and  frequently  represent  long-term  care  as  a  group  of
facilities.  Approximately  1.8  million  Americans  reside  in  the  nation's  16,500  nursing
homes  396.  Estimates  of  HAI  rates  of  1.8  to  13.5  per  1000  resident-care  days  have
been reported with a range of 3 to 7 per 1000 resident-care days in the more rigorous
studies  397-401.  The  infrastructure  described  in  the  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs
nursing home care units is a promising example for the development of a nationwide
HAI  surveillance  system  for  LTCFs  402.  LCTFs  are  different  from  other  healthcare
settings in that elderly patients at increased risk for infection are brought together in
one setting and remain in the facility for extended periods of time; for most residents, it
is their home. An atmosphere of community is fostered and residents share common
eating and living areas, and participate in various facility-sponsored activities 403, 404.
Since able residents interact freely with each other, controlling transmission of infection

in this setting is challenging 405. Residents who are colonized or infected with certain
microorganisms are, in some cases, restricted to their room. However, because of the
psychosocial  risks  associated  with  such  restriction,  it  has  been  recommended  that
psychosocial  needs  be  balanced  with  infection  control  needs  in  the  LTCF  setting
406-409.  Documented  LTCF  outbreaks  have  been  caused  by  various  viruses  (e.g.,
influenza  virus  35,  410-412,  rhinovirus  413,  adenovirus  [conjunctivitis]  414,  norovirus
278,  279  275,  281)  and  bacteria  (e.g.,  group  A  streptococcus  162,  B.  pertussis  415,
non-susceptible  S.  pneumoniae  197,  198,  other  MDROs,  and  Clostridium  difficile  416)
These  pathogens  can  lead  to  substantial  morbidity  and  mortality,  and  increased
medical costs; prompt detection and implementation of effective control measures are
required. Risk factors for infection are prevalent among LTCF residents 395, 417, 418.
Age-related declines in immunity may affect responses to immunizations for influenza
and  other  infectious  agents,  and  increase  susceptibility  to  tuberculosis.  Immobility,
incontinence,  dysphagia,  underlying  chronic  diseases,  poor  functional  status,  and
age-related skin changes increase susceptibility to urinary, respiratory and cutaneous
and  soft  tissue  infections,  while  malnutrition  can  impair  wound  healing  419-423.
Medications  (e.g.,  drugs  that  affect  level  of  consciousness,  immune  function,  gastric
acid secretions, and normal flora, including antimicrobial therapy) and invasive devices
(e.g.,  urinary  catheters  and  feeding  tubes)  heighten  susceptibility  to  infection  and
colonization  in  LTCF  residents  424-426.  Finally,  limited  functional  status  and  total
dependence on healthcare personnel for activities of daily living have been identified as
independent risk factors for infection 401, 417, 427 and for colonization with MRSA 428,
429  and  ESBL-producing  K.  pneumoniae  430.  Several  position  papers  and  review
articles  have  been  published  that  provide  guidance  on  various  aspects  of  infection
control  and  antimicrobial  resistance  in  LTCFs  406-408,  431-436.  The  Centers  for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) have established regulations for the prevention
of infection in LTCFs 437. Because residents of LTCFs are hospitalized frequently, they

can transfer pathogens between LTCFs and healthcare facilities in which they receive
care  8,  438-441.  This  is  also  true  for  pediatric  long-term  care  populations.  Pediatric
chronic  care  facilities  have  been  associated  with  importing  extended-spectrum
cephalosporin-resistant, gram-negative bacilli into one PICU 50. Children from pediatric
rehabilitation units may contribute to the reservoir of community-associated MRSA 385,
389-391. In the past decade, healthcare delivery in the United States has shifted from
the acute, inpatient hospital to a variety of ambulatory and community-based settings,
including  the  home.  Ambulatory  care  is  provided  in  hospital-based  outpatient  clinics,
nonhospital-based  clinics  and  physician  offices,  public  health  clinics,  free-standing
dialysis centers, ambulatory surgical centers, urgent care centers, and many others. In
2000,  there  were  83  million  visits  to  hospital  outpatient  clinics  and  more  than  823
million visits to physician offices 442; ambulatory care now accounts for most patient
encounters with the health care system 443. In these settings, adapting transmission
prevention  guidelines  is  challenging  because  patients  remain  in  common  areas  for
prolonged periods waiting to be seen by a healthcare provider or awaiting admission to
the  hospital,  examination  or  treatment  rooms  are  turned  around  quickly  with  limited
cleaning,  and  infectious  patients  may  not  be  recognized  immediately.  Furthermore,
immunocompromised  patients  often  receive  chemotherapy  in  infusion  rooms  where
they stay for extended periods of time along with other types of patients. There are few
data on the risk of HAIs in ambulatory care settings, with the exception of hemodialysis
centers  18  ,  444,  445.  Transmission  of  infections  in  outpatient  settings  has  been
reviewed in three publications 446-448. Goodman and Solomon summarized 53 clusters
of  infections  associated  with  the  outpatient  setting  from  1961-1990  446.  Overall,  29
clusters  were  associated  with  common  source  transmission  from  contaminated
solutions  or  equipment,  14  with  person-to-person  transmission  from  or  involving
healthcare personnel and ten associated with airborne or droplet transmission among
patients and healthcare workers. Transmission of bloodborne pathogens (i.e., hepatitis

B  and  C  viruses  and,  rarely,  HIV)  in  outbreaks,  sometimes  involving  hundreds  of
patients, continues to occur in ambulatory settings. These outbreaks often are related
to common source exposures, usually a contaminated medical device, multi-dose vial,
or intravenous solution 82, 449-453. In all cases, transmission has been attributed to
failure  to  adhere  to  fundamental  infection  control  principles,  including  safe  injection
practices  and  aseptic  technique.This  subject  has  been  reviewed  and  recommended
infection control and safe injection practices summarized 454. Airborne transmission of
M.tuberculosis  and  measles  in  ambulatory  settings,  most  frequently  emergency
departments,  has  been  reported  34,  127,  446,  448,  455-457.  Measles  virus  was
transmitted  in  physician  offices  and  other  outpatient  settings  during  an  era  when
immunization rates were low and measles outbreaks in the community were occurring
regularly 34, 122, 458. Rubella has been transmitted in the outpatient obstetric setting
33; there are no published reports of varicella transmission in the outpatient setting. In
the  ophthalmology  setting,  adenovirus  type  8  epidemic  keratoconjunctivitis  has  been
transmitted  via  incompletely  disinfected  ophthalmology  equipment  and/or  from
healthcare  workers  to  patients,  presumably  by  contaminated  hands  17,  446,  448,
459-462.  If  transmission  in  outpatient  settings  is  to  be  prevented,  screening  for
potentially infectious symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, especially those who
may  be  at  risk  for  transmitting  airborne  infectious  agents  (e.g.,  M.  tuberculosis,
varicella-zoster virus, rubeola [measles]), is necessary at the start of the initial patient
encounter.  Upon  identification  of  a  potentially  infectious  patient,  implementation  of
prevention measures, including prompt separation of potentially infectious patients and
implementation  of  appropriate  control  measures  (e.g.,  Respiratory  Hygiene/Cough
Etiquette and Transmission-Based Precautions) can decrease transmission risks 9, 12.
Transmission  of  MRSA  and  VRE  in  outpatient  settings  has  not  been  reported,  but  the
association of CA-MRSA in healthcare personnel working in an outpatient HIV clinic with
environmental  CA-MRSA  contamination  in  that  clinic,  suggests  the  possibility  of

transmission in that setting 463. Patient-to-patient transmission of Burkholderia species
and  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  in  outpatient  clinics  for  adults  and  children  with  cystic
fibrosis  has  been  confirmed  464,  465.  See  Interim  Infection  Prevention  and  Control
Recommendations for Measles in Healthcare Settings Home care in the United States is
delivered  by  over  20,000  provider  agencies  that  include  home  health  agencies,
hospices,  durable  medical  equipment  providers,  home  infusion  therapy  services,  and
personal care and support services providers. Home care is provided to patients of all
ages  with  both  acute  and  chronic  conditions.  The  scope  of  services  ranges  from
assistance  with  activities  of  daily  living  and  physical  and  occupational  therapy  to  the
care  of  wounds,  infusion  therapy,  and  chronic  ambulatory  peritoneal  dialysis  (CAPD).
The  incidence  of  infection  in  home  care  patients,  other  than  those  associated  with
infusion therapy is not well studied 466-471. However, data collection and calculation of
infection  rates  have  been  accomplished  for  central  venous  catheter-associated
bloodstream infections in patients receiving home infusion therapy 470-474 and for the
risk of blood contact through percutaneous or mucosal exposures, demonstrating that
surveillance  can  be  performed  in  this  setting  475.  Draft  definitions  for  home  care
associated infections have been developed 476. Transmission risks during home care
are  presumed  to  be  minimal.  The  main  transmission  risks  to  home  care  patients  are
from an infectious healthcare provider or contaminated equipment; providers also can
be  exposed  to  an  infectious  patient  during  home  visits.  Since  home  care  involves
patient care by a limited number of personnel in settings without multiple patients or
shared equipment, the potential reservoir of pathogens is reduced. Infections of home
care  providers,  that  could  pose  a  risk  to  home  care  patients  include  infections
transmitted by the airborne or droplet routes (e.g., chickenpox, tuberculosis, influenza),
and  skin  infestations  (e.g.,  scabies  69  and  lice)  and  infections  (e.g.,impetigo)
transmitted  by  direct  or  indirect  contact.  There  are  no  published  data  on  indirect
transmission  of  MDROs  from  one  home  care  patient  to  another,  although  this  is

theoretically  possible  if  contaminated  equipment  is  transported  from  an  infected  or
colonized patient and used on another patient. Of note, investigation of the first case of
VISA in homecare 186 and the first 2 reported cases of VRSA 178, 180, 181, 183 found
no  evidence  of  transmission  of  VISA  or  VRSA  to  other  home  care  recipients.  Home
health  care  also  may  contribute  to  antimicrobial  resistance;  a  review  of  outpatient
vancomycin  use  found  39%  of  recipients  did  not  receive  the  antibiotic  according  to
recommended guidelines 477. Although most home care agencies implement policies
and procedures to prevent transmission of organisms, the current approach is based on
the adaptation of the 1996 Guideline for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals 1 as well as
other professional guidance 478, 479. This issue has been very challenging in the home
care  industry  and  practice  has  been  inconsistent  and  frequently  not  evidence-based.
For example, many home health agencies continue to observe "nursing bag technique,"
a  practice  that  prescribes  the  use  of  barriers  between  the  nursing  bag  and
environmental surfaces in the home 480. While the home environment may not always
appear clean, the use of barriers between two non-critical surfaces has been questioned
481,  482.  Opportunities  exist  to  conduct  research  in  home  care  related  to  infection
transmission risks 483. Facilities that are not primarily healthcare settings but in which
healthcare  is  delivered  include  clinics  in  correctional  facilities  and  shelters.  Both
settings  can  have  suboptimal  features,  such  as  crowded  conditions  and  poor
ventilation. Economically disadvantaged individuals who may have chronic illnesses and
healthcare  problems  related  to  alcoholism,  injection  drug  use,  poor  nutrition,  and/or
inadequate shelter often receive their primary healthcare at sites such as these 484.
Infectious  diseases  of  special  concern  for  transmission  include  tuberculosis,  scabies,
respiratory infections (e.g., N. meningitides, S. pneumoniae), sexually transmitted and
bloodborne diseases (e.g.,HIV, HBV, HCV, syphilis, gonorrhea), hepatitis A virus (HAV),
diarrheal agents such as norovirus, and foodborne diseases 286, 485-488. A high index
of suspicion for tuberculosis and CA-MRSA in these populations is needed as outbreaks

in  these  settings  or  among  the  populations  they  serve  have  been  reported  489-497.
Patient  encounters  in  these  types  of  facilities  provide  an  opportunity  to  deliver
recommended  immunizations  and  screen  for  M.  tuberculosis  infection  in  addition  to
diagnosing and treating acute illnesses 498. Recommended infection control measures
in  these  non-traditional  areas  designated  for  healthcare  delivery  are  the  same  as  for
other ambulatory care settings. Therefore, these settings must be equipped to observe
Standard  Precautions  and,  when  indicated,  Transmission-based  Precautions.  As  new
treatments  emerge  for  complex  diseases,  unique  infection  control  challenges
associated  with  special  patient  populations  need  to  be  addressed.  Patients  who  have
congenital  primary  immune  deficiencies  or  acquired  disease  (eg.  treatment-induced
immune  deficiencies)  are  at  increased  risk  for  numerous  types  of  infections  while
receiving healthcare and may be located throughout the healthcare facility. The specific
defects of the immune system determine the types of infections that are most likely to
be  acquired  (e.g.,  viral  infections  are  associated  with  T-cell  defects  and  fungal  and
bacterial  infections  occur  in  patients  who  are  neutropenic).  As  a  general  group,
immunocompromised  patients  can  be  cared  for  in  the  same  environment  as  other
patients;  however,  it  is  always  advisable  to  minimize  exposure  to  other  patients  with
transmissible infections such as influenza and other respiratory viruses 499, 500. The
use of more intense chemotherapy regimens for treatment of childhood leukemia may
be  associated  with  prolonged  periods  of  neutropenia  and  suppression  of  other
components of the immune system, extending the period of infection risk and raising
the concern that additional precautions may be indicated for select groups 501, 502.
With  the  application  of  newer  and  more  intense  immunosuppressive  therapies  for  a
variety  of  medical  conditions  (e.g.,  rheumatologic  disease  503,  504,  inflammatory
bowel  disease  505),  immunosuppressed  patients  are  likely  to  be  more  widely
distributed throughout a healthcare facility rather than localized to single patient units
(e.g.,  hematology-oncology).  Guidelines  for  preventing  infections  in  certain  groups  of

immunocompromised  patients  have  been  published  15,  506,  507.  Published  data
provide  evidence  to  support  placing  allogeneic  HSCT  patients  in  a  Protective
Environment 15, 157, 158. Also, three guidelines have been developed that address the
special  requirements  of  these  immunocompromised  patients,  including  use  of
antimicrobial prophylaxis and engineering controls to create a Protective Environment
for  the  prevention  of  infections  caused  by  Aspergillus  spp.  and  other  environmental
fungi 11, 14, 15. As more intense chemotherapy regimens associated with prolonged
periods of neutropenia or graft-versus-host disease are implemented, the period of risk
and  duration  of  environmental  protection  may  need  to  be  prolonged  beyond  the
traditional 100 days 508. Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) require special consideration
when developing infection control guidelines. Compared to other patients, CF patients
require  additional  protection  to  prevent  transmission  from  contaminated  respiratory
therapy  equipment  509-513.  Infectious  agents  such  as  Burkholderia  cepacia  complex
and P. aeruginosa 464, 465, 514, 515 have unique clinical and prognostic significance.
In CF patients, B. cepacia infection has been associated with increased morbidity and
mortality 516-518, while delayed acquisition of chronic P.aeruginosa infection may be
associated  with  an  improved  long-term  clinical  outcome  519,  520.  Person-to-person
transmission  of  B.  cepacia  complex  has  been  demonstrated  among  children  517  and
adults 521 with CF in healthcare settings 464, 522, during various social contacts 523,
most notably attendance at camps for patients with CF 524, and among siblings with CF
525. Successful infection control measures used to prevent transmission of respiratory
secretions  include  segregation  of  CF  patients  from  each  other  in  ambulatory  and
hospital settings (including use of private rooms with separate showers), environmental
decontamination of surfaces and equipment contaminated with respiratory secretions,
elimination  of  group  chest  physiotherapy  sessions,  and  disbanding  of  CF  camps  97,
526.  The  Cystic  Fibrosis  Foundation  published  a  consensus  document  with
evidence-based  recommendations  for  infection  control  practices  for  CF  patients  20.

Gene  therapy  has  has  been  attempted  using  a  number  of  different  viral  vectors,
including  nonreplicating  retroviruses,  adenoviruses,  adeno-associated  viruses,  and
replication-competent strains of poxviruses. Unexpected adverse events have restricted
the prevalence of gene therapy protocols. The infectious hazards of gene therapy are
theoretical  at  this  time,  but  require  meticulous  surveillance  due  to  the  possible
occurrence of in vivo recombination and the subsequent emergence of a transmissible
genetically
 altered
 pathogen.
 Greatest
 concern
 attends
 the
 use
 of
replication-competent  viruses,  especially  vaccinia.  As  of  the  time  of  publication,  no
reports have described transmission of a vector virus from a gene therapy recipient to
another  individual,  but  surveillance  is  ongoing.  Recommendations  for  monitoring
infection  control  issues  throughout  the  course  of  gene  therapy  trials  have  been
published 527-529. The potential hazard of transmitting infectious pathogens through
biologic  products  is  a  small  but  ever  present  risk,  despite  donor  screening.  Reported
infections transmitted by transfusion or transplantation include West Nile Virus infection
530  cytomegalovirus  infection  531,  Creutzfeldt-Jacob  disease  230,  hepatitis  C  532,
infections  with  Clostridium  spp.533  and  group  A  streptococcus  534,  malaria  535,
babesiosis 536, Chagas disease 537, lymphocytic choriomeningitis 538, and rabies 539,
540. Therefore, it is important to consider receipt of biologic products when evaluating
patients  for  potential  sources  of  infection.  The  transplantation  of  nonhuman  cells,
tissues,  and  organs  into  humans  potentially  exposes  patients  to  zoonotic  pathogens.
Transmission  of  known  zoonotic  infections  (e.g.,  trichinosis  from  porcine  tissue),
constitutes  one  concern,  but  also  of  concern  is  the  possibility  that  transplantation  of
nonhuman  cells,  tissues,  or  organs  may  transmit  previously  unknown  zoonotic
infections (xenozoonoses) to immunosuppressed human recipients. Potential infections
that  might  accompany  transplantation  of  porcine  organs  have  been  described  541.
Guidelines  from  the  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  address  many  infectious  diseases  and
infection control issues that surround the developing field of xenotransplantation, 542

work in this area is ongoing. CDC provides information on infection control and clinical
safety  to  help  reduce  the  risk  of  infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and
visitors. Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/scientific-review.html
