A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Updates:  Recommendations  for  Enhanced  Barrier  Precautions  are  being  reviewed  as
part of updates to the 2007 Guideline for Isolation Precautions. Once a draft is finalized
by  the  Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC),  it  will  be
posted  in  the  federal  register  for  a  public  comment  period  before  being  returned  to
HICPAC  for  additional  review.  Further  information  about  HICPAC,  the  guideline
development  and  public  comment  process,  and  future  meetings  is  available  at:
Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC).  Key  Points:1
Residents in nursing homes are at increased risk of becoming colonized and developing
infection with MDROs2. As described further in Consideration for the Use of Enhanced
Barrier  Precautions  in  Skilled  Nursing  Facilities,  more  than  50%  of  nursing  home
residents  may  be  colonized  with  an  MDRO,  nursing  homes  have  been  the  setting  for
MDRO  outbreaks,  and  when  these  MDROs  result  in  resident  infections,  limited
treatment options are available123456789. Implementation of Contact Precautions, as
described  in  the  CDC  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions,  is  perceived  to  create
challenges for nursing homes trying to balance the use of PPE and room restriction to
prevent MDRO transmission with residents' quality of life. Thus, many nursing homes
only implement Contact Precautions when residents are infected with an MDRO and on
treatment.  Focusing  only  on  residents  with  active  infection  fails  to  address  the
continued risk of transmission from residents with MDRO colonization, who by definition
have no symptoms of illness. MDRO colonization may persist for long periods of time
(e.g., months) which contributes to the silent spread of MDROs.10 With the need for an

effective  response  to  the  detection  of  serious  antibiotic  resistance  threats,  there  is
growing evidence that the traditional implementation of Contact Precautions in nursing
homes is not implementable for most residents for prevention of MDRO transmission.
This  document  is  intended  to  provide  guidance  for  PPE  use  and  room  restriction  in
nursing  homes  for  preventing  transmission  of  MDROs,  including  as  part  of  a  public
health response. For the purposes of this guidance, the MDROs for which the use of EBP
applies are based on local epidemiology. At a minimum, they should include resistant
organisms  targeted  by  CDC  but  can  also  include  other  epidemiologically  important
MDROs910. This document is not intended for use in acute care or long-term acute care
hospitals and does not replace existing guidance regarding use of Contact Precautions
for other pathogens (e.g., Clostridioides difficile, norovirus) in nursing homes. A group
of  infection  prevention  practices  that  apply  to  the  care  of  all  residents,  regardless  of
suspected or confirmed infection or colonization status. They are based on the principle
that  all  blood,  body  fluids,  secretions,  and  excretions  (except  sweat)  may  contain
transmissible  infectious  agents.  Proper  selection  and  use  of  PPE,  such  as  gowns  and
gloves,  is  one  component  of  Standard  Precautions,  along  with  hand  hygiene,  safe
injection  practices,  respiratory  hygiene  and  cough  etiquette,  environmental  cleaning
and disinfection, and reprocessing of reusable medical equipment. Use of PPE is based
on  the  staff  interaction  with  residents  and  the  potential  for  exposure  to  blood,  body
fluids,  or  pathogens  (e.g.,  gloves  are  worn  when  contact  with  blood,  body  fluids,
mucous  membranes,  non-intact  skin,  or  potentially  contaminated  surfaces  or
equipment are anticipated). More detail about Standard Precautions is available as part
of the Core Infection Prevention and Control Practices for Safe Healthcare Delivery in all
Settings.  One  type  of  Transmission-Based  Precaution  that  are  used  when  pathogen
transmission  is  not  completely  interrupted  by  Standard  Precautions  alone.  Contact
Precautions are intended to prevent transmission of infectious agents, like MDROs, that
are spread by direct or indirect contact with the resident or the resident's environment.

Contact Precautions require the use of gown and gloves on every entry into a resident's
room. The resident is given dedicated equipment (e.g., stethoscope and blood pressure
cuff)  and  is  placed  into  a  private  room.  When  private  rooms  are  not  available,  some
residents  (e.g.,  residents  with  the  same  pathogen)  may  be  cohorted,  or  grouped
together. Residents on Contact Precautions should be restricted to their rooms except
for  medically  necessary  care  and  restricted  from  participation  in  group  activities.
Because Contact Precautions require room restriction, they are generally intended to be
time  limited  and,  when  implemented,  should  include  a  plan  for  discontinuation  or
de-escalation. More detail about Transmission-Based Precautions, including descriptions
of Droplet Precautions and Airborne Precautions are available in the CDC Guideline for
Isolation  Precautions.  In  addition,  other  infections  (e.g.  norovirus,  C.  difficile,  and
scabies) and conditions for which Contact Precautions are indicated are summarized in
Appendix A – Type and Duration of Precautions Recommended for Selected Infections
and Conditions of the guideline. Expand the use of PPE and refer to the use of gown and
gloves  during  high-contact  resident  care  activities  that  provide  opportunities  for
transfer  of  MDROs  to  staff  hands  and  clothing1112131415.  MDROs  may  be  indirectly
transferred from resident-to-resident during these high-contact care activities. Nursing
home residents with wounds and indwelling medical devices are at especially high risk
of both acquisition of and colonization with MDROs356. The use of gown and gloves for
high-contact  resident  care  activities  is  indicated,  when  Contact  Precautions  do  not
otherwise  apply,  for  nursing  home  residents  with  wounds  and/or  indwelling  medical
devices regardless of MDRO colonization as well as for residents with MDRO infection or
colonization. Examples of high-contact resident care activities requiring gown and glove
use for Enhanced Barrier Precautions include: In general, gown and gloves would not be
required  for  resident  care  activities  other  than  those  listed  above,  unless  otherwise
necessary for adherence to Standard Precautions. Residents are not restricted to their
rooms  or  limited  from  participation  in  group  activities.  Because  Enhanced  Barrier

Precautions  do  not  impose  the  same  activity  and  room  placement  restrictions  as
Contact Precautions, they are intended to be in place for the duration of a resident's
stay in the facility or until resolution of the wound or discontinuation of the indwelling
medical  device  that  placed  them  at  higher  risk.  gloves,  gown,  or  facemask  or  eye
protection (Change PPE before caring for another resident)   (Change PPE before caring
for another resident) (Face protection may also be needed if performing activity with
risk  of  splash  or  spray)  All  residents  who  have  another  infection  (e.g.,  C.  difficile,
norovirus,  scabies)  or  condition  for  which  Contact  Precautions  is  recommended  in
Appendix  A  (Type  and  Duration  of  Precautions  Recommended  for  Selected  Infections
and Conditions) of the CDC Guideline for Isolation Precautions   (Don before room entry,
doff before room exit; change before caring for another resident) (Face protection may
also be needed if performing activity with risk of splash or spray) Table: Summary of
PPE  Use  and  Room  Restriction  When  Caring  for  Residents  Colonized  or  Infected  with
MDROs in Nursing Homes Decisions regarding the use of additional practices to prevent
the  spread  of  MDROs  can  be  determined  in  conjunction  with  public  health.  These
strategies might differ depending on the prevalence or incidence of the MDRO in the
facility and region. Visit state-based HAI prevention to find contact information for your
state  health  department  HAI  program.  When  implementing  Contact  Precautions  or
Enhanced Barrier Precautions, it is critical to ensure that staff have awareness of the
facility's  expectations  about  hand  hygiene  and  gown/glove  use,  initial  and  refresher
training,  and  access  to  appropriate  supplies.  To  accomplish  this:  Note:  Prevention  of
MDRO  transmission  in  nursing  homes  requires  more  than  just  proper  use  of  PPE  and
room  restriction.  Guidance  on  implementing  other  recommended  infection  prevention
practices  (e.g.,  hand  hygiene,  environmental  cleaning,  proper  handling  of  wounds,
indwelling  medical  devices,  and  resident  care  equipment)  are  available  in  CDC's  free
online course — The Nursing Home Infection Preventionist Training. Nursing homes are
encouraged to have staff review relevant modules and to use the resources provided in

the  training  (e.g.,  policy  and  procedure  templates,  checklists)  to  assess  and  improve
practices  in  their  facility.  This  website  provides  resources  for  patients,  families  and
caregivers on the prevention of infections in nursing homes and assisted living facilities.
Languages Language Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/long-term-care-facilities/hcp/prevent-mdro/PPE.html
