Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. These recommendations are intended for healthcare settings.
Non-healthcare  settings  such  as  correctional  facilities  and  homeless  shelters  should
continue to follow CDC’s Preventing Mpox Spread in Congregate Settings. On 4/5/2024:
Infection prevention and control recommendations for healthcare settings are provided
in the Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents
in Healthcare Settings (2007). Recommendations and practices described in this 2007
guideline are intended to be used when providing care for any patient in a healthcare
setting, including those with mpox infection. Additional supporting infection prevention
and  control  information  is  provided  below.  Guidance  addressing  isolation  for  people
with mpox infection outside of healthcare settings is available at Isolation and Infection
Control  at  Home.  In  addition  to  Standard  Precautions,  if  a  patient  seeking  care  is
suspected to have mpox infection, additional infection control precautions (as described
below)  should  be  implemented.  Infection  prevention  and  control  personnel  should  be
notified immediately. Activities that could resuspend dried material from lesions (e.g.,
use of portable fans, dry dusting, sweeping, vacuuming) should be avoided. A patient
with suspected or confirmed mpox infection should be placed in a single-person room;
special air handling is not required. The door should be kept closed (if safe to do so).
The patient should have a dedicated bathroom. Transport and movement of the patient
outside of the room should be limited to medically essential purposes.  If the patient is
transported  outside  of  their  room,  they  should  use  well-fitting  source  control  (e.g.,
medical  mask)  and  have  any  exposed  skin  lesions  covered  with  a  sheet  or  gown.
Intubation,  extubation,  and  any  procedures  likely  to  spread  oral  secretions  should  be
performed  in  an  airborne  infection  isolation  room.  PPE  used  by  healthcare  personnel
who  enter  the  patient’s  room  should  include:  Waste  management  (i.e.,  handling,

storage,  treatment,  and  disposal  of  soiled  PPE,  patient  dressings,  etc.)  should  be
performed  in  accordance  with  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  Hazardous
Materials  Regulations  (HMR;  49  CFR  parts  171-180.)  Updated  U.S.  guidance  for
diagnostic samples and clinical waste advises that waste contaminated with Clade I or
Clade II of mpox is designated as Category B infectious substances except when they
contain or are contaminated with laboratory cultures of Clade I mpox virus. Refer to the
current DOT Safety Advisory Notice for details. Facilities should also comply with state
and local regulations for handling, storage, treatment, and disposal of waste, including
Regulated  Medical  Waste.  Standard  cleaning  and  disinfection  procedures  should  be
performed  using  an  EPA-registered  hospital-grade  disinfectant  with  an  emerging  viral
pathogen claim. Products with Emerging Viral Pathogens claims may be found on EPA’s
List Q. Follow the manufacturer’s directions for concentration, contact time, and care
and  handling.  Soiled  laundry  (e.g.,  bedding,  towels,  personal  clothing)  should  be
handled  in  accordance  with  recommended  [2.47  MB,  241  pages]  standard  practices,
avoiding  contact  with  lesion  material  that  may  be  present  on  the  laundry.   Soiled
laundry  should  be  gently  and  promptly  contained  in  an  appropriate  laundry  bag  and
never be shaken or handled in manner that may disperse infectious material. Activities
such as dry dusting, sweeping, or vacuuming should be avoided. Wet cleaning methods
are  preferred.  Management  of  food  service  items  should  also  be  performed  in
accordance  with  routine  procedures.  Detailed  information  on  environmental  infection
control  in  healthcare  settings  can  be  found  in  CDC’s  Guidelines  for  Environmental
Infection  Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  and  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:
Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings [section IV.F. Care
of  the  environment].  For  patients  with  suspected  or  confirmed  mpox  infection  in  a
healthcare  setting:  Decisions  regarding  discontinuation  of  isolation  precautions  in  a
healthcare facility may need to be made in consultation with the local or state health
department, depending on the jurisdiction. In general, patients in healthcare facilities

who  have  had  an  mpox  virus  exposure  and  are  asymptomatic  do  not  need  to  be
isolated, but they should be monitored. Monitoring should include assessing the patient
for signs and symptoms of mpox, including a thorough skin exam, at least daily, for 21
days  after  their  last  exposure.  Postexposure  risk  assessment  and  management  for
patients  should  be  adapted  from  community  guidance  or  healthcare  guidance,
depending  on  the  nature  and  location  of  a  patient’s  exposure.  During  the  21-day
monitoring  period:  Be  placed  on  empiric  isolation  precautions  for  mpox  until  (1)  the
rash is evaluated, (2) testing is performed, if indicated, and (3) the results of testing are
available  and  are  negative.  Some  patients  may  be  unable  to  communicate  onset  of
symptoms  (e.g.  a  newborn,  patients  with  delirium).  Decisions  on  whether  to  isolate
exposed patients who are unable to communicate about onset of symptoms should be
informed  by  the risk of their exposure incident (how  likely  they  are to  develop  mpox
infection),  risk  that  transmission  would  pose  to  other  patients  on  their  unit  (e.g.,
immunocompromised  patients),  and  other  factors.  To  date,  there  have  been  no
confirmed  reports  of  mpox  virus  transmission  from  medical  products  of  human  origin
(MPHO)
 including
 blood
 transfusion,
 organ
 transplantation,
 or
 implantation,
transplantation, infusion, or transfer of human cells, tissues, or cellular or tissue-based
products  (HCT/Ps).  As  a  precaution,  people  who  have  a  high-  or  intermediate-risk
exposure  (Monitoring  and  Risk  Assessment  for  Persons  Exposed  in  the  Community  |
Mpox  |  Poxvirus  |  CDC)  should  not  donate  blood,  cells,  tissue,  breast  milk,  or  semen
while  they  are  being  monitored  for  symptoms.  Given  the  morbidity  and  mortality
among individuals awaiting organ transplantation, potential deceased donors who have
been  exposed  and  have  no  evidence  of  mpox  virus  infection,  based  on  a  physical
examination, could be considered for organ donation following appropriate risk-benefit
considerations. Potential living donors who have been exposed to mpox could consider
deferring donation until 21 days following their last exposure. The risk of such wait time
should  be  weighed  against  the  morbidity  and  mortality  risk  for  individuals  awaiting

organ  transplantation.  All  decisions  should  be  based  on  appropriate  risk-benefit
considerations, recognizing that mpox virus has been detected in some samples taken
from people who reported no symptoms. CDC will continue to monitor case data and
available  science  for  new  or  changing  information  about  transmission.  Additional
information  on  safety  considerations  for  blood  and  plasma  donation  is  available  at
FDA’s  Information  for  Blood  Establishments  Regarding  the  Mpox  Virus  and  Blood
Donation and from the Association for the Advancement of Blood & Biotherapies (AABB)
[251  KB,  9  pages].  The  Organ  Procurement  and  Transplantation  Network  (OPTN)
Disease  Transmission  Advisory  Committee  is  evaluating  the  implications  for  organ
transplantation:  OPTN/HRSA’s  Mpox  and  Solid  Organ  Donation  For  further  questions
please contact CDC: eocreport@cdc.gov Visitors to patients with mpox infection should
be  limited  to  those  essential  for  the  patient’s  care  and  wellbeing  (e.g.,  parents  of  a
child, spouse). Decisions about who might visit, including whether the visitor stays or
sleeps in the room with the patient, typically take into consideration the patient’s age,
the  patient’s  ability  to  advocate  for  themselves,  ability  of  the  visitor  to  adhere  to
infection  prevention  and  control  recommendations,  whether  the  visitor  already  had
higher  risk  exposure  to  the  patient,  and  other  aspects.  In  general,  visitors  with
contagious diseases should not be visiting patients in healthcare settings to minimize
the risk of transmission to others. Each risk level category in the table below is intended
to  highlight  the  need  for  monitoring  and  assist  with  determining  the  need  for
postexposure  prophylaxis  (PEP).  The  exposure  risk  level  of  any  incident  may  be
recategorized to another risk level at the discretion of occupational health services or
public  health  authorities  due  to  the  unique  circumstances  of  each  exposure  incident.
Correct  and  consistent  use  of  PPE  when  caring  for  a  patient  with  mpox  infection  is
highly  protective  and  prevents  transmission  to  HCP.   However,  unrecognized  errors
during the use of PPE (e.g., self-contaminating when removing contaminated PPE) may
create opportunities for transmission to HCP. Therefore, in the absence of an exposure

described  below,  HCP  who  enter  a  contaminated  patient  room  or  care  area  while
wearing recommended PPE, should be aware of the signs and symptoms of mpox; if any
signs or symptoms of mpox occur, HCP should notify occupational health services for
further  evaluation  and  should  not  report  to  work  (or  should  leave  work,  if  signs  or
symptoms develop while at work).   ¶ ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS are available for PEP. ¶¶
Factors that may increase the risk of mpox transmission include (but are not limited to):
the  person  with  mpox  infection  had  clothes  that  were  soiled  with  bodily  fluids  or
secretions (e.g., discharge, skin flakes on clothes) or was coughing while not wearing a
mask  or  respirator,  or  the  exposed  individual  is  not  previously  vaccinated  against
smallpox or mpox. People who may be at increased risk for severe disease include (but
are not limited to): young children (e.g., children <1 year of age), individuals who are
pregnant or immunocompromised, and individuals with a history of atopic dermatitis or
eczema.  Decisions  on  how  to  monitor  exposed  HCP  are  at  the  discretion  of  the
occupational  health  program  and  public  health  authorities.  In  general,  the  type  of
monitoring
 employed
 often
 reflects
 the
 risk
 for
 transmission
 with
 more
active-monitoring  approaches  used  for  higher  risk  exposures.  Self-monitoring
approaches are usually sufficient for exposures that carry a lesser risk for transmission.
Even  higher  risk  exposures  may  be  appropriate  for  a  self-monitoring  strategy  if
occupational  health  services  or  public  health  authorities  determine  that  it  is
appropriate.  Ultimately,  the  person’s  exposure  risk  level,  their  reliability  in  reporting
symptoms that might develop, the number of persons needing monitoring, time since
exposure, receipt of PEP, and available resources, are all factors when determining the
type of monitoring to be used. Asymptomatic HCP with exposures to mpox virus do not
need  to  be  excluded  from  work,  but  should  be  monitored  (e.g.,  at  least  a  daily
assessment conducted by the exposed HCP for signs and symptoms of mpox infection)
for 21 days after their last exposure. If symptoms develop, HCP should be managed as
described  below.  If  pox  infection  is  ruled  out,  they  may  still  have  work  restrictions

recommended  if  their  diagnosis  is  one  where  restriction  from  work  is  recommended
(e.g.,  varicella).  During  the  21-day  monitoring  period:  As  a  precaution,  HCP  with
exposures categorized higher than ‘No risk’ in the above table should not donate blood,
cells, tissue, breast milk, or semen while they are being monitored for symptoms. Given
the morbidity and mortality among individuals awaiting organ transplantation, HCP who
have  been  exposed,  but  who  are  asymptomatic  and  without  evidence  of  mpox  virus
infection,  could  be  considered  for  organ  donation  following  appropriate  risk-benefit
considerations. HCP with confirmed mpox infection should be excluded from work until
all lesions have crusted, those crusts have separated, and a fresh layer of healthy skin
has formed underneath. Ultimately, the decision on when to return to work will be made
with  their  occupational  health  program,  and  potentially  with  input  from  public  health
authorities. Healthcare personnel (HCP) refers to all paid and unpaid persons serving in
healthcare settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or
infectious  materials,  including  body  substances  (e.g.,  blood,  tissue,  and  specific  body
fluids);  contaminated  medical  supplies,  devices,  and  equipment;  contaminated
environmental surfaces; or contaminated air. These HCP include, but are not limited to,
emergency  medical  service  personnel,  nurses,  nursing  assistants,  physicians,
technicians, therapists, phlebotomists, pharmacists, students and trainees, contractual
staff  not  employed  by  the  healthcare  facility,  and  persons  not  directly  involved  in
patient care, but who could be exposed to infectious agents that can be transmitted in
the healthcare setting (e.g., clerical, dietary, environmental services, laundry, security,
engineering
 and
 facilities
 management,
 administrative,
 billing,
 and
 volunteer
personnel).  Healthcare  settings  refers  to  places  where  healthcare  is  delivered  and
includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  acute  care  facilities,  long-term  acute-care  facilities,
inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities,  nursing  homes,  home  healthcare,  vehicles  where
healthcare is delivered (e.g., mobile clinics), and outpatient facilities, such as dialysis
centers,  physician  offices,  dental  offices,  and  others.  Active  monitoring  typically

involves in-person visits, regular communications (e.g., phone calls, video conferences)
between  occupational  health  services,  public  health  representatives,  and  the  person
being monitored. Self-monitoring typically involves persons self-reporting symptoms to
occupational  health  programs  or  health  departments  if  symptoms  appear.  On
10/31/2022:  Information  about  human-to-human  transmission  of  mpox  virus  is
described  in  How  it  Spreads  |  Mpox  |  Poxvirus  |  CDC.   Transmission  in  healthcare
settings has been rarely described. On 8/11/2022: On 7/01/2022:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/clinicians/infection-control-healthcare.html
