Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. The recommendations in this guidance continue to apply after
the  expiration  of  the  federal  COVID-19  Public  Health  Emergency.  For  healthcare
personnel,  see  Isolation  and  work  restriction  guidance.  For  strategies  to  mitigate
healthcare personnel staffing shortages, see Contingency and crisis management. For
healthcare professionals advising people in non-healthcare settings about isolation for
laboratory-confirmed  COVID-19,  see  Preventing  Spread  of  Respiratory  Viruses  When
You’re  Sick.  This  interim  guidance  has  been  updated  based  on  currently  available
information  about  COVID-19  and  the  current  situation  in  the  United  States.  Updates
were made to reflect the high levels of vaccine-and infection-induced immunity and the
availability  of  effective  treatments  and  prevention  tools.   This  guidance  provides  a
framework for facilities to implement select infection prevention and control practices
(e.g., universal source control) based on their individual circumstances (e.g., levels of
respiratory virus transmission in the community). This guidance is applicable to all U.S.
settings where healthcare is delivered (including nursing homes and home health). This
guidance  is  not  intended  for  non-healthcare  settings  (e.g.,  restaurants)  and  not  for
persons outside of healthcare settings. CDC’s main landing page for COVID-19 content
will  help  readers  navigate  to  information  regarding  modes  of  transmission,  clinical
management,  laboratory  settings,  COVID-19  vaccines  and  CDC  guidance  on  other
COVID-19-related topics. Employers should be aware that other local, territorial, tribal,
state,  and  federal  requirements  may  apply,  including  those  promulgated  by  the
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  (OSHA).  With  the  end  of  the  federal
COVID-19 Public Health Emergency (PHE) on May 11, 2023, CDC will no longer receive
data  needed  to  publish  Community  Transmission  levels  for  SARS-CoV-2.   This  metric
informed  CDC’s  recommendations  for  broader  use  of  source  control  in  healthcare

facilities to allow for earlier intervention, to avoid strain on a healthcare system, and to
better protect individuals seeking care in these settings. As described in CDC’s Core IPC
Practices,  source  control  remains  an  important  intervention  during  periods  of  higher
respiratory virus transmission. Without the Community Transmission metric, healthcare
facilities  should  identify  local  metrics  that  could  reflect  increasing  community
respiratory viral activity to determine when broader use of source control in the facility
might be warranted (See Appendix). Encourage everyone to remain up to date with all
recommended  COVID-19  vaccine  doses.  Establish  a  Process  to  Identify  and  Manage
Individuals with Suspected or Confirmed SARS-CoV-2 Infection 
Implement  Source  Control  Measures   Source  control  refers  to  use  of  respirators  or
well-fitting facemasks or cloth masks to cover a person’s mouth and nose to prevent
spread  of  respiratory  secretions  when  they  are  breathing,  talking,  sneezing,  or
coughing. Masks and respirators also offer varying levels of protection to the wearer.
Further  information  about  types  of  masks  and  respirators,  including  those  that  meet
standards and the degree of protection offered to the wearer, is available at: Masks and
Respirators.  People,  particularly  those  at  high  risk  for  severe  illness,  should  wear  the
most  protective  mask  or  respirator  they  can  that  fits  well  and  that  they  will  wear
consistently. Even when a facility does not require masking for source control, it should
allow individuals to use a mask or respirator based on personal preference, informed by
their perceived level of risk for infection based on their recent activities (e.g., attending
crowded  indoor  gatherings  with  poor  ventilation)  and  their  potential  for  developing
severe disease if they are exposed. Source control options for HCP include: When used
solely  for  source  control,  any  of  the  options  listed  above  could  be  used  for  an  entire
shift unless they become soiled, damaged, or hard to breathe through. If they are used
during  the  care  of  patient  for  which  a  NIOSH  Approved  respirator  or  facemask  is
indicated  for  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  (e.g.,  NIOSH  Approved  particulate
respirators  with  N95  filters  or  higher  during  the  care  of  a  patient  with  SARS-CoV-2

infection, facemask during a surgical procedure or during care of a patient on Droplet
Precautions), they should be removed and discarded after the patient care encounter
and  a  new  one  should  be  donned.  Source  control  is  recommended  for  individuals  in
healthcare settings who: Source control is recommended more broadly as described in
CDC’s  Core  IPC  Practices  in  the  following  circumstances:  Implement  Universal  Use  of
Personal  Protective  Equipment  for  HCP  If  SARS-CoV-2  infection  is  not  suspected  in  a
patient  presenting  for  care  (based  on  symptom  and  exposure  history),  HCP  should
follow Standard Precautions (and Transmission-Based Precautions if required based on
the suspected diagnosis). As SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the community increases, the
potential for encountering asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic patients with SARS-CoV-2
infection  also  likely  increases.  In  these  circumstances,  healthcare  facilities  should
consider  implementing  broader  use  of  respirators  and  eye  protection  by  HCP  during
patient  care  encounters  as  described  below.  NIOSH  Approved  particulate  respirators
with N95 filters or higher used for: Optimize the Use of Engineering Controls and Indoor
Air  Quality  Perform  SARS-CoV-2  Viral  Testing  Create  a  Process  to  Respond  to
SARS-CoV-2 Exposures Among HCP and Others Healthcare facilities should have a plan
for how SARS-CoV-2 exposures in a healthcare facility will be investigated and managed
and  how  contact  tracing  will  be  performed.  If  healthcare-associated  transmission  is
suspected or identified, facilities might consider expanded testing of HCP and patients
as  determined  by  the  distribution  and  number  of  cases  throughout  the  facility  and
ability to identify close contacts. For example, in an outpatient dialysis facility with an
open treatment area, testing should ideally include all patients and HCP. Depending on
testing  resources  available  or  the  likelihood  of  healthcare-associated  transmission,
facilities may elect to initially expand testing only to HCP and patients on the affected
units  or  departments,  or  a  particular  treatment  schedule  or  shift,  as  opposed  to  the
entire facility. If an expanded testing approach is taken and testing identifies additional
infections,  testing  should  be  expanded  more  broadly.  If  possible,  testing  should  be

repeated every 3-7 days until no new cases are identified for at least 14 days. Guidance
for outbreak response in nursing homes is described in setting-specific considerations
below.  Healthcare  facilities  responding  to  SARS-CoV-2  transmission  within  the  facility
should always notify and follow the recommendations of public health authorities. The
IPC  recommendations  described  below  (e.g.,  patient  placement,  recommended  PPE)
also  apply  to  patients  with  symptoms  of  COVID-19  (even  before  results  of  diagnostic
testing)  and  asymptomatic  patients  who  have  met  the  criteria  for  empiric
Transmission-Based Precautions based on close contact with someone with SARS-CoV-2
infection. However, these patients should NOT be cohorted with patients with confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection unless they are confirmed to have SARS-CoV-2 infection through
testing. Duration of Empiric Transmission-Based Precautions for Symptomatic Patients
being
 Evaluated
 for
 SARS-CoV-2
 infection
 The
 decision
 to
 discontinue
empiric  Transmission-Based  Precautions  by  excluding  the  diagnosis  of  current
SARS-CoV-2  infection  for  a  patient  with  symptoms  of  COVID-19  can  be  made  based
upon  having  negative  results  from  at  least  one  viral  test.  If  a  patient  suspected  of
having
 SARS-CoV-2
 infection
 is
 never
 tested,
 the
 decision
 to
 discontinue
Transmission-Based Precautions can be made based on time from symptom onset as
described in the Isolation section below.  Ultimately, clinical judgment and suspicion of
SARS-CoV-2  infection  determine  whether  to  continue  or  discontinue  empiric
Transmission-Based  Precautions.  Duration  of  Empiric  Transmission-Based  Precautions
for  Asymptomatic  Patients  following  Close  Contact  with  Someone  with  SARS-CoV-2
Infection
 In
 general,
 asymptomatic
 patients
 do
 not
 require
 empiric
 use
of
 Transmission-Based
 Precautions
 while
 being
 evaluated
 for
 SARS-CoV-2
following close contact with someone with SARS-CoV-2 infection. These patients should
still wear source control and those who have not recovered from SARS-CoV-2 infection
in the prior 30 days should be tested as described in the testing section. Examples of
when  empiric  Transmission-Based  Precautions  following  close  contact  may  be

considered  include:  Patients  placed  in  empiric  Transmission-Based  Precautions  based
on  close  contact  with  someone  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection  should  be  maintained  in
Transmission-Based  Precautions  for  the  following  time  periods.  Patient  Placement
 Personal  Protective  Equipment   Aerosol-Generating  Procedures  (AGPs)  Visitation
 Duration of Transmission-Based Precautions for Patients with SARS-CoV-2 Infection The
following  are  criteria  to  determine  when  Transmission-Based  Precautions  could  be
discontinued for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection and are influenced by severity of
symptoms  and  presence  of  immunocompromising  conditions.  Patients  should
self-monitor and seek re-evaluation if symptoms recur or worsen.  If symptoms recur
(e.g.,  rebound),  these  patients  should  be  placed  back  into  isolation  until  they  again
meet  the  healthcare  criteria  below  to  discontinue  Transmission-Based  Precautions  for
SARS-CoV-2 infection unless an alternative diagnosis is identified. In general, patients
who
 are
 hospitalized
 for
 SARS-CoV-2
 infection
 should
 be
 maintained
 in
Transmission-Based Precautions for the time period described for patients with severe
to  critical  illness.  In  general,  patients  should  continue  to  wear  source  control  until
symptoms  resolve  or,  for  those  who  never  developed  symptoms,  until  they  meet  the
criteria to end isolation below. Then they should revert to usual facility source control
policies for patients. Patients with mild to moderate illness who are not moderately to
severely  immunocompromised:  Patients  who  were  asymptomatic  throughout  their
infection  and  are  not  moderately  to  severely  immunocompromised:  Patients
with
 severe
 to
 critical
 illness
 and
 who
 are
 not
 moderately
 to
 severely
immunocompromised:  The  exact  criteria  that  determine  which  patients  will  shed
replication-competent virus for longer periods are not known. Disease severity factors
and  the  presence  of  immunocompromising  conditions  should  be  considered  when
determining  the  appropriate  duration  for  specific  patients.  For  a  summary  of  the
literature, refer to Preventing Spread of Respiratory Viruses When You’re Sick Patients
who
 are
 moderately
 to
 severely
 immunocompromised
 may
 produce

replication-competent  virus  beyond  20  days  after  symptom  onset  or,  for  those  who
were asymptomatic throughout their infection, the date of their first positive viral test.
The  criteria  for  the  test-based  strategy  are:  Patients  who  are  symptomatic:   Patients
who  are  not  symptomatic:  Environmental  Infection  Control  In  addition  to  the
recommendations described in the guidance above, here are additional considerations
for the settings listed below. Considerations for Patient Placement Additional Guidance
for Use of Isolation Gowns Cleaning and Disinfecting Dialysis Stations Considerations for
vehicle  configuration  when  transporting  a  patient  with  suspected  or  confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection Additional considerations when performing AGPs on patients with
suspected  or  confirmed  SARS-CoV-2  infection:  In  general,  long-term  care  settings
(excluding nursing homes) whose staff provide non-skilled personal care* similar to that
provided by family members in the home (e.g., many assisted livings, group homes),
should follow community prevention strategies based on COVID-19 hospital admission
levels,  similar  to  independent  living,  retirement  communities  or  other  non-healthcare
congregate  settings.  Residents  should  also  be  counseled  about  strategies  to  protect
themselves  and  others,  including  recommendations  for  source  control  if  they  are
immunocompromised  or  at  high  risk  for  severe  disease.  CDC  has  information  and
resources for older adults and for people with disabilities. Visiting or shared healthcare
personnel who enter the setting to provide healthcare to one or more residents (e.g.,
physical  therapy,  wound  care,  intravenous  injections,  or  catheter  care  provided  by
home health agency nurses) should follow the healthcare IPC recommendations in this
guidance.  In  addition,  if  staff  in  a  residential  care  setting  are  providing  in-person
services  for  a  resident  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection,  they  should  be  familiar  with
recommended IPC practices to protect themselves and others from potential exposures
including  the  hand  hygiene,  personal  protective  equipment  and  cleaning  and
disinfection  practices  outlined  in  this  guidance.  *Non-skilled  personal  care  consists  of
any  non-medical  care  that  can  reasonably  and  safely  be  provided  by  non-licensed

caregivers,  such  as  help  with  daily  activities  like  bathing  and  dressing;  it  may  also
include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves, like taking oral
medications.  In  some  cases  where  care  is  received  at  home  or  a  residential  setting,
care  can  also  include  help  with  household  duties  such  as  cooking  and  laundry.
Introduction: Use of well-fitting masks in healthcare settings are an important strategy
to  prevent  the  spread  of  respiratory  viruses.  Well-fitting  masks  can  help  block  virus
particles from reaching the nose and mouth of the wearer (wearer protection) and, if
someone  is  ill,  help  block  virus  particles  coming  out  of  their  nose  and  mouth  from
reaching  others  (source  control).   Masking  by  healthcare  personnel  as  part  of
Standard  and  Transmission-Based  Precautions  and  by  ill  individuals  as  part  of
respiratory  hygiene  and  cough  etiquette  (i.e.,  for  people  with  symptoms)  are  already
well-described.  This appendix describes considerations for implementing broader use
of masking in healthcare settings. However, even when masking is not required by the
facility,  individuals  should  continue  using  a  mask  or  respirator  based  on  personal
preference, informed by their perceived level of risk for infection based on their recent
activities  (e.g.,  attending  crowded  indoor  gatherings  with  poor  ventilation)  and  their
potential  for  developing  severe  disease  if  they  are  exposed.  When  to  Implement
Broader  Use  of  Masking  The  overall  benefit  of  broader  masking  is  likely  to  be  the
greatest for patients at higher risk for severe outcomes from respiratory virus infection
and  during  periods  of  high  respiratory  virus  transmission  in  the  community.  Facilities
should consider several factors when determining how and when to implement broader
mask  use:  Metrics  for  Community  Respiratory  Virus  Transmission  CDC  is  in  the  early
stages  of  developing  metrics  that  could  be  used  to  guide  when  to  implement  select
infection prevention and control practices for multiple respiratory viruses. However, at
this  time  there  are  some  general  metrics  that  could  be  used  to  help  facilities  make
decisions  about  community  respiratory  virus  incidence.  Data  on  the  exact  metric
thresholds that correspond with a higher risk for transmission are lacking. In addition,

data from these systems are generally not available for all jurisdictions. Some facilities
might  consider  recommending  masking  during  the  typical  respiratory  virus  season
(approximately  October-April).  Facilities  could  also  follow  national  data  on  trends  of
several  respiratory  viruses.  Healthcare  Personnel  (HCP):  HCP  refers  to  all  paid  and
unpaid  persons  serving  in  healthcare  settings  who  have  the  potential  for  direct  or
indirect  exposure  to  patients  or  infectious  materials,  including  body  substances  (e.g.,
blood,  tissue,  and  specific  body  fluids);  contaminated  medical  supplies,  devices,  and
equipment;  contaminated  environmental  surfaces;  or  contaminated  air.  HCP  include,
but are not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, nurses, nursing assistants,
home  healthcare  personnel,  physicians,  technicians,  therapists,  phlebotomists,
pharmacists, dental healthcare personnel, students and trainees, contractual staff not
employed by the healthcare facility, and persons not directly involved in patient care,
but  who  could  be  exposed  to  infectious  agents  that  can  be  transmitted  in  the
healthcare  setting  (e.g.,  clerical,  dietary,  environmental  services,  laundry,  security,
engineering
 and
 facilities
 management,
 administrative,
 billing,
 and
 volunteer
personnel).  Healthcare  settings  refers  to  places  where  healthcare  is  delivered  and
includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  acute  care  facilities,  long-term  acute-care  facilities,
nursing homes, home healthcare, vehicles where healthcare is delivered (e.g., mobile
clinics),  and  outpatient  facilities,  such  as  dialysis  centers,  physician  offices,  dental
offices,  and  others.  Source  control:  Use  of  respirators,  well-fitting  facemasks,  or
well-fitting  cloth  masks  to  cover  a  person’s  mouth  and  nose  to  prevent  spread  of
respiratory secretions when they are breathing, talking, sneezing, or coughing. Source
control devices should not be placed on children under age 2, anyone who cannot wear
one safely, such as someone who has a disability or an underlying medical condition
that  precludes  wearing  one  safely,  or  anyone  who  is  unconscious,  incapacitated,  or
otherwise unable to remove their source control device without assistance. Face shields
alone are not recommended for source control. At a minimum, source control devices

should be changed if they become visibly soiled, damaged, or hard to breathe through. 
Further information about source control options is available at:  Masks and Respirators
(cdc.gov)  Cloth  mask:  Textile  (cloth)  covers  that  are  intended  primarily  for  source
control  in  the  community.  They  are  not  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)
appropriate  for  use  by  healthcare  personnel.  Guidance  on  design,  use,  and
maintenance  of  cloth  masks  is  available.  Facemask:  OSHA  defines  facemasks  as  “a
surgical, medical procedure, dental, or isolation mask that is FDA-cleared, authorized by
an  FDA  EUA,  or  offered  or  distributed  as  described  in  an  FDA  enforcement  policy.
Facemasks may also be referred to as ‘medical procedure masks’.”  Facemasks should
be  used  according  to  product  labeling  and  local,  state,  and  federal  requirements.
FDA-cleared  surgical  masks  are  designed  to  protect  against  splashes  and  sprays  and
are  prioritized  for  use  when  such  exposures  are  anticipated,  including  surgical
procedures. Other facemasks, such as some procedure masks, which are typically used
for  isolation  purposes,  may  not  provide  protection  against  splashes  and  sprays.
Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective device that is worn on the face, covers
at  least  the  nose  and  mouth,  and  is  used  to  reduce  the  wearer’s  risk  of  inhaling
hazardous airborne particles (including dust particles and infectious agents), gases, or
vapors.  Respirators  are  approved  by  CDC/NIOSH,  including  those  intended  for  use  in
healthcare.  Airborne  Infection  Isolation  Rooms  (AIIRs):  Immunocompromised:   For  the
purposes  of  this  guidance,  moderate  to  severely  immunocompromising  conditions
include, but might not be limited to, those defined in the Interim Clinical Considerations
for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines Close contact: Being within 6 feet for a cumulative total of
15  minutes  or  more  over  a  24-hour  period  with  someone  with  SARS-CoV-2  infection.
SARS-CoV-2  Illness  Severity  Criteria  (adapted  from  the  NIH  COVID-19  Treatment
Guidelines) The studies used to inform this guidance did not clearly define “severe” or
“critical”  illness.  This  guidance  has  taken  a  conservative  approach  to  define  these
categories.
 Although
 not
 developed
 to
 inform
 decisions
 about
 duration
 of

Transmission-Based  Precautions,  the  definitions  in  the  National  Institutes  of  Health
(NIH)  COVID-19  Treatment  Guidelines  are  one  option  for  defining  severity  of  illness
categories. The highest level of illness severity experienced by the patient at any point
in  their  clinical  course  should  be  used  when  determining  the  duration  of
Transmission-Based  Precautions.  Clinical  judgment  regarding  the  contribution  of
SARS-CoV-2 to clinical severity might also be necessary when applying these criteria to
inform infection control decisions. Mild Illness: Individuals who have any of the various
signs and symptoms of COVID-19 (e.g., fever, cough, sore throat, malaise, headache,
muscle  pain)  without  shortness  of  breath,  dyspnea,  or  abnormal  chest  imaging.
Moderate Illness: Individuals who have evidence of lower respiratory disease by clinical
assessment or imaging, and a saturation of oxygen (SpO2) ≥94% on room air at sea
level.  Severe  Illness:  Individuals  who  have  respiratory  frequency  >30  breaths  per
minute, SpO2 <94% on room air at sea level (or, for patients with chronic hypoxemia, a
decrease from baseline of >3%), ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction
of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) <300 mmHg, or lung infiltrates >50%. Critical Illness:
Individuals  who  have  respiratory  failure,  septic  shock,  and/or  multiple  organ
dysfunction. In pediatric patients, radiographic abnormalities are common and, for the
most part, should not be used as the sole criteria to define COVID-19 illness category.
Normal values for respiratory rate also vary with age in children, thus hypoxia should
be  the  primary  criterion  to  define  severe  illness, especially  in  younger  children.  In
situations where the use of a respirator is not required either by the employer or by an
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standard, the employer may still
offer filtering facepiece respirators or permit employees to use their own respirators as
long  as  the  employer  determines  that  such  respirator  use  will  not  in  itself  create  a
hazard.  This  is  considered  voluntary  use  under  the  Respiratory  Protection  Standard.
CDC  encourages  employers  to  permit  workers  to  voluntarily  use  filtering  facepiece
respirators
 like
 N95s.
 If
 an
 employer
 allows
 voluntary
 use
 of
 filtering

facepiece respirators, the employer must provide users with 29 CFR 1910.134 Appendix
D  –  Information  for  Employees  Using  Respirators  When  Not  Required  Under  the
Standard.  See  29  CFR  1910.134(c)(2)  for  additional  requirements  applicable  to
voluntary  respirator  use.  Healthcare  personnel,  both  paid  and  unpaid,  should  be
allowed to bring their own highly protective masks (such as N95 respirators) as long as
the mask does not violate the facility’s safety and health requirements. They should not
be  asked  to  remove  their  more  protective  source  control  device  (a  well-fitting  N95
respirator, for example) for a less protective device (such as a procedure mask) unless
the mask or respirator is visibly soiled, damaged, or hard to breathe through. However,
devices brought from home may not be appropriate for protecting healthcare personnel
from  all  job  hazards,  and  they  should  change  to  recommended  personal  protective
equipment  when  indicated  (for  instance,  before  entering  the  room  of  a  patient
managed with Transmission-Based Precautions). Learn more about the types of masks
and respirators and infection control recommendations for healthcare personnel. CDC
recommends that people visiting healthcare facilities use the most protective form of
source  control  (masks  or  respirators)  that  fits  well  and  will  be  worn  consistently.
Healthcare  facilities  may  choose  to  offer  well-fitting  facemasks  as  a  source  control
option  for  visitors  but  should  allow  the  use  of  a  clean  mask  or  respirator  with  higher
level protection by people who chose that option based on their individual preference.
 Masks and respirators used for source control should be changed if they become visibly
soiled, damaged, or hard to breathe through. Learn more about the types of masks and
respirators  and  infection  control  recommendations  for  healthcare  personnel.  CDC’s
guidance to use NIOSH-approved particulate respirators with N95 filters or higher when
providing care for patients with suspected or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection is based
on the current understanding of SARS-CoV-2 and related respiratory viruses. Facemasks
commonly  used  during  surgical  procedures  will  provide  barrier  protection  against
droplet sprays contacting mucous membranes of the nose and mouth, but they are not

designed to protect wearers from inhaling small particles. NIOSH-approved particulate
respirators  with  N95  filters  or  higher,  such  as  other  disposable  filtering  facepiece
respirators,  powered  air-purifying  respirators  (PAPRs),  and  elastomeric  respirators,
provide  both  barrier  and  respiratory  protection  because  of  their  fit  and  filtration
characteristics. Respirators should be used as part of a respiratory protection program
that  provides  staff  with  medical  evaluations,  training,  and  fit  testing.  Although
facemasks  are  routinely  used  for  the  care  of  patients  with  common  viral  respiratory
infections,  NIOSH-approved  particulate  respirators  with  N95  filters  or  higher  are
routinely  recommended  for  emerging  pathogens  like  SARS  CoV-2,  which  have  the
potential for transmission via small particles, the ability to cause severe infections, and
limited  or  no  treatment  options.  While  the  situation  is  evolving  for  SARS-CoV-2,  CDC
continues  to  recommend  respiratory  protection  while  the  impact  of  new  variants  is
being  assessed.  In  general,  transport  and  movement  of  a  patient  with  suspected  or
confirmed  SARS-CoV-2  infection  outside  of  their  room  should  be  limited  to  medically
essential  purposes.  If  being  transported  outside  of  the  room,  such  as  to  radiology,
healthcare  personnel  (HCP)  in  the  receiving  area  should  be  notified  in  advance  of
transporting  the  patient.  For  transport,  the  patient  should  wear  a  well-fitting  source
control  (if  tolerated)  to  contain  secretions  and  their  body  should  be  covered  with  a
clean sheet. If transport personnel must prepare the patient for transport (e.g., transfer
them to the wheelchair or gurney), transport personnel should wear all recommended
PPE (gloves, a gown, a NIOSH-approved particulate respirator with N95 filters or higher,
and  eye  protection  [i.e.,  goggles  or  disposable  face  shield  that  covers  the  front  and
sides  of  the  face]).  This  is  recommended  because  these  interactions  typically  involve
close,  often  face-to-face,  contact  with  the  patient  in  an  enclosed  space  (e.g.,  patient
room). Once the patient has been transferred to the wheelchair or gurney (and prior to
exiting the room), transporters should remove their gown and gloves and perform hand
hygiene.  The  transporter  should  continue  to  wear  their  respirator.  The  transporter

should also continue to use eye protection  if there is potential that the patient might
not  be  able  to  tolerate  their  well-fitting  source  control  device  for  the  duration  of
transport. Additional PPE should not be required unless there is an anticipated need to
provide  medical  assistance  during  transport  (e.g.,  helping  the  patient  replace  a
dislodged  facemask).  After  arrival  at  their  destination,  receiving  personnel  (e.g.,  in
radiology) and the transporter (if assisting with transfer) should perform hand hygiene
and  wear  all  recommended  PPE.  If  still  wearing  their  original  respirator  and  eye
protection, the transporter should take care to avoid self-contamination when donning
the  remainder  of  the  recommended  PPE.  This  cautious  approach  will  be  refined  and
updated as more information becomes available and as response needs change in the
United  States.  EMS  personnel  should  wear  all  recommended  PPE  because  they  are
providing  direct  medical  care  and  are  in  close  contact  with  the  patient  for  longer
periods  of  time.  In  general,  minimize  the  number  of  personnel  entering  the  room  of
patients who have SARS-CoV-2 infection. Healthcare facilities should consider assigning
daily  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  high-touch  surfaces  to  nursing  personnel  who  will
already be in the room providing care to the patient. If this responsibility is assigned to
EVS personnel, they should wear all recommended PPE when in the room. PPE should
be  removed  upon  leaving  the  room,  immediately  followed  by  performance  of  hand
hygiene. After discharge, terminal cleaning can be performed by EVS personnel. If not
wearing  all  recommended  PPE,  they  should  delay  entry  into  the  room  until  time  has
elapsed  for  enough  air  changes  to  remove  potentially  infectious  particles.  After  this
time  has  elapsed,  EVS  personnel  can  enter  the  room  and  should  wear   a  gown  and
gloves  when  performing  terminal  cleaning;  well-fitting  source  control  might  also  be
recommended. Eye protection and a facemask (if not already worn for source control)
should  be  added  if  splashes  or  sprays  during  cleaning  and  disinfection  activities  are
anticipated or otherwise required based on the selected cleaning products. Shoe covers
are  not  recommended  at  this  time  for  SARS-CoV-2.  Some  procedures  performed  on

patients  are  more  likely  to  generate  higher  concentrations  of  infectious  respiratory
aerosols  than  coughing,  sneezing,  talking,  or  breathing.  These  aerosol  generating
procedures (AGPs) potentially put healthcare personnel and others at an increased risk
for pathogen exposure and infection. Development of a comprehensive list of AGPs for
healthcare settings has not been possible, due to limitations in available data on which
procedures  may  generate  potentially  infectious  aerosols  and  the  challenges  in
determining  if  reported  transmissions  during  AGPs  are  due  to  aerosols  or  other
exposures. There is neither expert consensus, nor sufficient supporting data, to create a
definitive and comprehensive list of AGPs for healthcare settings. Commonly performed
medical procedures that are often considered AGPs, or that might create uncontrolled
respiratory secretions, include: Based on limited available data, it is uncertain whether
aerosols  generated  from  some  procedures  may  be  infectious,  such  as:  *Aerosols
generated  by  nebulizers  are  derived  from  medication  in  the  nebulizer.  It  is  uncertain
whether  potential  associations  between  performing  this  common  procedure  and
increased risk of infection might be due to aerosols generated by the procedure or due
to  increased  contact  between  those  administering  the  nebulized  medication  and
infected patients. References related to aerosol generating procedures: Tran K, Cimon
K, Severn M, Pessoa-Silva CL, Conly J (2012) Aerosol Generating Procedures and Risk of
Transmission  of  Acute  Respiratory  Infections  to  Healthcare  Workers:  A  Systematic
Review.
 PLoS
 ONE
7(4);
 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3338532/#!po=72.2222external
iconexternal icon). The amount of time that the air inside an examination room remains
potentially  infectious  depends  on  a  number  of  factors  including  the  size  of  the  room,
the number of air changes per hour, how long the patient was in the room, if the patient
was  coughing  or  sneezing,  and  if  an  aerosol-generating  procedure  was  performed.  In
general, it is recommended to restrict HCP and patients without PPE from entering the
room  until  sufficient  time  has  elapsed  for  enough  air  changes  to  remove  potentially

infectious  particles.  General  guidance  is  available  on  clearance  rates  under  differing
ventilation conditions. In addition to ensuring sufficient time for enough air changes to
remove  potentially  infectious  particles,  HCP  should  clean  and  disinfect  environmental
surfaces  and  shared  equipment  before  the  room  is  used  for  another  patient.
Preprocedural  mouth  rinses  (PPMR)  with  an  antimicrobial  product  (e.g.  chlorhexidine
gluconate,
 povidone-iodine)  have  been
 shown
 to
 reduce  the  level
 of  oral
microorganisms in aerosols and spatter generated during dental procedures. Evidence
from  recent  studies  suggest  that  some  PPMR  solutions  are  efficacious  and  may
temporarily decrease the viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in the oral cavity. Targeted clinical
studies are currently underway to learn more about the potential role of PPMR and the
prevention  of  SARS-CoV-2  transmission.  Because  more  research  is  needed  to
demonstrate the effectiveness of PPMR in preventing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the
dental setting, CDC does not provide a recommendation for or against the use of PPMR
before  dental  procedures.  However,  if  PPMR  are  used  before  dental  procedures,  they
should  be  used  as  an  adjunct  to  other  infection  prevention  and  control  measures
recommended  to  decrease  the  spread  of  infectious  diseases  in  dental  settings.  Such
measures  include  delaying  elective  dental  procedures  for  patients  with  suspected  or
confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection until they are no longer infectious or for patients who
meet criteria for quarantine until they complete quarantine. Updates as of September
23,  2022  Updates  as  of  February  2,  2022  Due  to  concerns  about  increased
transmissibility of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant, this guidance is being updated to
enhance  protection  for  healthcare  personnel,  patients,  and  visitors  and  to  address
concerns  about  potential  impacts  on  the  healthcare  system  given  a  surge  in
SARS-CoV-2 infections. These updates will be refined as additional information becomes
available  to  inform  recommended  actions.  Updates  as  of  September  10,  2021  As  of
February 10, 2021 As of December 14, 2020 As of November 4, 2020 N95 and NIOSH
Approved are certification marks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

(HHS) registered in the United States and several international jurisdictions. To receive
email updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/infection-control-recommendations.html
