Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Previous updates This interim guidance is intended to assist
with the following: Guidance addressing recommended infection prevention and control
practices including use of source control by HCP is available in Infection Control: Severe
acute  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  2  (SARS-CoV-2)  Employers  should  be  aware
that other local, territorial, tribal, state, and federal requirements may apply, including
those promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). HCP
with even mild symptoms of COVID-19 should be prioritized for viral testing with nucleic
acid or antigen detection assays. When testing a person with symptoms of COVID-19,
negative results from at least one viral test  indicate that the person most likely does
not have an active SARS-CoV-2 infection at the time the sample was collected. For HCP
who  were  initially  suspected  of  having  COVID-19  but,  following  evaluation,  another
diagnosis is suspected or confirmed, return-to-work decisions should be based on their
other suspected or confirmed diagnoses. The following are criteria to determine when
HCP with SARS-CoV-2 infection could return to work and are influenced by severity of
symptoms  and  presence  of  immunocompromising  conditions.  After  returning  to  work,
HCP should self-monitor for symptoms and seek re-evaluation from occupational health
if symptoms recur or worsen.  If symptoms recur (e.g., rebound) these HCP should be
restricted  from  work  and  follow  recommended  practices  to  prevent  transmission  to
others  (e.g.,  use  of  well-fitting  source  control)  until  they  again  meet  the  healthcare
criteria  below  to  return  to  work  unless  an  alternative  diagnosis  is  identified.  HCP
with mild to moderate illness who are not  moderately to severely immunocompromised
could  return  to  work  after  the  following  criteria  have  been  met:  *Either  a  NAAT
(molecular) or antigen test may be used.  If using an antigen test, HCP should have a
negative test obtained on day 5 and again 48 hours later HCP who were asymptomatic

throughout  their  infection  and  are  not  moderately  to  severely  immunocompromised
could  return  to  work  after  the  following  criteria  have  been  met:  *Either  a  NAAT
(molecular) or antigen test may be used.  If using an antigen test, HCP should have a
negative  test  obtained  on  day  5  and  again  48  hours  later  HCP  with  severe  to  critical
illness who are not moderately to severely immunocompromised could return to work
after the following criteria have been met: The exact criteria that determine which HCP
will shed replication-competent virus for longer periods are not known. Disease severity
factors  and  the  presence  of  immunocompromising  conditions  should  be  considered
when  determining  the  appropriate  duration  for  specific  HCP.  For  a  summary  of  the
literature, refer to Preventing Spread of Respiratory Viruses When You’re Sick. HCP who
are  moderately  to  severely  immunocompromised  may  produce  replication-competent
virus  beyond  20  days  after  symptom  onset  or,  for  those  who  were  asymptomatic
throughout their infection, the date of their first positive viral test. Test-based strategy
HCP who are symptomatic could return to work after the following criteria are met: HCP
who  are  not  symptomatic  could  return  to  work  after  the  following  criteria  are  met:
Exposures that might require testing and/or restriction from work can occur both while
at  work  and  in  the  community.   Higher-risk  exposures  generally  involve  exposure  of
HCP’s eyes, nose, or mouth to material potentially containing SARS-CoV-2, particularly
if  these  HCP  were  present  in  the  room  for  an  aerosol-generating  procedure.  Other
exposures not classified as higher-risk, including having body contact with the patient
(e.g.,  rolling  the  patient)  without  gown  or  gloves,  may  impart  some  risk  for
transmission,  particularly  if  hand  hygiene  is  not  performed  and  HCP  then  touch  their
eyes, nose, or mouth. When classifying potential exposures, specific factors associated
with these exposures (e.g., quality of ventilation, use of PPE and source control) should
be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.  These factors might raise or lower the level of
risk;  interventions,  including  restriction  from  work,  can  be  adjusted  based  on  the
estimated  risk  for  transmission.  For  the  purposes  of  this  guidance,  higher-risk

exposures  are  classified  as  HCP  who  had  prolonged1  close  contact2  with  a  patient,
visitor,  or  HCP  with  confirmed  SARS-CoV-2  infection3  and:  Following  a  higher-risk
exposure,  HCP  should:  Work  restriction  is  not  necessary  for  most  asymptomatic  HCP
following a higher-risk exposure, regardless of vaccination status.  Examples of when
work  restriction  may  be  considered  include:  If  work  restriction  is  recommended,  HCP
could return to work after either of the following time periods: In addition to above: HCP
with travel or community exposures should consult their occupational health program
for  guidance  on  need  for  work  restrictions.  In  general,  HCP  who  have  had  prolonged
close  contact  with  someone  with  SARS-CoV-2  in  the  community  (e.g.,  household
contacts)  should  be  managed  as  described  for  higher-risk  occupational  exposures
above.  Footnotes:  Healthcare  Personnel  (HCP):  HCP  refers  to  all  paid  and  unpaid
persons  serving  in  healthcare  settings  who  have  the  potential  for  direct  or  indirect
exposure  to  patients  or  infectious  materials,  including  body  substances  (e.g.,  blood,
tissue,  and  specific  body  fluids);  contaminated  medical  supplies,  devices,  and
equipment;  contaminated  environmental  surfaces;  or  contaminated  air.  HCP  include,
but are not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, nurses, nursing assistants,
home  healthcare  personnel,  physicians,  technicians,  therapists,  phlebotomists,
pharmacists, dental healthcare personnel, students and trainees, contractual staff not
employed by the healthcare facility, and persons not directly involved in patient care,
but  who  could  be  exposed  to  infectious  agents  that  can  be  transmitted  in  the
healthcare  setting  (e.g.,  clerical,  dietary,  environmental  services,  laundry,  security,
engineering
 and
 facilities
 management,
 administrative,
 billing,
 and
 volunteer
personnel).  For  this  guidance,  HCP  does  not  include  clinical  laboratory  personnel.
Immunocompromised:   For  the  purposes  of  this  guidance,  moderate  to  severely
immunocompromising conditions include, but might not be limited to, those defined in
the Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines. The studies used to
inform this guidance did not clearly define “severe” or “critical” illness. This guidance

has taken a conservative approach to define these categories. Although not developed
to inform decisions about duration of Transmission-Based Precautions, the definitions in
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines are one option
for  defining  severity  of  illness  categories.  The  highest  level  of  illness  severity
experienced  by  the  patient  at  any  point  in  their  clinical  course  should  be  used  when
determining  the  duration  of  Transmission-Based  Precautions.  Mild  Illness:  Individuals
who have any of the various signs and symptoms of COVID-19 (e.g., fever, cough, sore
throat,  malaise,  headache,  muscle  pain)  without  shortness  of  breath,  dyspnea,  or
abnormal  chest  imaging.  Moderate  Illness:  Individuals  who  have  evidence  of  lower
respiratory  disease,  by  clinical  assessment  or  imaging,  and  a  saturation  of  oxygen
(SpO2) ≥94% on room air at sea level. Severe Illness: Individuals who have respiratory
frequency  >30  breaths  per  minute,  SpO2  <94%  on  room  air  at  sea  level  (or,  for
patients  with  chronic  hypoxemia,  a  decrease  from  baseline  of  >3%),  ratio  of  arterial
partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) <300 mmHg, or
lung  infiltrates  >50%.  Critical  Illness:  Individuals  who  have  respiratory  failure,  septic
shock,  and/or  multiple  organ  dysfunction.  In  pediatric  patients,  radiographic
abnormalities  are  common  and,  for  the  most  part,  should  not  be  used  as  the  sole
criteria to define COVID-19 illness category. Normal values for respiratory rate also vary
with  age  in  children;  thus,  hypoxia  should  be  the  primary  criterion  to  define  severe
illness, especially in younger children. Fever: For the purpose of this guidance, fever is
defined  as  subjective  fever  (feeling  feverish)  or  a  measured  temperature  of  100.0oF
(37.8oC) or higher. Note that fever may be intermittent or may not be present in some
people,  such  as  those  who  are  elderly,  immunocompromised,  or  taking  certain
fever-reducing  medications  (e.g.,  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  [NSAIDS]).
Facemask:  OSHA  defines  facemasks  as  “a  surgical,  medical  procedure,  dental,  or
isolation mask that is FDA-cleared, authorized by an FDA EUA, or offered or distributed
as  described  in  an  FDA  enforcement  policy.  Facemasks  may  also  be  referred  to  as

‘medical procedure masks’.”  Facemasks should be used according to product labeling
and local, state, and federal requirements. FDA-cleared surgical masks are designed to
protect  against  splashes  and  sprays  and  are  prioritized  for  use  when  such  exposures
are  anticipated,  including  surgical  procedures.  Other  facemasks,  such  as  some
procedure  masks,  which  are  typically  used  for  isolation  purposes,  may  not  provide
protection against splashes and sprays. Respirator: A respirator is a personal protective
device  that  is  worn  on  the  face,  covers  at  least  the  nose  and  mouth,  and  is  used  to
reduce  the  wearer’s  risk  of  inhaling  hazardous  airborne  particles  (including  dust
particles  and  infectious  agents),  gases,  or  vapors.  Respirators  are  certified  by
CDC/NIOSH, including those intended for use in healthcare. Cloth mask: Textile (cloth)
covers that are intended  primarily  for source control  in  the community.  They  are not
personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  appropriate  for  use  by  healthcare  personnel.
Guidance on design, use, and maintenance of cloth masks is available. As of December
23, 2021 Due to concerns about increased transmissibility of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron
variant, this guidance is being updated to enhance protection for healthcare personnel
(HCP), patients, and visitors, and to address concerns about potential impacts on the
healthcare  system  given  a  surge  of  SARS-CoV-2  infections.  These  updates  will  be
refined as additional information becomes available to inform recommended actions. As
of September 10, 2021 The interim guidance was updated to: As of March 10, 2021 As
of  February  16,  2021:  Updates  as  of  Dec  14,  2020:  To  receive  email  updates  about
COVID-19, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html
