Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
IMPLEMENTATION EVALUATION — Volume 21 — March 7, 2024 Suggested citation
for  this  article:  Wood  M,  Robles  B,  Beltran  J,  Kuo  T.  Integrating  Healthy  Nutrition
Standards  and  Practices  Into  Food  Service  Contracting  in  a  Large  US  County
Government.
 Prev
 Chronic
 Dis
 2024;21:230220.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd21.230220. PEER REVIEWED What is already known about
this topic? Integrating healthy nutrition standards and practices into the procurement
process  of  an  institutional  food  service  is  a  promising  public  health  strategy  for
improving  nutrition.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  We  describe  how  a  large  county
government operationalized a model practice to integrate nutritional requirements into
its procurement process with food vendors. What are the implications for public health
practice?  Healthy  nutrition  standards  and  practices  can  change  the  quality  of  food
served. Although implementation of such standards is feasible, organizational barriers
exist  across  the  various  phases  of  the  process.  Purpose  and  Objectives  Although
considered a promising model of practice, integrating healthy nutrition standards and
practices into a large county government’s contracting process with food vendors has
not  been  widely  described  in  empirical  literature.  We  conducted  an  implementation
evaluation  project  to  address  this  gap.  Intervention  Approach  County  of  Los  Angeles
food  vendors  provide  food  or  meals  annually  to  more  than  100,000  employees  and
millions of clients and visitors. In 2011, the County of Los Angeles Board of Supervisors
adopted a policy to integrate healthy nutrition standards and practices into its requests
for proposals (RFPs) and contracting process with food vendors. The policy required all
contracts awarded to adhere to these new standards. Evaluation Methods In 2011, the
Los Angeles County Department of Public Health (DPH) began reviewing RFPs for food

services for county departments that procured, served, or sold food. From 2011 through
2021,  DPH  applied  a  4-pronged  formative–evaluative  approach  to  help  county
departments  implement  the  Board  of  Supervisors  policy  and  ensure  that  nutritional
requirements  were  appropriately  integrated  into  all  RFPs  for  new  and  renewing
contracts with food vendors. We focused our evaluation on understanding the process
and  tracking  the  progress  of  this  policy  intervention.  Our  evaluation  included  13  key
informant interviews, a 2-part survey, reviews of contract data, and synthesis of lessons
learned. Results Based on reviews and subsequent actions taken on more than 20 RFPs,
DPH  successfully  assisted  7  county  departments  to  incorporate  healthy  nutrition
standards  and  practices  into  their  food  vendor  contracts.  Implementation  of  the  food
policy encountered several challenges, including staffing and training constraints and a
limited  infrastructure.  An  iterative  approach  to  program  improvement  facilitated  the
process.  Implications  for  Public  Health  Although  the  model  for  integrating  healthy
nutrition standards and practices into a government contracting process is promising,
more work is needed to make it less resource-intensive and to increase user buy-in. Top
Recent  national  data  suggest  that  most  of  the  US  population  has  or  is  at  risk  of
developing chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, or heart disease (1). Data
from regional population health surveys point to a similar pattern at the local level. In
2021,  33.5%  of  Los  Angeles  County  adults  reported  ever  being  diagnosed  with
hypertension or prehypertension and 12.1% with diabetes (2). These and other chronic
conditions  represent  a  major  public  health  problem  that  has  substantial  social  and
economic costs (3). Diet plays a central and critical role in the development of chronic
diseases (4,5). Diets high in sugar, sodium, saturated fat, and trans-fatty acids and the
nutrients and ingredients in processed foods are linked to chronic ailments (6–8). The
Dietary  Guidelines  for  Americans  (DGA)  encourage  increased  intake  of  fruits  and
vegetables,  whole  grains,  dairy  foods,  and  lean  proteins;  they  also  encourage  limited
consumption of foods high in sodium, added sugars, and saturated fat (9). Since 2010,

federal and local governments have increased efforts to integrate DGA-recommended
nutrition  standards  and  behavioral  economics  strategies  into  their  food  service
contracting processes (10–12). At the federal level, nutrition standards are derived from
DGA and form the foundation of the Food Service Guidelines for Federal Facilities of the
US  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  and  the  US  General  Services
Administration.  These  guidelines  are  intended  for  government-operated  food  services
and, as a model, highlight the importance of implementing standards in food service as
a  way  to  enhance  population-level  nutrition  and  public  health  (13).  Although  long
considered an innovative and promising model of practice (14,15), limited literature has
been  published  on  the  implementation  of  such  food  service  requirements  through
institutional  or  governmental  policy.  Top  The  objective  of  our  implementation
evaluation was to address this gap in research and practice by describing how a large
county government integrated healthy nutrition standards and practices into the food
service contracting process of its departments. We present practice-based experiences
and  lessons  learned  from  the  County  of  Los  Angeles  in  implementing  such  a  policy,
from  2011  through  2021.  With  the  county’s  extensive  reach,  which  included  over
100,000  employees  and  millions  of  annual  clients  and  visitors,  this  decade-long  food
policy  had  the  potential  to  generate  significant  health  effects  across  the  diverse
communities  it  served.  Top  In  response  to  the  growing  prevalence  of  obesity  and
related chronic diseases, particularly among its employees, in March 2011 the County
of  Los  Angeles  Board  of  Supervisors  adopted  an  organizational  policy  on  food  quality
entitled Healthy Food Promotion in LA County Food Services Contracts (16). This policy
called  for  the  Los  Angeles  County  Department  of  Public  Health  (DPH)  to  ensure  that
healthy nutrition standards and practices were incorporated into all county food service
and  vending  solicitations  or  requests  for  proposals  across  all  the  government’s  37
departments.  DPH  designed  a  review  procedure  to  ensure  that  these  nutrition
requirements (eg, food purchasing and serving standards for fruit, vegetables, grains,

protein,  dairy,  sodium,  sugar)  —  including  evidence-based  behavioral  economics
strategies  —  were  accurately  incorporated  and  faithfully  executed  in  contracts  with
food vendors (17). The Board of Supervisors landmark policy remains active to this day.
A  food  policy  and  procurement  (FPP)  team  in  DPH  continues  to  provide  support  and
serve  as  this  implementation  program’s  subject  matter  expert  and  lead.  The  team  is
presently  tasked  with  reviewing  all  food-related  RFPs  initiated  under  the  county
government’s  umbrella;  it  can  make  recommendations  on  nutrition  standards  and
practices and on how each department should conduct business with their food vendors
(Figure). 
Figure.
Timeline  of  the  Los  Angeles  County  Department  of  Public  Health  Food  Policy  and
Procurement  (FPP)  team’s  implementation  process  for  reviewing  and  integrating
nutrition standards and behavioral economics practices into more than 20 requests for
proposals (RFPs) and food service contracts with food vendors conducting business with
the County of Los Angeles, from 2011 to 2021. Department A refers to the first adopter
of  the  March  2011  board  policy.  Department  B  refers  to  a  second  department  that
integrated nutrition standards and practices into its vending machine contract with its
selected food supplier. [A text version of this figure is available.] Top In our evaluation
of the implementation of the Board of Supervisors policy, we sought to 1) summarize
the  contracting  process  that  allowed  the  FPP  team  to  integrate  healthy  nutrition
standards  and  practices  into  the  county’s  RFPs  for  new  and  renewing  food  vendor
contracts, 2) review and document contents of the reviewed RFPs and their contracts
from 2011 through 2021, and 3) share practice-based experiences and lessons learned
from  the  implementation  of  the  board’s  historic  policy.  The  FPP  team  applied  a
formative, multimethod, evaluative approach to achieve these goals and captured the
progress and nuances of implementing the food policy. This approach consisted of 1) an
organizational landscape analysis through key informant interviews, 2) a 2-part survey

of county departments, 3) a document review of county food vendor RFPs and resulting
contracts, and 4) a synthesis of lessons learned from implementing the policy. As an
example,  in  2012  (after  the  board’s  policy  was  adopted  but  before  the  policy  was
implemented), the FPP team conducted an organizational landscape analysis with key
informants to identify and better understand the types of contracts covered under the
Board  of  Supervisors  policy.  This  assessment  included  disseminating  a  memorandum
requiring each of the 37 county departments affected by the policy to inform DPH of
whether  they  operated  any  food  services.  “Food  vendor”  was  defined  as  any  vendor
who prepares, sells, distributes, or serves food for the county. Key informant interviews
were  then  conducted  with  representatives  from  departments  that  reported  they
purchased,  distributed,  or  sold  food.  To  gauge  implementation  progress,  in  2018  the
FPP  team  administered  a  2-part  survey.  The  first  part  was  emailed  to  selected
participants from the county’s 37 departments. The second part was administered only
to  departments  that  indicated  they  operated  food  service  venues  or  programs.  A
document  review  of  county  food  vendor  RFPs  and  their  contracts,  including  a  case
assessment of an early county department adopter, was carried out to learn about the
implementation  process.  Finally,  a  synthesis  of  lessons  learned  from  the  field  was
compiled  to  inform  future  policy  implementation  and  refinements.  We  conducted  a
landscape analysis to 1) support the implementation of the Board of Supervisors policy,
2)  engage  key  stakeholders  to  better  understand  the  county’s  diverse  food
environments (where food was prepared, served, or sold), and 3) inform the resources
and planning needed to comply with the food policy. County departments were initially
sent a memorandum asking them to complete a brief questionnaire indicating whether
their department purchased, distributed, or sold food. Departments that indicated they
did were then asked to designate a department contact who could participate in a key
informant telephone interview with the FPP team. The team then scheduled interviews
with  the  designated  department  contacts.  Interviews  were  carried  out  by  using  an

interview guide informed by data and information from the literature (what was known
about  food  policy  adoption  and  implementation  at  the  time)  (15,17).  The  goal  of  the
interviews was to gather information from county departments before implementation
of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  policy.  Information  gathered  consisted  of  types  of  food
venues and populations served by each of the departments; current contracts, such as
the  number  of  agreements  and  food  vendors  each  department  was  handling;  the
existing nutrition guidelines or practices the department followed; the number of meals
the department prepared, sold, or served across their food venues and environments;
and any challenges or barriers encountered with purchasing or preparing healthy food
items. Each interview took about 1 hour. The FPP team developed the 2-part survey in
2018 and sent it to all 37 county departments. The survey’s primary goal was to better
understand the departments’ approach to conducting business with their food vendors
and to identify any major changes that may have occurred in their approach since the
adoption of the 2011 Board of Supervisors policy. The first part of the survey was a brief
questionnaire designed to collect information on 1) each department’s name, number
of  employees,  and  the  physical  and  mailing  addresses  for  their  headquarters;  2)  the
name  and  contact  information  of  the  staff  member(s)  who  would  represent  each
department and complete the survey; and 3) whether each department at the time of
the  survey  distributed,  sold,  or  served  food  or  beverages  to  county  employees,  their
dependents,  or  visitors.  The  questionnaire  was  web-based  and  programmed  by  using
the SurveyMonkey platform (SurveyMonkey). The first part of the survey was emailed to
all 37 departments, asking the appropriate contact or representative to complete the
questionnaire. The second part was sent to departments that indicated they prepared,
sold, or served food or beverages at their facilities to get further details about their food
service environments (eg, types of venues, types of contracts, populations served, food
service operation characteristics). Data and information obtained from interviews and
the survey were reviewed and synthesized as lessons learned or field-tested practices

(Table  1).  These  results  are  currently  being  used  to  update  and  refine  policy
implementation efforts. With results from the key informant interviews, and subsequent
findings from the 2-part survey, the FPP team developed a document review procedure
to streamline the process of examining each food service RFP. These results helped the
team plan for and update the overall review process, by 1) categorizing the types of
food  venues  operating  in  the  county,  2)  gaining  a  better  understanding  of  the
population  served  by  each  contract,  3)  determining  whether  a  department  was  using
existing  nutrition  standards,  4)  documenting  the  implementation  challenges  each
department  encountered,  and  5)  learning  how  best  to  build  policy  implementation
capacity (eg, tailored technical assistance, support tools) across the county. The review
procedure  has  been  refined  iteratively  over  the  past  10  years  to  improve  the
implementation of the Board of Supervisors policy. Since the policy’s adoption in 2011,
the FPP team has reviewed and paved the way for 7 county departments to incorporate
healthy  nutrition  standards  and  practices  into  21  food  service  RFPs;  most  of  the
resulting  contracts  were  successfully  executed.  For  each  RFP,  the  review  focused  on
adherence  to  the  county’s  recommended  nutrition  standards  and  practices  and  the
factors  that  may  have  facilitated  or  impeded  the  execution  of  these  requirements
(Table  2).  These  factors  included  vendor  readiness,  the  feasibility  of  standardizing
nutrition quality, types of contracts and timelines (ie, new or renewing), and types of
food  service  settings  or  environments  encountered  (ie,  distributive  meal  programs,
institutionalized meal programs, concession stands, worksite cafeterias, restaurants, or
vending machines). The review also provided an opportunity for the FPP team to make
recommendations regarding contract language that focused on facilitating the feasible
integration and operationalization of healthy nutrition standards and practices. In most
cases, departments accepted the FPP team’s recommendations. The implementation of
healthy nutrition standards and practices has evolved over the past 10 years, especially
for  environments  like  cafeterias,  cafés,  and  concessions.  The  integration  of  these

standards has become more venue-specific and often requires careful consideration of
where  the  food  is  being  sold  or  served.  Making  this  distinction  is  important  because
where the food is being sold (cafés, regular food stands) may be quite different from
where meals are being served (eg, county’s detention facilities, no-cost or reduced-cost
meal  programs).  Based  on  these  lessons  learned,  and  the  latest  nutrition  science,  in
2020 the FPP team revised its DPH Nutrition Standards for Prepared Foods, Snacks, and
Beverages. Ten years of lessons learned from the various RFPs, such as what facilitated
the  policy  implementation  and  the  challenges  encountered  during  implementation,
were  documented  and  synthesized  by  the  FPP  team.  These  were  used  to  build  a
comprehensive  compendium  (inventory)  of  the  strategies  used  to  integrate  healthy
nutrition standards and practices into the county’s food vendor contracting process. A
series  of  brainstorming  meetings  based  on  the  FPP  team’s  implementation  and
evaluation  findings  were  convened  internally  by  the  team  throughout  the  policy
implementation  period  to  develop,  establish,  and  periodically  refine  the  policy
objectives,  nutrition  and  practice  recommendations,  and  the  review  procedure  that
aided  the  processing  of  the  RFPs.  Top  In  2012,  for  the  organizational  landscape,  28
(76%)  of  the  37  county  departments  responded  to  the  initial  DPH  memorandum
requesting  information  from  departments  on  whether  they  purchased,  distributed,  or
sold food. Thirteen departments that indicated in their response that they purchased,
distributed, or sold food were subsequently interviewed. Twenty-six (70%) of the county
departments  participated  in  the  first  part  of  the  2018  survey.  A  total  of  34
representatives,  1  to  2  per  department,  completed  the  questionnaire.  More  than  half
(53.0%)  of  the  respondents  were  identified  as  being  an  administrative  deputy  or  an
administrative  or  section  manager.  Of  these  26  departments  that  participated  in  the
first  part  of  the  survey,  only  15  identified  as  distributing,  selling,  or  serving  food  to
county  employees,  dependent  populations,  or  visitors.  All  15  departments  completed
the  questionnaire.  Results  of  the  second  part  of  the  survey  indicated  that  each

department spent an average of $2,808,340 per year on food and beverages; the total
annual  spending  across  all  departments  ranged  from  $500  to  $27,000,000.  Most
(66.7%)
 indicated
 they
 purchased
 food
 and
 beverages
 internally
 for
department-sponsored meetings and events. About half (53.3%) reported they offered
food  at  no  or  low  cost  to  community  members  and  to  those  who  depended  on  food
programs  such  as  CalFresh  (Supplemental  Nutrition  Assistance  Program)  and  the
National School Lunch Program. Less than a third (25.6%) reported they operated their
own food service (ie, via their own department staff). More than half (53.3%) reported
contracting most of their food services needs to external companies such as Aramark,
Morrison  Healthcare,  or  Sodexo.  Although  less  than  half  (46.7%)  indicated  their
department  offered  healthy  foods  (eg,  fruit,  vegetables,  whole  grains,  minimally
processed foods), about 60% had a registered dietician on staff who either worked for
the department or for the contracted food vendor. Based on reviews of more than 20
food-related  RFPs  issued  from  2011  through  2021,  the  FPP  team  drew  several
takeaways  and  lessons  learned  from  the  county’s  effort  to  implement  the  Board  of
Supervisors policy. For example, the reviews provided information and pointed to key
places in the county’s RFP and contracting process where standards and best practices
could  be  reasonably  incorporated  without  leading  to  costly  delays  or  issues  with
execution of the contracts. The resulting 4-phase contracting framework provided the
FPP  team  with  a  roadmap  to  guide  implementation  decisions,  inform  strategy
selections, provide an illustrative case example, and discuss implementation facilitators
and challenges. The addition or integration of evidence-based nutrition standards and
practices into the county’s food service RFP and contracting process for food vendors
was lengthier and more resource-intensive than originally anticipated. For example, the
FPP team reviewed more than 20 county RFPs and related documents on food services
and food procurement at the beginning of policy implementation and continued to do
so throughout the 10 years to keep pace with new and renewing contract development.

For renewals, many contracts had expired and RFPs were subsequently reissued after
the board policy was adopted. The RFP process across all departments turned out to be
less  uniform  than  initially  anticipated,  requiring  additional  time  to  gain  a  better
understanding  of  the  differences  and  similarities  between  departments.  For  instance,
government food programs operated by the County of Los Angeles are often governed
by existing local, state, or federal laws (eg, Title 15, National School Lunch Program).
Adding new standards and practices required careful review of these existing laws so
that the new Board of Supervisors policy did not disrupt, contradict, or exceed existing
legal requirements. To develop the framework on contracting (Table 3), the FPP team
worked collaboratively with at least 7 county departments to document and understand
the  nuanced  workflows  that  governed  the  various  RFPs.  The  FPP  team  used  this
information to conceptualize the county’s food service contracting process as a 4-phase
solicitation  and  contract  execution  procedure.  This  procedure  incorporated  healthy
nutrition standards and practices strategically at places where they could be inserted or
implemented  along  the  continuum  of  actions,  taking  into  account  each  department’s
needs  and  considerations  (eg,  program  readiness,  laws  a  department  had  to  follow,
how large or small food vendors worked with each department). The 4 phases are as
follows:  1)  the  development  of  the  RFP  (an  optimal  time  for  including  standards  and
practices as part of the proposed scope of work for each contract), 2) the release of the
RFP  (an  opportune  time  to  educate  prospective  vendors  about  the  required  nutrition
standards and practices), 3) the evaluation of vendor proposals (an important leverage
point where information about complying with the Board of Supervisors policy could be
emphasized),  and  4)  the  selection  of  the  food  vendor  (timepoint  where  the  final
execution of the contract allowed for the codification of the healthy nutrition standards
and  practices,  that  is,  standards  and  practices  that  could  be  required  in  the  food
vendor’s contractual agreement). On average, each contract review — activities such
as  reviewing  the  RFP,  developing  nutrition  standards  and  contract  language,

corresponding  with  county  departments  —  took  approximately  2  to  3  weeks.  In  the
early  stages  of  policy  implementation,  reviews  took  much  longer,  because  the
implementation  program  was  new  and  the  FPP  team  was  still  building  the  program’s
infrastructure. Reviews of RFPs for low- or no-cost meal programs, and food served to
populations  that  are  dependent  on  meals,  such  as  those  in  detention  facilities,  often
required additional time and extensive review. This was due to the need to ensure that
the proposed standards and practices adhered to requirements set by local, state, and
federal laws. The contract for cafeteria and vending machine vendors of the first county
department to adopt the board’s policy, referred to in this article as Department A, was
an example of how the FPP team worked with one of the county’s largest departments
to  introduce  and  embed  healthy  nutrition  standards  and  practices  into  their  food
service RFP and resulting contract. Department A’s on-site cafeteria sold food to county
employees  and  visitors  at  their  department  headquarters.  Their  RFP  was  the  first
solicitation  the  FPP  team  worked  on;  the  team’s  review  took  place  shortly  after  the
enactment  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  policy.  As  the  first  RFP  to  be  reviewed,  the
sequence of steps the FPP team took to move the process forward was iterative, and a
learning experience. The workflow required the development of an entirely new set of
contract  language  that  delineated  required  nutrient  standards  and  limits  to  follow  as
well  as  the  “dos  and  don’ts”  of  practices  for  purchasing  food  under  these  new
standards. Language specified how signage and behavioral economics strategies should
be  used  in  the  cafeteria.  Some  of  the  recommended  standards  and  practices  were
menu labeling, requiring at least 2 healthy entrée selections and 2 healthy side options
on  the  menu,  using  pricing  incentives,  specifying  nutritional  requirements  for
combination meals, developing and implementing a sodium reduction plan, setting size
limits for sugar-sweetened beverages, and requiring 25% of snack options to be healthy
(ie, low in sugar and sodium). Many of the standards and practices were also applied to
vending  machines;  a  separate  nutrition  policy,  the  County  of  Los  Angeles  Vending

Machine Nutrition Policy (19), guides nutritional quality of foods in vending machines. A
half-decade  after  the  initial  contract  was  developed,  Department  A’s  cafeteria  and
vending machine services contract expired, and a new RFP cycle was initiated in 2017.
This new cycle gave the FPP team an opportunity to apply lessons learned from the first
contracting process to streamline and improve the second RFP (Table 2). For example,
a major challenge with Department A’s RFP development was the need to draft contract
language  where  allowable  nutrient  limits  were  clearly  delineated  and  could  be  easily
enforced, but at the same time, flexible enough to account for unanticipated problems
in putting the program into practice. Standards had to address clientele dissatisfaction
with  the  food  or  a  decline  in  sales  volume  as  a  result  of  changes  in  food  options,
account  for  supply  chain  and  workflow  issues  that  were  barriers  for  food  vendors
seeking  to  comply  with  the  recommended  standards  and  practices  and  consider
potentially higher costs of food low in sodium or sugar. Sorting through many of these
challenges  was  an  invaluable  learning  experience  for  the  FPP  team.  Department  A’s
experience built the FPP team’s confidence and gave it the opportunity to experiment
with the review procedure and with the standards and practices that were ultimately
recommended  to  improve  the  nutritional  quality  of  foods  offered  by  selected  food
vendors  from  each  of  the  RFPs.  In  making  these  nutritional  recommendations,  we
synthesized and applied lessons learned from integrating nutritional requirements into
Department  A’s  and  other  county  departments’  contractual  processes  with  food
vendors (Table 4). The Board of Supervisors policy played a pivotal role in prioritizing
and  institutionalizing  nutritional  quality  in  the  food  service  contracting  process.  The
policy established a mindset that access to healthy food should be the norm in practice.
The  policy  initiated  a  process  in  which  DPH’s  review  of  food-related  RFPs  and  their
contracts became an accepted routine practice, standardizing how the county conducts
business with food vendors. Early in the implementation process and shortly after the
policy’s  adoption,  efforts  were  made  to  understand  the  solicitation  process  of  each

county  department.  This  understanding  acknowledged  that  departmental  protocols
might  differ,  and  that  certain  department  staff  and  food  vendors  might  need  to  be
educated  about  the  RFPs  and  contracts.  Key  insights  from  this  phase  guided  the  FPP
team  as  they  mapped  the  necessary  implementation  steps  to  translate  the  board’s
policy  into  practice.  In  the  early  phases  of  working  with  RFPs,  the  FPP  team  quickly
recognized  the  importance  of  establishing  strong  partnerships  with  key  members  of
county departments. These partnerships proved essential for effectively incorporating
the recommended standards and practices into contract solicitations. Recognizing this,
the team made a top priority of working diligently and respectfully with administrators
overseeing  a  department’s  food  service  contracts  or  the  contract  managers  who
monitored  food-related  contracts.  The  team  also  discovered  that  standards  and
practices  had  to  align  with  each  department’s  overall  business  goals.  These
considerations reflected important realities that influenced the speed, or lack thereof,
at  which  a  given  RFP  could  be  developed  and  administered.  After  10  years  of  policy
implementation,  the  integration  of  healthy  nutrition  standards  and  practices  into
government  food  service  RFPs  and  their  resulting  contracts  has  become  a  qualified
success.  However,  investments  in  staffing  and  support  were  limited  at  the  policy’s
launch  and  remain  underresourced  to  this  day.  Implementing  contract  requirements
involves a multipronged approach and technical assistance resources, such as culinary
training,  marketing,  and  leveraging  data  to  drive  nutritional  changes.  A  robust
evaluation  component  was  imperative  to  guide  and  refine  implementation.  For
instance, the FPP team provided ongoing monitoring and evaluation support to county
departments throughout the 10 years; this was a key facilitator for implementing the
food policy. Food environment assessments were conducted before and after contract
execution  for  selected  departments  by  using  internally  developed  checklist  tools  that
assessed  the  implementation  of  the  recommended  standards  and  practices  (eg,
implementation  of  behavioral  economics  strategies).  Quality  assurance  reports  with

checklist results were developed for use by departments. The FPP team also developed
implementation  guides  and  resources  (eg,  toolkits,  recipes)  and  nutrition  promotional
materials (eg, signage, table tents, decals) for staff and visitors to use. These resources
played  a  critical  role  in  educating  implementers  (county  departments  and  food
vendors), county employees, and community members who visited county food settings
about  the  changes  that  were  being  made  to  the  food  at  county  facilities.  We
encountered several notable challenges to integrating healthy nutrition standards and
practices into the county contracting process. First, the contracting system across the
county  was  complex  and  continues  to  pose  challenges  to  this  day.  For  instance,  the
learning  curve  for  the  FPP  team  was  steep.  It  took  the  team  some  time  to  grasp  the
nuances  of  how  contracts  with  food  vendors  functioned  in  the  county.  The  county
contracting  process  is  also  multilevel  and  nonlinear,  with  variations  based  on  food
service type or venue, department staffing, and inter- and intradepartmental workflow.
Other  challenges  resulted  from  the  diverse  procedures  among  departments.  Often,
each department had separate contracts and grant units, each with its own operating
procedures  and  solicitation  mechanisms  (eg,  RFPs,  invitations  for  bids,  requests  for
statements of interest). The county system’s size and complexity may also explain why
some departments were not involved in implementation, because they were unfamiliar
with the board’s policy or had food vendor contracts that were signed for a long term
(≥10  y),  precluding  meaningful  review.  Staff  turnover  and  gaps  in  staffing  may  have
precluded  engagement,  participation,  and  intracounty  collaboration.  A  second
challenge was that some of the department administrative structures that were created
to ensure checks and balances and a seamless pathway to contracting did not always
work  smoothly.  Instead,  they  often  generated  operational  inefficiency,  which  led  to
unforeseen delays with the RFP process and poor contract execution. For instance, the
limited adherence to a strict timeline and a lack of standardization of the contracting
process  across  several  departments  meant  that  even  simple  adjustments  to  contract

language  was  a  daunting  task  to  coordinate,  especially  when  these  adjustments
affected more than one department. Long delays became an undesirable norm because
the  sparse  standardization  and  lack  of  structure  frequently  allowed  for  competing
institutional priorities to redirect human resources away from the contracting process.
In some instances, the FPP team never received final copies of the contracts or were
not informed by the county department whether the contracts had been executed. In
some cases, it was unknown or unclear whether the RFPs the FPP team worked on were
ever  released  to  the  public.  Third,  most  contract  managers  within  the  county
departments  had  limited  nutrition  knowledge  and  experience  with  operationalizing
nutrition standards or implementing behavioral economics strategies. As such, the time
required  to  train  contract  managers  (eg,  how  to  market  healthier  meals,  how  to
improve  consumer  buy-in,  how  to  collect  relevant  evaluation  data)  was  a
labor-intensive task. This was not something the FPP team, a small group with only one
full-time–equivalent  staff  position  dedicated  to  the  policy’s  implementation,  had
anticipated.  Currently,  the  FPP  team  still  has  only  one  full-time–equivalent  position
allocated for implementing the Board of Supervisors policy. Other difficult-to-overcome
challenges  in  implementation  included  cost  and  budget  constraints,  limited  contract
oversight,  and  limited  institutional  capacity  to  monitor  contracts  and  activities  for
adherence  to  DPH-recommended  nutrition  standards  and  practices  (17).  Lastly,  the
collection  of  data  on  food  purchased,  sold,  and  served  by  county  departments  posed
multiple challenges. Often, the only pertinent data came from publicly available menus.
Almost  no  nutritional  analysis  data  were  collected  or  reported  by  contracted  food
vendors, and in several cases, vendors did not use standardized recipes. Top Although
the  Board  of  Supervisors  policy  adopted  in  2011  has  made  tremendous  progress  in
helping to solidify a review procedure and a set of nutrition recommendations for the
county’s  food  service  contracting  process,  notable  challenges  remain.  Funding  and
human  resources  for  ongoing  administration,  compliance  monitoring,  and  program

evaluation remain elusive, despite their being essential for sustaining implementation
of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  policy.  Because  of  challenges  with  data  collection  and
limited funding and human resources, the FPP team has been unable to assess the level
of  adherence  to  nutrition  standards  and  practices  in  food  services  operated  by  the
county. Most county-contracted food vendors shared only menus and have been unable
to  provide  additional  information  on  the  nutrients  and  ingredients  they  use  in  food
preparation.  As  a  result,  it  has  been  difficult  to  fully  assess  whether  healthy  menus
actually  complied  with  the  DPH-recommended  nutrition  standards  and  practices.  In
summary, our model to integrate nutritional requirements into the county contracting
process  with  food  vendors  appears  to  be  a  promising  approach  for  institutionalizing
healthy nutrition standards and practices in a large California county government. The
approach’s goal was to increase the quality of food that government entities purchase,
sell, and serve. Based on field findings and early evaluation results, our model has the
potential  to  perform  similarly  in  other  agencies  or  jurisdictions  interested  in  taking
similar  action  within  their  organization  to  improve  food  quality,  health,  and  financial
sustainability  (11,20–22).  Although  some  best  practices  introduced  by  the  model
require further research for codification, efforts on the ground and in the field should
continue to build a business case for implementing food policies like the one embedded
in  the  contracting  process  of  the  County  of  Los  Angeles  government.  For  instance,
convening  contracts  and  grants  specialists  from  each  of  the  relevant  departments
would be beneficial to discuss lessons learned and gather input on how best to leverage
their  department’s  contracting  process,  enforcement  mechanisms,  and  purchasing
power to improve the nutritional quality of foods served or sold in county facilities. Top
The  authors  thank  each  of  the  37  departments  within  the  County  of  Los  Angeles  for
their cooperation and support of the 2011 County of Los Angeles Board of Supervisors
policy  that  required  the  integration  of  healthy  nutrition  standards  and  practices  into
government food vendor contracts. Their partnerships have been invaluable throughout

the  past  10  years  for  adopting  and  implementing  this  policy.  The  authors  also  thank
Allison  Kwan,  MPP,  for  her  support  with  policy  implementation  and  Ranjana
Wickramasekaran, PhD, MPH, for her evaluation support. The contents and any views
expressed  in  this  article  are  those  of  the  authors  and  do  not  reflect  the  positions  or
viewpoints  of  the  departments,  organizations,  or  agencies  that  are  mentioned  in  this
article. This work was supported in part by a cooperative agreement from the Centers
for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (U58DP003061).  No  copyrighted  materials  were
used in this article. Top Corresponding Author: Michelle Wood, DrPH, MPP, Division of
Chronic  Disease  and  Injury  Prevention,  Los  Angeles  County  Department  of  Public
Health,
 3530
 Wilshire
 Blvd,
 8th
 floor,
 Los
 Angeles,
 California
 90010
(mwood@ph.lacounty.gov). Author Affiliations: 1Division of Chronic Disease and Injury
Prevention,  Los  Angeles  County  Department  of  Public  Health,  Los  Angeles,  California.
2Research Group on Statistics, Econometrics and Health, University of Girona, Girona,
Spain. 3Department of Health Policy and Management, Fielding School of Public Health,
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles.  4Department  of  Family  Medicine,  David  Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles. 5Department of Epidemiology,
Fielding  School  of  Public  Health,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles.  6Population
Health Program, Clinical and Translational Science Institute, University of California, Los
Angeles. Top Top  Abbreviation: DPH, Los Angeles County Department of Public Health.
a Healthy Food Promotion in LA County Food Services Contracts policy (16).
b The Board of Supervisors policy (16) requires the review of RFPs to integrate healthy
nutrition standards. In some cases, county departments used other types of solicitation
mechanisms  (eg,  invitations  for  bids,  requests  for  statements  of  interest).  Each  row
represents a different county department or food service type with separate RFPs and
contracts.
c Population reach estimates were based on publicly available data or internal records
and  determined  by  using  the  definitions  and  methodology  described  in  Robles  et  al

(18).
d County department selected as a case example of the policy implementation in the
study.
e County department that administers a large vending machine contract.  Abbreviation:
DPH, Los Angeles County Department of Public Health.
a Excerpted from the County of Los Angeles Department of Public Works Request for
Proposals  for  Cafeteria  and  Vending  Machine  Services  at  the  Department  of  Public
Works  Headquarters  (2017-PA011)  to  illustrate  what  nutrition  standards  were
integrated into the RFP to implement requirements of the Board of Supervisor’s Policy.
These standards were revised in 2020.
b County department selected as a case example of the implementation of County of
Los  Angeles  Board  of  Supervisors  policy,  Healthy  Food  Promotion  in  LA  County  Food
Services Contracts (16).
c  Exhibit  H:  Los  Angeles  County  Department  of  Public  Health  Concession  Nutrition
Standards. The standards set nutrition limits for snacks/desserts, main dish/entree, side
items,  beverages,  combination  meals,  condiments,  fruit,  vegetables,  grains,  protein,
and  dairy.  They  include  standards  for  food  preparation  methods,  local  produce,  and
behavioral economics strategies (ie, product placement, menu labeling, signage, price
incentives).
d  Exhibit  G:  County  of  Los  Angeles  Vending  Machine  Nutrition  Policy.  The  policy  sets
nutrition  guidelines  for  snacks  and  beverages  sold  in  County  of  Los  Angeles  vending
machines.
e Exhibit M: Sample Nutritional Analysis Food Production and Sales Record. This exhibit
presents samples of data sources for menus, nutritional information, food production,
and  sales  records.  These  data  sources  support  the  assessment  of  contract  terms
related to the implementation of nutrition standards.
f  Exhibit  L:  Implementing  a  Sodium  Reduction  Plan.  This  exhibit  specifies  a  plan  to

implement purchasing standards for the sodium content of food products.
g  Exhibit  K:  Menu  Labeling  Requirements.  This  exhibit  specifies  menu  labeling
requirements including the display of calories for all food items.
h Choose Health LA is an educational campaign directed at county employees and the
community to promote healthy eating through informational materials such as signage,
table  tents,  and  an  informational  website  at  worksite  cafeterias  in  county  buildings.  
Abbreviations: DPH, Los Angeles County Department of Public Health; RFP, request for
proposal.
a Entry points where integration of healthy nutrition standards and practices could be
accomplished or strengthened.
b Healthy Food Promotion in LA County Food Services Contracts policy (16).
c In some cases, county departments used other types of solicitation mechanisms (eg,
invitations  for  bids,  requests  for  statements  of  interest).  There  may  also  be  some
differences in the wording, and requirements of RFPs across county departments and
food  service  settings.   Challenges  with  collecting  nutrition  analysis  and  procurement
data  from  county  departments  to  identify  opportunities  for  replacing  unhealthy
products  with  healthier  alternatives.  Abbreviation:  FFP  team,  Food  Policy  and
Procurement team within the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health.
a  Healthy  Food  Promotion  in  LA  County  Food  Services  Contracts  policy  (16).  Top  The
opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the
opinions  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  the  Public  Health
Service,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  or  the  authors’  affiliated
institutions.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2024/23_0220.htm
