A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Introduction,  methods  and  definition  of
terms  from  the  Guideline  for  Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in  Healthcare  Facilities
(2008). In the United States, approximately 46.5 million surgical procedures and even
more  invasive  medical  procedures—including  approximately  5  million  gastrointestinal
endoscopies—are performed each year. 2Each procedure involves contact by a medical
device or surgical instrument with a patient's sterile tissue or mucous membranes. A
major  risk  of  all  such  procedures  is  the  introduction  of  pathogens  that  can  lead  to
infection.  Failure  to  properly  disinfect  or  sterilize  equipment  carries  not  only  risk
associated with breach of host barriers but also risk for person-to-person transmission
(e.g.,  hepatitis  B  virus)  and  transmission  of  environmental  pathogens  (e.g.,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa). Disinfection and sterilization are essential for ensuring that
medical  and  surgical  instruments  do  not  transmit  infectious  pathogens  to  patients.
Because  sterilization  of  all  patient-care  items  is  not  necessary,  health-care  policies
must  identify,  primarily  on  the  basis  of  the  items'  intended  use,  whether  cleaning,
disinfection,  or  sterilization  is  indicated.  Multiple  studies  in  many  countries  have
documented  lack  of  compliance  with  established  guidelines  for  disinfection  and
sterilization.  3-6  Failure  to  comply  with  scientifically-based  guidelines  has  led  to
numerous  outbreaks.  6-12  This  guideline  presents  a  pragmatic  approach  to  the
judicious  selection  and  proper  use  of  disinfection  and  sterilization  processes;  the
approach is based on well-designed studies assessing the efficacy (through laboratory
investigations)  and  effectiveness  (through  clinical  studies)  of  disinfection  and
sterilization procedures. This guideline resulted from a review of all MEDLINE articles in
English  listed  under  the  MeSH  headings  of  disinfection  or  sterilization  (focusing  on
health-care  equipment  and  supplies)  from  January  1980  through  August  2006.
References  listed  in  these  articles  also  were  reviewed.  Selected  articles  published

before  1980  were  reviewed  and,  if  still  relevant,  included  in  the  guideline.  The  three
major peer-reviewed journals in infection control—American Journal of Infection Control,
Infection  Control  and  Hospital  Epidemiology,  and  Journal  of  Hospital  Infection—were
searched  for  relevant  articles  published  from  January  1990  through  August  2006.
Abstracts presented at the annual meetings of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology
of America and Association for professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc.
during 1997–2006 also were reviewed; however, abstracts were not used to support the
recommendations. Sterilization describes a process that destroys or eliminates all forms
of  microbial  life  and  is  carried  out  in  health-care  facilities  by  physical  or  chemical
methods. Steam under pressure, dry heat, EtO gas, hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, and
liquid  chemicals  are  the  principal  sterilizing  agents  used  in  health-care  facilities.
Sterilization is intended to convey an absolute meaning; unfortunately, however, some
health professionals and the technical and commercial literature refer to "disinfection"
as "sterilization" and items as "partially sterile." When chemicals are used to destroy all
forms  of  microbiologic  life,  they  can  be  called  chemical  sterilants.  These  same
germicides  used  for  shorter  exposure  periods  also  can  be  part  of  the  disinfection
process  (i.e.,  high-level  disinfection).  Disinfection  describes  a  process  that  eliminates
many or all pathogenic microorganisms, except bacterial spores, on inanimate objects
(Tables  1  and  2).  In  health-care  settings,  objects  usually  are  disinfected  by  liquid
chemicals or wet pasteurization. Each of the various factors that affect the efficacy of
disinfection  can  nullify  or  limit  the  efficacy  of  the  process.  Factors  that  affect  the
efficacy of both disinfection and sterilization include prior cleaning of the object; organic
and inorganic load present; type and level of microbial contamination; concentration of
and  exposure  time  to  the  germicide;  physical  nature  of  the  object  (e.g.,  crevices,
hinges,  and  lumens);  presence  of  biofilms;  temperature  and  pH  of  the  disinfection
process; and in some cases, relative humidity of the sterilization process (e.g., ethylene
oxide).  Unlike  sterilization,  disinfection  is  not  sporicidal.  A  few  disinfectants  will  kill

spores  with  prolonged  exposure  times  (3–12  hours);  these  are  called  chemical
sterilants. At similar concentrations but with shorter exposure periods (e.g., 20 minutes
for  2%  glutaraldehyde),  these  same  disinfectants  will  kill  all  microorganisms  except
large  numbers  of  bacterial  spores;  they  are  called  high-level  disinfectants.  Low-level
disinfectants  can  kill  most  vegetative  bacteria,  some  fungi,  and  some  viruses  in  a
practical period of time (≤10 minutes). Intermediate-level disinfectants might be cidal
for  mycobacteria,  vegetative  bacteria,  most  viruses,  and  most  fungi  but  do  not
necessarily  kill  bacterial  spores.  Germicides  differ  markedly,  primarily  in  their
antimicrobial  spectrum  and  rapidity  of  action.  Cleaning  is  the  removal  of  visible  soil
(e.g.,  organic  and  inorganic  material)  from  objects  and  surfaces  and  normally  is
accomplished  manually  or  mechanically  using  water  with  detergents  or  enzymatic
products. Thorough cleaning is essential before high-level disinfection and sterilization
because  inorganic  and  organic  materials  that  remain  on  the  surfaces  of  instruments
interfere  with  the  effectiveness  of  these  processes.  Decontamination  removes
pathogenic  microorganisms  from  objects  so  they  are  safe  to  handle,  use,  or  discard.
Terms  with  the  suffix  cide  or  cidal  for  killing  action  also  are  commonly  used.  For
example, a germicide is an agent that can kill microorganisms, particularly pathogenic
organisms  ("germs").  The  term  germicide  includes  both  antiseptics  and  disinfectants.
Antiseptics  are  germicides  applied  to  living  tissue  and  skin;  disinfectants  are
antimicrobials applied only to inanimate objects. In general, antiseptics are used only
on  the  skin  and  not  for  surface  disinfection,  and  disinfectants  are  not  used  for  skin
antisepsis  because  they  can  injure  skin  and  other  tissues.  Virucide,  fungicide,
bactericide,  sporicide,  and  tuberculocide can  kill  the type of  microorganism  identified
by  the  prefix.  For  example,  a  bactericide  is  an  agent  that  kills  bacteria.  13-18  CDC
provides information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk of
infections  among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language
Assistance Languages  Language Assistance 

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/disinfection-sterilization/introduction-methods-definition-of-ter
ms.html
