Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  NOTICE   This  issue  of  MMWR
Recommendations and Reports (Volume 39, No.
RR-9) is a reprint of two articles published in the December 1,
1989, edition of the Journal of the American Medical Association.
The articles are reprinted, with permission, in the MMWR series
of publications as a service to the readership.  The tables of state and territorial disease
requirements
provide summary information and were current as of March 1, 1989.
Readers should contact state health departments for current and
complete information on reporting requirements in individual
states.
Mandatory Reporting of Infectious Diseases by Clinicians
Terence L. Chorba, MD, MPH
Ruth L. Berkelman, MD
Susan K. Safford, MD
Norma P. Gibbs
Harry F. Hull, MD  Reporting of cases of communicable disease is important in the
planning and evaluation of disease prevention and control
programs, in the assurance of appropriate medical therapy, and in
the detection of common-source outbreaks. In the United States,
the authority to require notification of cases of disease resides
in the respective state legislatures. We examined the laws and
regulations of health departments of all US jurisdictions to
ascertain diseases and conditions currently required to be
reported in each state or territory. We present herein the state

reporting requirements for infectious diseases and infectious
disease-related conditions. To obtain additional information
regarding time frames for reporting, agencies to which reports
are required, persons required to report, and specific conditions
under which reports are required, the reader is referred to the
statutes and health department regulations of the respective
states.  Reporting of cases of infectious diseases and related
conditions has been and remains a vital step in controlling and
preventing the spread of communicable disease. These reports are
useful in many ways, including assurance of provision of
appropriate medical therapy (eg, for tuberculosis), detection of
common-source outbreaks (eg, in food-borne outbreaks), and
planning and evaluating prevention and control programs (eg, for
vaccine-preventable diseases). The epidemic of the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome, the recent increase in tuberculosis in
young adults, the reemergence of malaria as a health threat to
travelers, and the potential spread of dengue fever to the
continental United States have all contributed to the renewed
interest in the surveillance of infectious diseases.
 The control and prevention of infectious disease has
traditionally been a primary health mandate. Systematic reporting
of various diseases in the United States began in 1874 when the
State Board of Health of Massachusetts inaugurated a plan for the
weekly voluntary reporting of prevalent diseases by physicians
(1). A sample postcard was designed to "reduce to the minimum the
expenditure of time and trouble incident to the service asked of
busy medical men (2)." In 1883, Michigan became the first US

jurisdiction to mandate the reporting of specific infectious
diseases. By 1901, all states required notification of selected
communicable diseases to local health authorities. However, the
poliomyelitis epidemic in 1916 and the influenza pandemic of 1918
heightened interest in reporting requirements, resulting in the
participation of all states in national morbidity reporting by
1925. Today, all states and territories of the United States
participate in a national morbidity reporting system and
regularly report aggregate or case-specific data for 49
infectious diseases and related conditions to the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta, Ga (3).  In the United States, the authority to require
notification of
cases of disease resides in the respective state legislatures. In
some states, authority is enumerated in statutory provisions; in
other states, authority to require reporting has been given to
state boards of health; still other states require reports both
under statutes and under health department regulations. Variation
among states also exists among conditions and diseases to be
reported, time frames for reporting, agencies receiving reports,
persons required to report, and conditions under which reports
are required. In many states, local health departments provide
epidemiologic services; as a consequence, health care providers
in many states are encouraged to report diseases directly to
local health departments rather than to the state health
department.  Compilations of disease-reporting requirements in the United
States were last published by the US Public Health Service in
1933 (4) and 1944 (5). To ascertain diseases and conditions

currently required to be reported in each state, we examined the
laws and regulations of health departments of all the states, the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam,
American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
and the US Virgin Islands (hereafter referred to as states). This
information was provided by the Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists (CSTE) through the respective state
epidemiologists. Among reportable diseases identified at the
outset of this project were more than 160 infectious diseases or
infectious disease-related conditions, 90 diseases caused by
occupational exposures, 23 other environmental diseases, 29
congenital or noninfectious childhood conditions, and 6 diseases
of unknown etiology. In addition, the laws relating to morbidity
in some states specify that cases of certain classes of disease
shall be notifiable, eg, "diseases which are known or suspected
to be related to environmental exposure to toxic-hazardous
material" (Alaska) or "the occurrence of any increase in
incidence of disease of unknown or unusual etiology" (Hawaii).  The Table summarizes
the infectious diseases and infectious
disease-related conditions reportable (or in process of being
made reportable) in at least 10 states for physicians and other
health care providers as of March 1, 1989. Diseases are presented
in the nomenclature used by the majority of states or, where
appropriate, in the nomenclature recommended by the American
Public Health Association (6). Where appropriate, eponymic terms
have been changed to internationally accepted format.
Consequently, there is variation between the terms used in this

Table and those used in some state statutes or regulations.
Diseases reportable in fewer than 10 states are not included
unless nomenclature used in some states could be interpreted to
denote diseases or conditions for which different nomenclature
was used in other states (see Table footnotes). A semicolon (;)
is provided to demarcate separate reporting requirements for
conditions described by the same nomenclature. For example,
Ohio's reporting requirements for streptococcal disease, site
unspecified, are presented as "NZ;n," denoting a reporting
requirement for streptococcal B infections in newborns and a
reporting requirement for total numbers of streptococcal
infections.  Many states also have infectious disease-reporting requirements
for laboratories, but these are not presented herein. In
addition, the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986
requires that health care providers who administer certain
vaccines and toxoids are required by law to record permanently
certain information and to report to the US Department of Health
and Human Services selected adverse events occurring after
vaccination. Events occurring after receipt of publicly purchased
vaccines are reported through local, county, and/or state health
departments to the CDC on its Report of Adverse Events Following
Immunization (CDC form 71.19). Events occurring after receipt of
a privately purchased vaccine usually are reported directly to
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on its Adverse Reaction
Report (FDA form 1639) by the health care provider or the
manufacturer; this form, which may be duplicated, can be obtained
directly from the FDA and is also printed in the FDA Drug

Bulletin,  the  physician's  edition  of  the  Physician's  Desk   Reference,  USP  Drug
Information for Health Care Providers, and 
AMA Drug Evaluations. Readers are referred elsewhere (7) for
details of this surveillance system and requirements for
recording and reporting. The accompanying article details state reporting requirements
for occupational diseases (8). To obtain additional information
regarding time frames for reporting, agencies to which reports
are required, persons required to report, specific conditions
under which reports are required, and reporting requirements for
laboratories, the reader is referred to the statutes and health
department regulations of the respective states.
 In most developed countries, systems for reporting notifiable
diseases have evolved as the basis of infectious disease
surveillance (9-11). In the United States, the federal Quarantine
Act of 1878 authorized the US Public Health Service to collect
morbidity data for use in quarantine measures against cholera,
smallpox, and yellow fever. The Quarantine Act of 1893 authorized
the US Public Health Service to collect morbidity information
each week from state and local public health authorities
throughout the United States. Since 1961, the CDC has had the
responsibility of operating the National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System, for the purpose of tabulating and
disseminating summary morbidity data. The CSTE determines the
list of diseases in collaboration with the CDC, revising it
annually as needed; the list includes those infectious diseases
for which data can provide a basis for state and local agencies
to plan more effective programs for disease prevention and

control.  The Table presented herein underscores substantial differences
among states as to the specific list of diseases for which
reporting is required. Similar differences exist for the lists of
reportable diseases in other countries as well, including the
various Canadian provinces and territories (12). These different
reporting requirements merit examination in light of the public
health significance of the diseases, other states' reporting
requirements, and the potential for use of alternate data sources
(13). In addition, the lack of uniformity among states regarding
the case definitions for many diseases has made comparisons
between states difficult. For example, some states have required
any person with a culture positive for Salmonella to be reported,
whereas other states have required reporting of culture-positive
individuals only if they were symptomatic (14). To facilitate
comparison of surveillance data among states, standardized case
definitions for the nationally notifiable diseases have been
developed by the CDC and the CSTE and were approved by the CSTE
in May 1989 (15). It is hoped that these definitions will also
facilitate interstate reciprocal notification of disease; in
agreement with the CSTE, the CDC provides forms to state health
departments for reciprocal notification for (1) cases of all
diseases having onset in one state but hospitalized or
transferring to another state; (2) cases of reportable diseases
having onset within the state but presumably infected in another
state; and (3) cases regarding which epidemiologic information or
other public health action may be needed, eg, contact tracing
(3).  Most infectious disease surveillance systems rely primarily on

receipt of case reports from physicians and other health care
providers. These data are usually incomplete and may not be
representative for certain populations; completeness of reporting
has been estimated to vary from 6% to 90% for many of the common
notifiable diseases (16). However, if the level of completeness
is consistent over time, these data usually are the best source
of information regarding the temporal and geographic trends and
the characteristics of the persons affected. Clinician-based
surveillance has also been useful in identifying common-source
outbreaks of diseases, eg, hepatitis A (17), hepatitis B (18,19),
and  hepatitis  non-A,  non-B  (20).   To  encourage  partnership  with  those  physicians  or
other health
professionals who report, most state health departments use
newsletters to provide feedback of data to the health care
professionals who contribute to the database. The CDC reports
surveillance data weekly in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report and annually in its Summary of Notifiable Diseases. Media
coverage, driven by community and medical interest in newly
emerging diseases or conditions, may also improve reporting. For
example, a significant increase in reporting of toxic shock
syndrome  was  observed  after  media  publicity  first  appeared  (21).   Surveillance
activities are often strengthened when the disease
is given a high priority, such as when primary prevention of most
or all cases is feasible (eg, measles), or when the disease is
severe and newly emerging (eg, the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome, toxic shock syndrome). These activities frequently
include working closely with hospitals to identify cases,

reviewing hospital discharge records, and working closely with
clinicians who are likely to diagnose and treat patients.
Examples of such increased surveillance activities include those
to estimate rates of occurrence and to describe the epidemiology
of toxic shock syndrome (22) and hepatitis non-A, non-B (23), to
determine the adequacy of treatment of gonorrhea in a community
(24), and to monitor the occurrence of Reye's syndrome following
public warning to avoid use of salicylates in young febrile
children (25). Some surveillance systems are unique, being
designed to fit the specific needs of the disease or condition;
for example, nationwide surveillance for Guillain-Barre syndrome
following the initiation of the National Influenza Immunization
Program in October 1976 was accomplished through a network of
neurologists (26).  Generally, there has been growing interest in surveillance
systems for infectious diseases that need not be based (or rely
completely) on mandatory reporting by clinicians; many states
have developed reporting requirements for laboratories and/or
hospitals, especially for those diseases requiring specific
laboratory results for confirmation. Others have used
provider-based surveillance systems (9,27), periodic reviews of
hospital discharge summaries for selected infectious diseases
(28), laboratory-based surveillance systems (14,29,30), and other
non-provider-based systems (31,32). However, none of these
systems have proved completely successful either. Provider
networks may provide more detailed information, but the
provider's patients may not be representative of the general
population. Also, although existing databases such as

computerized hospital discharge summaries are useful to evaluate
the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, a lack of
timeliness often precludes the computerized hospital database
from being the primary source of such data. In addition, there
remain diseases (eg, Lyme disease) for which there is no
sensitive and specific laboratory test and that, although
serious, may be treated on an outpatient basis and thus could not
be  identified  by  many  of  these  alternate  data  sets.   The  tools  for  surveillance  are
improving. Computer-based
telecommunication has improved the efficiency of disease
reporting, and databases may be better managed and analyzed. The
National Electronic Telecommunications System for Surveillance,
formerly the Epidemiologic Surveillance Project, is a
computer-based telecommunications system initiated in 1984 for
reporting disease surveillance data to the CDC (33). All states
now use this system for the weekly reporting of cases of 44 of
the 49 nationally notifiable diseases. The computerized system
allows more case detail and analytic capability than previously,
when only summary reports were available by telephone; disease
distribution can be mapped by county, onset dates of disease can
be examined more precisely, and comparative information on the
distribution of age, race, and sex is available. There is also an
increasing sophistication of statistical methods for evaluating
surveillance data (eg, to estimate completeness of reporting) and
for  analysis  (eg,  to  detect  spatial  and  temporal  trends)  (34).   The  usefulness  of
surveillance data and the programs to which
the data are applied vary with the disease, but generally such

data are used to monitor short- and long-term trends, to alert
health professionals to important changes in trends, and to
estimate the magnitude of morbidity and mortality. Surveillance
facilitates epidemiologic and laboratory research, both by
providing cases for more detailed investigation or a case-control
study and by directing which research avenues are most important.
More specifically, all individuals reported with selected
diseases (eg, tuberculosis, syphilis) are routinely followed up
by health departments either directly or through their physician
or other health care provider to ensure initiation of appropriate
therapy for the individual. Health departments also provide
diagnostic tests and prophylactic therapy, as needed, for
contacts of persons with infectious conditions such as hepatitis
and tuberculosis. Counseling and partner notification activities
may be provided to persons such as those infected with human
immunodeficiency virus. Reports of unusual clusters of disease
are often followed by an epidemic investigation to identify and
remove any common-source exposure or to reduce other associated
risks of transmission. For example, of 307 domestic epidemic
assistance requests received by the CDC in fiscal years 1985
through 1988, a total of 134 (44%) were for problems related to
specific diseases reportable in the requesting jurisdictions
(CDC, unpublished data, 1989); this does not take into account
the majority of epidemics that are handled at a state or county
level.  Surveillance data also provide the basis for determining public
health priorities and for planning and implementing prevention
and control programs. Policymakers use these data to determine

overall priorities for resources for public health programs, and,
in certain instances, these data may be the basis for geographic
distribution of funds for treatment (eg, federal reimbursement to
states for zidovidine (azidothymidine, or AZT) therapy in
individuals with severe human immunodeficiency virus disease). In
addition to directing resources, these data are the basis for
evaluating the success or failure of prevention and control
programs (eg, initiatives to reduce the incidence of
vaccine-preventable diseases). The CDC also provides surveillance
data to the World Health Organization in accordance with
international reporting standards designed to limit the spread of
quarantinable  and  vaccine-preventable  diseases  (35).   Thus,  through  participation  in
disease-reporting systems,
physicians and other health care providers are integral to
ensuring that public health resources are used most effectively.
However, during training of clinicians, little attention has been
given to the legal requirements or the importance of reporting. A
study of New York City physicians demonstrated that many do not
know the requirements or methods for reporting in their state;
reasons given by physicians for nonreporting included not knowing
which diseases are required to be reported, not knowing how a
disease should be reported, concerns regarding confidentiality,
and perceptions that the list of reportable diseases is too
extensive (36). A more recent study in Vermont concluded that
physicians often failed to report because they assumed that the
laboratory would have reported the case (37). Certainly, for many
diseases, the laboratory is a vital component, but the physician

and other primary health care providers are still integral to
disease-reporting  systems.   Although  surveillance  systems  do  not  need  complete
reporting to
be useful, underreporting may adversely affect public health
efforts by distorting trends observed in the incidence of disease
(38,39), distorting attributable risk estimates for disease
acquisitions (22,38), preventing accurate assessment of potential
benefits or impact of control programs (40), preventing timely
identification of disease outbreaks (39,41), distorting observed
periods at risk and geographic distribution of cases (39), and
undermining the success of prevention and control programs for
tuberculosis, sexually transmitted diseases, and other
communicable diseases, such as immunization programs (10,24,42).  The participation
of the clinician is critical in determining
the value of a reporting system as a basis for directing
prevention and control activities and as an indicator of their
success or failure. Thus, the role of the physicians and others
providing health care has changed little since it was underscored
in a US Public Health Service document 74 years ago:
Unfortunately many participating physicians have little knowledge
of the methods of health administration and . . . frequently
expect the health department in some mysterious manner to control
disease without placing upon them (the physicians) the burden and
privilege of cooperating by the notification of the occurrence of
cases. The practicing physician...is essentially an adjunct of
the health department, for unless he performs his part the health
department is in large measure helpless (1).  We wish to express our appreciation for

the assistance of
Deborah Collier, Elliott Churchill, MA, Anthony Burton, Lyle
Conrad, MD, and Steven Teutsch, MD, of the Epidemiology Program
Office; Jeffrey Sacks, MD, and Stephen Thacker, MD, of the Center
for Environmental Health and Injury Control; Miriam Alter, PhD,
of the Center for Infectious Diseases; and the many state and
territorial epidemiologists and other health department staff who
enabled us to assemble this report. A list of the state and
territorial epidemiologists and their office addresses and
commercial  telephone  numbers  as  of  November  1,  1989,  follows:   From  the
Epidemiology Program Office, Centers for Disease
Control, Atlanta, GA (Drs Chorba, Berkelman, and Safford and Ms
Gibbs); and the New Mexico Health and Environment Department,
Santa Fe (Dr Hull).
Reprint requests to the Centers for Disease Control, 1600 Clifton
Rd  NE,  Mailstop  F36,  Atlanta,  GA  30333  (Dr  Chorba).  Disclaimer    All  MMWR  HTML
documents  published  before  January  1993  are  electronic  conversions  from  ASCII  text
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to
the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,  figures,  and  tables.   An  original
paper copy of this issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S.
Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)
512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.**Questions or messages regarding errors in
formatting  should  be  addressed  to  mmwrq@cdc.gov.   Disclaimer    All  MMWR  HTML
documents  published  before  January  1993  are  electronic  conversions  from  ASCII  text
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to

the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for  the  official  text,  figures,  and  tables.   An  original
paper copy of this issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S.
Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)
512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 

 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00001665.htm
