Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Authors: Paul A. Gastanaduy, MD, MPH; Susan B. Redd; Nakia
S.  Clemmons,  MPH;  Adria  D.  Lee,  MSPH;  Carole  J.  Hickman,  PhD;  Paul  A.  Rota,  PhD;
Manisha Patel, MD, MS Measles is an acute viral illness caused by a virus in the family
paramyxovirus, genus Morbillivirus. Measles is characterized by a prodrome of fever (as
high  as  105°F)  and  malaise,  cough,  coryza,  and  conjunctivitis,  followed  by  a
maculopapular  rash.   [1]  The  rash  spreads  from  head  to  trunk  to  lower  extremities.
Measles is usually a mild or moderately severe illness. However, measles can result in
complications such as pneumonia, encephalitis, and death. Approximately one case of
encephalitis [2] and two to three deaths may occur for every 1,000 reported measles
cases. [3] One rare long-term sequelae of measles virus infection is subacute sclerosing
panencephalitis  (SSPE),  a  fatal  disease  of  the  central  nervous  system  that  generally
develops 7–10 years after infection. Among persons who contracted measles during the
resurgence in the United States (U.S.) in 1989–1991, the risk of SSPE was estimated to
be 7–11 cases/100,000 cases of measles. [4] The risk of developing SSPE may be higher
when measles occurs prior to the second year of life. [4] The average incubation period
for  measles  is  11–12  days  [5],  and  the  average  interval  between  exposure  and  rash
onset  is  14  days,  with  a  range  of  7–21  days.[1,  6]  Persons  with  measles  are  usually
considered infectious from four days before until four days after onset of rash with the
rash  onset  being  considered  as  day  zero.  In  the  decade  prior  to  the  licensure  of  live
measles  vaccine  in  1963,  an  average  of  549,000  measles  cases  and  495  measles
deaths  were  reported  annually.  [7]  However,  almost  every  American  was  affected  by
measles  during  their  lifetime,  and  it  is  estimated  that  3–4  million  measles  cases
occurred  each  year.  [8,9]  Following  implementation  of  a  one  dose  measles  vaccine
program,  there  was  a  rapid  and  significant  reduction  in  the  reported  incidence  of

measles  in  the  United  States  through  the  1980s,  [10]  resulting  in  declines  in
measles-related hospitalizations and deaths. [11] By the late 1980s, however, measles
outbreaks were still occurring among school-aged children who had received a single
dose  of  measles  vaccine.  In  1989,  a  second-dose  vaccination  schedule  was
recommended  by  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP),  the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the American Academy of Family Physicians
(AAFP).  [11]  During  1989–1991,  a  resurgence  of  measles  occurred  when  over  55,000
cases  and  123  deaths  were  reported.  The  epidemiology  during  the  resurgence  was
characterized mainly by cases in preschool-aged children living in poor urban areas who
had not been vaccinated on time with one dose of measles vaccine. [12] Following the
resurgence,  a  commitment  of  resources  for  improved  implementation  of  the  timely
administration  of  the  first  dose  of  the  vaccine,  and  increased  implementation  of  two
doses among school-aged children, led to further declines in measles cases. In 2000,
endemic measles was declared “eliminated1” from the United States. [13] 1 Elimination
is defined as the absence of endemic measles cases for a period of 12 months or more,
in  the  presence  of  adequate  surveillance  (World  Health  Organization)   During
2001–2008, 557 measles cases were reported in the United States. [14,15] The median
number  of  measles  cases  reported  per  year  was  56  (range:  37–140  cases/year).  The
majority  of  US-resident  case-patients  were  unvaccinated  (66%)  or  had  unknown
vaccination  status  (16%).  Of  the  557  reported  measles  cases,  232  (42%)  were
importations (median of 26 importations/year). In comparison, during 2009–2014, 1,264
measles  cases  were  reported  in  the  United  States.  The  median  number  of  measles
cases  reported  per  year  was  130  (range:  55–667  cases/year).  The  majority  of
US-resident case-patients were unvaccinated (74%) or had unknown vaccination status
(16%). Of the 1,264 reported measles cases, 275 (22%) were importations (median of
45 importations/year). Among the 989 US-acquired cases reported during 2009–2014,
673 (68%) were epidemiologically linked to these importations, 256 (26%) either had

virologic  evidence  of  importation  or  had  been  linked  to  those  cases  with  virologic
evidence  of  importation,  and  60  (6%)  had  unknown  source.  Unknown  source  cases
represent  cases  where  epidemiologic  or  virologic  link  to  an  imported  case  was  not
detected.  Measles  incidence  has  remained  below  one  case  per  million  since  1997,
except  in  2014,  when  667  measles  cases  were  reported,  representing  a  reported
incidence  of  2.08  cases  per  million.  [14]  The  epidemiology  of  measles  in  2014  was
characterized by (1) a high proportion (92%) of cases among U.S. residents who were
unvaccinated  or  who  had  unknown  vaccination  status  and  (2)  more  spread  from
imported  cases  than  in  other  years.  In  2015,  191  measles  cases  were  reported;  28
(15%)  were  importations,  and  142  (80%)  of  178  cases  among  U.S.  residents  were
unvaccinated  or  had  an  unknown  vaccination  status.  In  recent  years,  most  of  the
importations  were  the  result  of  unvaccinated  U.S.  travelers  who  had  traveled  to
measles endemic countries, including countries in the World Health Organization (WHO)
European  and  Western  Pacific  Regions.   [14]  Although  measles  elimination  has  been
achieved in the United States, importation of measles will continue to occur as measles
remains endemic in many other parts of the world. Thus, current measles epidemiology
in the United States is determined by characteristics of the imported cases and their
susceptible  contacts.  From  2001  through  2008,  38  outbreaks2  of  measles  were
reported (annual median no. of outbreaks, 4 [range, 2–10 outbreaks]); outbreaks had a
median size of four cases (range: 3–34).[14] From 2009 through 2014, 66 outbreaks of
measles were reported (annual median no. of outbreaks, 10 [range, 4–23 outbreaks]);
outbreaks had a median size of 5 cases (range: 3–383).[14] Outbreaks of measles in the
United States mostly involve individuals who are directly exposed to imported measles
cases or who are infected during a resulting chain of transmission, and who are either
unvaccinated  or  had  unknown  vaccine  status.  The  settings  of  measles  transmission
have included households, educational institutions (e.g., schools, day care), churches,
health  care  facilities,  homeless  shelters,  and  other  congregate  settings.  Lack  of

adherence to existing recommendations for measles prevention among groups at high
risk  (for  example,  individuals  who  travel  internationally),  can  spread  measles  to
susceptible populations, including infants too young to be vaccinated and unvaccinated
persons by choice.[16,17] Because of high population immunity, high measles vaccine
effectiveness,  and  the  immediate  implementation  of  control  measures,  generally  the
sizes  of  measles  outbreaks  in  the  United  States  are  limited.  However,  recent  large
outbreaks  emphasize  the  importance  of  maintaining  high  levels  of  measles  immunity
across the population through routine measles vaccine coverage. The largest measles
outbreak  documented  in  the  United  States  in  more  than  two  decades  (383  cases)
occurred in an under-immunized Amish community in Ohio over 4 months (March–July)
in 2014.[18] From December 2014 through March 2015, a measles outbreak consisting
of 147 cases that originated in Disney theme parks in California spread to seven other
U.S.  states  and  two  neighboring  countries.[19,20]  Responding  to  measles  cases  and
outbreaks
 is
 time
 consuming
 and
 costly
 for
 local
 and
 state
 health
departments.[21,22] The overall costs to health departments to contain 16 outbreaks
during  2011  amounted  to  an  estimated  $2.7  million  to  $5.3  million  U.S.  dollars.  The
economic burden of controlling measles spread in health care settings amounts to an
estimated $19,000 to $114,286 U.S. dollars per case. 2 National reporting: An outbreak
is  defined  as  a  chain  of  transmission  including  3  or  more  cases  linked  in  time  and
space.  Despite  tremendous  achievements  towards  global  measles  mortality  reduction
and  elimination  goals,  globally,  in  2015,  there  were  254,928  measles  cases  reported
and  an  estimated  134,200  measles  deaths  (i.e.,  approximately  367  deaths/day).[23]
During  2015,  measles  outbreaks  were  reported  in  several  countries  in  the  African,
European,  and  Eastern  Mediterranean  regions.[23]  In  the  Americas,  under  the
leadership  of  the  Pan  American  Health  Organization  (PAHO),  Ministries  of  Health
implemented  an  aggressive  measles  elimination  program  in  1994.  By  2002,  scientific
evidence  suggested  that  endemic  transmission  of  measles  virus  in  the  Americas  was

interrupted for ≥12 months,[24] however, imported cases from endemic areas of the
world continued to occur, resulting in sizable outbreaks in several countries, including
Ecuador,  Canada,  and  the  United  States.  More  recently,  a  large  measles  outbreak  in
Brazil,  with  sustained  transmission  lasting  over  a  year,  ended  in  July  2015.  [25]  In
September 2016, after over two decades of commitments and efforts by Member States
to control measles, the Region of the Americas was the first in the world to verify the
elimination of measles. [25] Important measures are also underway to achieve measles
elimination  in  other  regions.  Countries  in  all  six  WHO  regions  have  adopted  measles
elimination  goals,  and  four  WHO  regions  endorsed  the  Global  Vaccine  Action  Plan  to
eliminate  measles  by  2015;  although  these  elimination  goals  were  not  accomplished.
The Global Vaccine Action Plan has also set a target for measles elimination in five WHO
regions  by  2020.  [23]  Achieving  elimination  in  other  regions  of  the  world  will  have
direct benefits in the United States. Top of Page The declaration of endemic measles
elimination  in  the  United  States  was  made  in  2000.[9,13]  The  key  challenges  to
maintaining the elimination of measles from the United States are In addition, pockets
of  unvaccinated  populations  can  pose  a  risk  to  maintaining  elimination.[15,26]  Thus,
rapid  detection  of  cases  is  necessary  so  that  appropriate  control  measures  can  be
quickly  implemented.  This  is  to  prevent  imported  strains  of  measles  virus  from
establishing  endemic  chains  of  transmission.  Outbreak  preparedness  and  response
remains one of the five core strategies in the 2012–2020 WHO strategic plan for global
measles  and  rubella.  [27]   Top  of  Page  Live  attenuated  measles  virus  vaccine  is
incorporated into combination MMR vaccine and combination measles, mumps, rubella,
and  varicella  (MMRV)  vaccines.  Monovalent  measles  vaccine  is  not  available  in  the
United States. For prevention of measles, two doses of MMR vaccine are recommended
routinely for children, with the first dose at age 12 through 15 months and the second
dose  at  ages  four  through  six  years  (school  entry).  [28]  For  prevention  of  measles
among adults, two doses of MMR vaccine are also recommended for adults at high risk,

including  international  travelers,  college  and  other  post-high  school  students,  and
health care personnel born during or after 1957. [28] All other adults, born during or
after  1957,  without  other  presumptive  evidence  of  measles  immunity,  should  be
vaccinated  with  one  dose  of  MMR  vaccine.  Vaccination  recommendations  for  an
outbreak  setting  are  discussed  in  the  “Control  Measures”  section  in  this  chapter.  For
more details on health care personnel please see the section “Health care settings” in
this chapter. Children 6–11 months of age who travel internationally should receive one
dose  of  MMR  vaccine  optimally  at  least  two  weeks  prior  to  travel.  Because  serologic
response to the measles component of the vaccine varies among infants 6–11 months
of age, children vaccinated before age 12 months should receive two additional doses
of  MMR  or  MMRV  vaccine  on  or  after  the  first  birthday  according  to  the  routine
recommended schedule. [28] Children ≥12 months of age and adults who plan to travel
outside  the  United  States  should  receive  two  doses  of  MMR  vaccine,  separated  by  at
least  28  days.   Top  of  Page  Acceptable  presumptive  evidence  of  measles  immunity
includes at least one of the following: [28] Persons who do not meet the above criteria
are considered susceptible and should be vaccinated unless contraindicated. For health
care  settings  please  see  the  section  “Health  care  settings”  below  as  the  criteria  are
slightly  different.   Top  of  Page  The  following  case  definition  for  case  classification  of
measles cases, including case classifications for importation status, has been approved
by  the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists  (CSTE)  and  was  published  in
2012.  [29]  Clinical  description:  Probable:  Confirmed:  †  Temperature  does  not  need  to
reach ≥101°F/38.3°C and rash does not need to last ≥3 days. ‡ Not explained by MMR
vaccination  during  the  previous  6–45  days.  §  Not  otherwise  ruled  out  by  other
confirmatory  testing  or  more  specific  measles  testing  in  a  public  health  laboratory.  
Note: Genotype identification by a WHO reference laboratory (CDC or a public health
laboratory  that  has  validated  their  measles  virus  sequence  analysis)  is  required  to
distinguish  wild  type  from  vaccine  strain  if  vaccinated  within  21  days  of  rash  onset.

International importation: An internationally imported case is defined as a case in which
measles results from exposure to measles virus outside the United States as evidenced
by at least some of the exposure period (7–21 days before rash onset) occurring outside
the United States and rash onset occurring within 21 days of entering the United States
and there is no known exposure to measles in the United States during that time. All
other  cases  are  considered  US-acquired.  US-acquired  case:  An  US-acquired  case  is
defined as a case in which the patient had not been outside the United States during
the 21 days before rash onset or was known to have been exposed to measles within
the  United  States.  Import-linked  case:  Any  case  in  a  chain  of  transmission  that  is
epidemiologically  linked  to  an  internationally  imported  case.  Imported-virus  case:  A
case  for  which  an  epidemiologic  link  to  an  internationally  imported  case  was  not
identified, but for which viral genetic evidence indicates an imported measles genotype,
i.e., a genotype that is not occurring within the United States in a pattern indicative of
endemic transmission. An endemic genotype is the genotype of any measles virus that
occurs  in  an  endemic  chain  of  transmission  (i.e.,  lasting  ≥12  months).  Any  genotype
that is found repeatedly in US-acquired cases should be thoroughly investigated as a
potential  endemic  genotype,  especially  if  the  cases  are  closely  related  in  time  or
location.  Endemic  case:  A  case  for  which  epidemiological  or  virological  evidence
indicates an endemic chain of transmission. Endemic transmission is defined as a chain
of  measles  virus  transmission  that  is  continuous  for  ≥12  months  within  the  United
States. Unknown source case: A case for which an epidemiological or virological link to
importation or to endemic transmission within the United States cannot be established
after
 a
 thorough
 investigation.
 These
 cases
 must
 be
 carefully
 assessed
epidemiologically to assure that they do not represent a sustained US-acquired chain of
transmission  or  an  endemic  chain  of  transmission  within  the  United  States.  Note:
Internationally  imported,  import-linked,  and  imported-virus  cases  are  considered
collectively to be import-associated cases. States may also choose to classify cases as

“out-of-state-imported” when imported from another state within the United States. For
national reporting, however, cases will be classified as either internationally imported or
US-acquired.  The  possibility  that  a  patient  was  exposed  within  his  or  her  state  of
residence should be excluded; therefore, the patient either must have been out of state
continuously for the entire period of possible exposure (at least 7–21 days before onset
of  rash)  or  have  had  one  of  the  following  types  of  exposure  while  out  of  state:  a)
face-to-face  contact  with  a  person  who  had  probable  or  confirmed  measles,  or  b)
attendance  in  the  same  institution  as  a  person  with  measles  (e.g.,  in  a  school,
classroom, or childcare center). Top of Page Laboratory confirmation is essential for all
outbreaks and all sporadic measles cases. Detection of measles-specific IgM antibody
and measles RNA by real-time RT-PCR are the most common methods for confirmation
of measles infection. Efforts should be made to obtain a serum sample and throat swab
(or  nasopharyngeal  swab)  from  suspected  cases  at  first  contact.  Urine  samples  may
also contain virus and when feasible to do so, collection of both respiratory and urine
samples  can  increase  the  likelihood  of  detecting  virus.  Staff  at  the  CDC  Measles
Laboratory  are  available  for  consultation  and  can  assist  with  confirmatory  testing  as
needed  for  measles.  For  details  on  all  types  of  specimens  (serum,  respiratory,  urine)
collection and transport, see the CDC Measles Lab website. Because measles is a rare
disease  in  the  United  States,  even  with  the  excellent  laboratory  tests  available,  false
positive  results  for  measles  IgM  will  occur.  To  minimize  the  problem  of  false  positive
laboratory results, it is important to restrict case investigation and laboratory tests to
patients most likely to have measles (i.e., those who meet the clinical case definition,
especially  if  they  have  risk  factors  for  measles,  such  as  being  unvaccinated,  recent
history  of  travel  abroad,  without  an  alternate  explanation  for  symptoms,  for  example
epi-linked to known parvovirus case) or those with fever and generalized maculopapular
rash with strong suspicion of measles. During a measles investigation when community
awareness  is  increased,  many  cases  of  febrile  rash  illness  may  be  reported  as

suspected  measles,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  situation  may  be  exaggerated  if  these
cases  are  included  in  the  absence  of  laboratory  confirmation.  This  is  particularly
important as the investigation is ending; at that point, laboratory confirmation should
be  sought  for  all  suspected  cases.  Occasionally,  suspected  cases  may  include
vaccinated individuals. For these cases, laboratory confirmation may be challenging. An
overview  of  diagnostic  tools  is  described  below.  Clinical  specimens  for  real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and virus isolation should be collected at the same
time as samples taken for serologic testing. The preferred specimens for virus isolation
or RT-PCR are throat or nasopharyngeal swabs, but urine may also contain virus. Virus
isolation and RNA detection are more likely to be successful when the specimens are
collected  early  (ideally  within  three  days  of  rash  onset,  but  up  to  ten  days  post  rash
may  be  successful).  Isolation  of  measles  virus  in  cell  culture  or  detection  of  measles
RNA  by  RT-PCR  in  clinical  specimens  confirms  the  diagnosis  of  measles.  However,  a
negative  virus  isolation  or  negative  RT-PCR  results  do  not  rule  out  measles  because
both  methods  are  affected  by  the  timing  of  specimen  collection  and  the  quality  and
handling  of  the  clinical  specimens.  Successful  isolation  of  measles  virus  in  culture  or
direct detection of measles RNA by RT-PCR in the clinical sample is particularly helpful
for case confirmation when serology results are inconclusive. The Vero/hSLAM cell line,
a  recombinant  cell  line  with  a  receptor  for  measles  virus,  has  greatly  improved  the
ability to isolate measles virus in cell culture. Determination of the measles genotype
provides  the  only  means  to  distinguish  between  wild  type  virus  infection  and  a  rash
caused  from  a  recent  measles  vaccination.  In  addition,  the  collection  of  appropriate
specimens  from  which  virus  or  viral  RNA  can  be  obtained  or  amplified  is  extremely
important for molecular epidemiologic surveillance to identify the genotypes associated
with  imported  cases  of  measles.  This  information  is  used  to  track  transmission
pathways, link cases to countries overseas, and to document the absence of endemic
circulation of measles in the United States. [30] Sequence analysis and genotyping for

measles virus is conducted at the CDC Measles Laboratory. Refer to the CDC Measles
Laboratory website for additional information on sample collection, processing and the
genetic  analysis  of  measles.  The  state  health  department  can  provide  guidance
regarding available laboratory services. At the direction of the state health department,
health  care  providers  and  state  and  local  health  departments  may  send  serum
specimens from suspected measles cases to the CDC Measles Laboratory. For detailed
information  on  blood  collection  and  shipping,  refer  to  the  CDC  Measles  Laboratory
website. There is no single serologic laboratory test capable of confirming with 100%
confidence every true case of measles. Public health laboratories that use commercial
measles  assay  kits  are  encouraged  to  fully  characterize  and  validate  the  kits  in  their
laboratories using known test panels of positive and negative specimens. Information
regarding  the  performance  characteristics  of  many  of  the  commercially  available
enzyme  immunoassays  (EIA)  kits  is  available  by  contacting  the  CDC  Measles
Laboratory. The reference laboratory at CDC uses an IgM assay developed at CDC for
measles serologic testing of IgM. The assay is a capture IgM format EIA that utilizes a
recombinant measles nucleoprotein (NP) antigen and tends to have high sensitivity and
specificity  compared  to  some  commercial  EIAs.  Unvaccinated  persons.  Following
measles  virus  infection  in  an  unvaccinated  individual,  measles  IgM  antibodies  appear
within the first few days (1–4 days) of rash onset, peak within the first week post rash
onset  and  are  rarely  detected  after  6–8  weeks.  Measles  IgG  antibodies  are  generally
produced and detectable a few days after the IgM response. The timing of the IgM and
the IgG response varies among individuals but IgG should be detectable by 7–10 days
post rash onset. IgG levels peak approximately two weeks post rash onset and persist
for life. Upon exposure to wild type measles virus, an unvaccinated person may have
detectable  IgM  as  soon  as  the  first  day  of  rash  onset.  However,  depending  on  the
sensitivity of the assay used, a proportion of serum samples (23% in a study using CDC
capture  IgM  assay  [31])  collected  within  72  hours  after  rash  onset  may  give  false

negative results. If a negative result is obtained from serum collected within 72 hours
after  rash  onset,  a  second  serum  should  be  collected  ≥72  hours  after  rash  onset.
Measles IgM is detectable for at least 30 days after rash onset and frequently longer.
Following  vaccination,  measles  IgM  may  not  be  detectable  until  8–14  days  after
vaccination  and  measles  IgG  may  not  be  detectable  for  up  to  three  weeks  post
vaccination.  [32]  Note:  When  a  patient  with  suspected  measles  has  been  recently
vaccinated (6–45 days prior to blood collection) neither IgM nor IgG antibody responses
can distinguish measles disease from the response to vaccination. Determination of the
measles genotype is necessary when measles symptoms occur following an exposure
to  wild  type  virus  and  MMR  vaccine  had  been  provided  as  postexposure  prophylaxis.
Vaccinated persons. Individuals who have been previously exposed to measles antigen
may have a modified disease presentation. These cases are usually detected during an
outbreak  or  after  a  known  exposure  to  a  confirmed  measles  case.  In  rare  instances,
such cases can occur without a known exposure or other risk factor. Vaccinated persons
may not have an IgM response or it may be transient and not detected depending on
timing  of  specimen  collection,  therefore  a  negative  IgM  test  in  vaccinated  persons
suspected of having measles should not be used to rule out the case; RT-PCR testing
may  be  the  best  method  to  confirm  such  cases.  If  viral  testing  results  are
noncontributory,  additional  serological  testing  can  be  performed  for  highly  suspicious
cases. See the sections below. Testing for measles-specific IgM from persons with rash
and  fever  can  produce  false  positive  IgM  results.  As  discussed  above,  false  negative
results  can  also  occur  in  a  previously  vaccinated  person.  Tests  for  IgG  rise  or
seroconversion such as plaque reduction neutralization (PRN) and avidity testing may
be helpful in certain situations. A brief description for the utility of these assays is given
below. More information is available on the CDC Measles webpage. Requests for testing
should  be  directed  to  the  Measles  Laboratory  at  CDC.  (See  Chapter  22,  Laboratory
Support for the Surveillance of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases) Unvaccinated persons. If

classification  of  a  case  cannot  be  made  after  testing  a  serum  sample  collected  ≥72
hours after rash or detection of measles virus from a viral specimen was not successful,
a convalescent serum sample can be collected. A convalescent serum sample should be
collected  10–30  days  after  the  acute  serum.  In  immunologically  naïve  persons,  the
measles IgG response starts slowly and, depending on the assay, can be detected by
day 3–7 after rash onset (range: 1–10 days), but typically persists for a lifetime. Note: 
IgG testing of paired serum samples requires the demonstration of a significant (usually
four-fold)  rise  in  the  titer  of  antibody  against  measles  using  an  assay  that  has  been
validated  for  this  use.  The  test  for  IgG  antibody  should  be  conducted  with  acute  and
convalescent  serum  samples  at  the  same  time  using  the  same  test.  IgG  avidity
assessments  would  also  be  informative  on  such  specimens,  since  low  avidity  results
would rule in a case of measles in this instance (See Avidity of IgG below).  Note:  A
recent systematic review of published literature found no reported confirmed instances
of  human-to-human  transmission  of  the  measles  vaccine  virus.  [33]  Vaccinated
persons. When measles is suspected in previously vaccinated persons, the acute serum
may be IgM negative and IgG positive. Measles infection in such cases is characterized
by a rapid and robust IgG response. [34,35] If a second serum sample collected 5–10
days later remains IgM negative, then the paired serum samples can be tested in a PRN
assay or a quantitative or semi-quantitative IgG EIA validated for such use. Refer to the
CDC Measles Laboratory website for more information. The occurrence of measles-like
illness in recently vaccinated persons can pose particular difficulties. Fever and rash are
known to occur 6–12 days post-vaccination in a small percent of vaccinated persons.[1]
A  positive  measles  IgM  test  cannot  be  used  to  confirm  the  diagnosis  of  measles  in
persons with measles-like illness who received measles vaccine 6–45 days before onset
of rash due to the measles IgM antibody response to the vaccine. Specimens for viral
isolation should be obtained in addition to serologic testing (see “Laboratory Testing”
section  above);  isolation  of  wild  type  measles  virus  would  allow  confirmation  of  the

case.  In  the  absence  of  strain  typing  to  confirm  wild  type  infection,  cases  in  persons
with measles-like illness who received measles vaccine 6–45 days before onset of rash
should be classified as confirmed cases only if a) they meet the clinical case definition
and  b)  they  are  epidemiologically  linked  to  a  laboratory-confirmed  case.  The  gold
standard test for serologic evidence of recent measles infection is a four-fold rise in titer
as  measured  in  a  measles  virus  plaque  reduction  neutralization  test  (PRN  or  PRNT)
between acute and convalescent serum samples. Unlike the IgG EIA, this test measures
measles functional (neutralizing) antibodies, requires specialized reagents, and is labor
and  time  intensive.  Only  in  rare  situations  would  such  testing  be  deemed  necessary.
Prior  approval  should  be  obtained  from  the  CDC  Measles  Laboratory.  A  single
acute-phase serum sample can be tested for IgG avidity; however samples must have
detectable  IgG.  Low  avidity  IgG  confirms  a  recent  measles  infection  (or  recent
vaccination).  Avidity  testing  can  distinguish  between  primary  and  secondary  vaccine
failures. Avidity testing requires specialized reagents and their use is limited to unusual
cases (prior approval required) usually in an outbreak setting when cases with modified
or nonclassic presentation of measles are detected. Specimen collection and shipping
are  important  steps  in  obtaining  laboratory  diagnosis  or  disease  confirmation.
Guidelines  have  been  published  for  specimen  collection  and  handling  for  viral  and
microbiologic agents. Information is also available on using CDC laboratories as support
for  reference  and  disease  surveillance;  this  includes:  The  APHL/CDC  Vaccine
Preventable  Disease  Reference  Centers  [2  pages]  can  perform  RT-PCR  to  detect
measles RNA and measles genotyping. Specific instructions for specimen collection and
shipping may be obtained from the CDC measles website or by contacting the CDC Viral
Vaccine  Preventable  Diseases  Branch  at  404-639-4181.  Specimens  for  virus  isolation
and genotyping should be sent to CDC as directed by the State Health Department. For
additional
 information
 on
 use
 of
 laboratory
 testing
 for
 surveillance
 of
vaccine-preventable diseases, see Chapter 22, “Laboratory Support for the Surveillance

of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases.” Top of Page Each state and territory has regulations
or laws governing the reporting of diseases and conditions of public health importance.
[36]  These  regulations  and  laws  list  the  diseases  to  be  reported  and  describe  those
persons  or  groups  responsible  for  reporting,  such  as  health  care  providers,  hospitals,
laboratories, schools, daycare and childcare facilities, and other institutions. You may
contact your local or state health department for reporting requirements in your state.
Since  continuous  endemic  measles  transmission  has  been  eliminated,  measles  is  an
immediately notifiable disease. Measles cases should be reported promptly (within 24
hours3) by the state health department to the CDC by e-mail: measlesreport@cdc.gov.
Notifications  of  confirmed  cases  using  the  event  code  10140  should  then  be
electronically  reported  by  the  state  health  department  to  the  National  Notifiable
Diseases  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS)  with  the  next  regularly  scheduled  electronic
transmission. 3CSTE List of Nationally Notifiable Diseases [2 pages] The following data
are  epidemiologically  important  and  should  be  collected  in  the  course  of  case
investigation. Additional information also may be collected at the direction of the state
health  department.  Please  also  refer  to  the  measles  surveillance  worksheet  for  a
complete  list  of  the  key  variables  that  should  be  collected  during  case  investigations
(Appendix 8 [2 pages]) Top of Page Prompt recognition, reporting, and investigation of
measles are important because the spread of the disease can be limited with early case
identification  and  vaccination  of  susceptible  contacts.  Active  surveillance  for  measles
disease  should  be  conducted  for  every  confirmed  measles  case  to  assure  timely
reporting of suspected cases in the population known to be affected as well as other
segments  of  the  community  that  may  be  at  high  risk  of  exposure  or  in  whom
vaccination  coverage  is  known  to  be  low.  Efforts  should  be  made  to  obtain  clinical
specimens  for  viral  detection  (see  “Laboratory  Testing”  section  above).  Active
surveillance  should  be  maintained  until  at  least  two  incubation  periods  after  the  last
confirmed  case  is  reported  (e.g.,  two  maximum  incubation  periods  [21  days  from

exposure  to  rash]  or  42  days  after  rash  onset  in  last  case).  If  the  case-patient  was
traveling  by  plane  or  ship  during  the  infectious  period,  the  CDC  Quarantine  Station
(operated by the Division of Global Migration and Quarantine) with jurisdiction for the
reporting  state  should  be  contacted  for  assistance  in  the  investigation  and  contact
tracing of potentially exposed passengers and crew. If unable to contact the QS, call the
DGMQ  24-hour  number  at  866-694-4867  for  assistance.  Information  that  should  be
collected  and  shared  with  DGMQ   includes  date(s)  of  travel,  departure  and  arrival
locations,  and  flight  or  ship  carrier  and  number.  Because  measles  importations  occur
every year in the United States, additional surveillance effort may be required to ensure
that appropriate and timely diagnosis of rash illnesses and reporting of suspected cases
continues. In addition, the rapid investigation and reporting of all suspected cases and
recording of vaccination history and import status for all cases has become increasingly
important.  Additional  guidelines  for  enhancing  surveillance  are  given  in  Chapter  19,
“Enhancing Surveillance.” Regular monitoring of surveillance indicators, including time
intervals between diagnosis and reporting and completeness of reporting, may identify
specific  areas  of  the  surveillance  and  reporting  system  that  need  improvement.  An
important indicator of the adequacy of the measles surveillance system is the detection
of  importations.  In  the  absence  of  measles  endemic  transmission,  imported  cases  or
cases linked to importations should be detected. A program which reports no imported
cases in settings where endemic measles has been eliminated cannot be assumed to
have  adequate  measles  surveillance.  For  more  information  on  surveillance  indicators,
see Chapter 18, “Surveillance Indicators.” The following indicators should be monitored:
Top of Page All reports of suspected measles cases should be investigated immediately.
In  the  measles  post-elimination  era,  a  single  case  of  measles  is  considered  a  public
health priority that requires rapid evaluation for likelihood of measles and appropriate
public  health  response;  additional  effort  is  required  to  ensure  that  appropriate  and
timely diagnosis of rash illnesses and reporting of suspected cases continues in order to

prevent outbreaks and re-establishment of endemic disease transmission. The measles
surveillance  worksheet  (see  Appendix  8  [2  pages])  should  be  used  as  a  guideline  for
collecting  demographic  and  epidemiologic  data  during  case  investigation.  Essential
components of case investigation include establishing a diagnosis of measles, obtaining
immunization histories for confirmed cases, identifying sources of infection, assessing
potential  for  transmission  and  identifying  contacts  without  presumptive  evidence  of
immunity,  classifying  importation  status,  and  obtaining  specimens  for  genotyping.  As
measles continues to be endemic in many regions of the world, importations of measles
occur  every  year  in  the  United  States.  Each  imported  measles  case  could  result  in
transmission of measles to susceptible individuals if exposed. Surveillance and prompt
investigation of cases and their susceptible contacts is important because the spread of
the  disease  can  be  limited  with  early  case  identification  and  public  health  response
including  vaccination  and  quarantine  of  susceptible  contacts  without  presumptive
evidence  of  immunity.  However,  because  some  imported  measles  cases  are  not
detected in our surveillance system, maintaining a high alertness for measles is needed
since  not  every  “sporadic”  case  occurring  in  the  community  can  be  linked  to  an
importation. Information obtained through surveillance is also used to describe current
measles  epidemiology  and  to  evaluate  prevention  policies  and  achievement  of  goals
including  maintenance  of  disease  elimination.  Surveillance  data  are  used  to
characterize persons, groups, or areas in which additional efforts are required to reduce
risk  of  measles  disease  and  outbreaks.  An  essential  first  step  in  a  measles  case
investigation is to obtain necessary clinical information to determine whether or not a
reported case is clinically compatible with measles and to obtain key epidemiological
information. If the case was reported within three days of onset of rash, the case may
not  meet  the  clinical  case  definition  (see  “Case  definitions“)  and  there  should  be
appropriate follow-up to establish a rash duration of at least three days. However public
health  action,  if  needed,  should  not  be  delayed.  Suspected  cases  of  measles  should

have laboratory confirmation. Efforts should be made to obtain clinical specimens for
viral testing (see the section “Laboratory Testing“). In the measles post-elimination era,
most cases of febrile rash illness seen in physician’s offices that meet the clinical case
definition will not be measles. However, health care providers should maintain a high
index  of  suspicion  for  measles  in  clinically  compatible  cases  especially  among
unvaccinated persons and among persons who recently traveled abroad or who have
had  contact  with  persons  such  as  travelers  or  international  visitors.  In  addition,  not
every sporadic measles case is linked to a known importation, so cases that raise high
suspicion of measles, irrespective of associated risk factors, should be investigated for
measles unless an alternative diagnosis is likely (e.g., known epidemiological link to a
parvovirus  case).  It  is  important  to  consider  measles  in  the  differential  diagnoses  of
parvovirus, dengue, Kawasaki disease, and scarlet fever. In addition, when evaluating
patients with suspected measles who have negative tests for acute measles infection,
additional  testing  for  rubella  can  be  considered.  Measles  case  investigations  should
include complete immunization histories that document all doses of measles-containing
vaccine. Acceptable proof of vaccination is documented administration of live measles
virus-containing  vaccine.  Written  or  electronic  records  with  dates  of  vaccine
administration are the only acceptable evidence of vaccination. Case-patients or their
caregivers  may  have  personal  copies  of  immunization  records  available  that  include
dates  of  administration;  these  are  acceptable  for  reporting  purposes.  Usually
immunization records must be sought from review of childcare or school/college records
or from providers; if the case is a health care personnel, immunization records may be
available at the health care facility. Immunization registries are now very useful sources
of  vaccination  histories  for  children  and  adolescents.  As  part  of  the  initial  case
investigation, case-patients or their parents should be asked where all vaccines were
received,  including  the  names  of  private  physicians  and  out-of-town  or  out-of-state
providers.  Records  at  public  health  departments  and  health  centers  should  be

reviewed,  and  private  physicians  should  be  contacted  and  asked  to  review  patient
records for this information. With careful planning in an outbreak setting, it is possible
to contact providers with a list of all case-patients reported to date for whom data are
needed,  and  to  call  back  at  a  prearranged  time,  rather  than  repeatedly  contacting
providers for records on individual children. All confirmed case-patients should then be
classified as recipients of one dose of measles-containing vaccine (as MMR, MMRV, MR
or M), two doses, three or more doses, or no doses of vaccine. The date of vaccination
for each dose and the interval between doses should be noted. Written documentation
of  the  date  of  administration  are  the  only  doses  that  are  considered  to  be  valid;
self-reported  doses  and  history  of  vaccination  is  not  valid.  The  vaccination  status  of
persons  for  whom  vaccination  status  cannot  be  verified  should  be  classified  as
unknown.  Persons  are  categorized  as  unvaccinated  if  they  report  that  they  had  no
history  of  being  vaccinated;  if  available,  immunization  records  should  be  checked  to
verify lack of vaccine receipt. Efforts should be made to identify the source of infection
for every confirmed case of measles. Case-patients or their caregivers should be asked
about contact with other known cases. When no history of contact with a known case
can  be  found,  opportunities  for  exposure  to  unknown  cases  should  be  sought.  Such
exposures  may  occur  in  schools,  during  air  travel,  through  other  contact  with  recent
travelers  or  foreign  visitors,  while  visiting  tourist  locations  (casinos,  resorts,  theme
parks), in health care settings, or in churches. Unless a history of exposure to a known
case within 7–21 days prior to onset of rash in the case is confirmed, case-patients or
their caregivers should be closely queried about all these possibilities. In the event of a
confirmed measles case, local or state health departments should contact health care
providers  in  their  areas  through  the  media  or  Epi-X  to  inform  them  of  the  confirmed
case and request immediate reporting of any suspected cases. Previously unreported
cases may be identified by reviewing emergency room logs, electronic medical records,
or  laboratory  records.  Hospital  emergency  rooms  and  physicians  serving  affected

communities  are  usually  recruited  to  participate  in  active  surveillance.  Tracking  what
information  is  collected  and  what  still  needs  to  be  collected.  Tracking  is  easily
accomplished  by  constructing  a  line  listing  of  cases,  allowing  ready  identification  of
known and unknown data and ensuring complete case investigation. The line listing is
an  essential  component  of  every  outbreak  investigation  (Table  1).  Identifying  risk  of
transmission  in  the  population  affected  by  the  outbreak.  As  part  of  the  case
investigation,  the  potential  for  further  transmission  should  be  evaluated,  and  an
assessment  should  be  made  of  exposed  contacts  of  the  case-patient  (and  their
presumptive evidence of immunity during the infectious period [four days before to four
days  after  onset  of  rash,  day  of  rash  onset  being  day  zero]).  In  a  closed  setting  the
measles  virus  has  been  reported  to  have  been  transmitted  by  airborne  or  droplet
exposure up to two hours after the measles case occupied the area. [37] Based on the
findings  of  individual  case  investigations,  the  population  affected  by  the  outbreak
should be characterized in terms of These essential data elements allow public health
officials to Top of Page In general, the most effective control efforts are those that are
targeted  based  upon  epidemiologic  data,  rather  than  those  that  are  directed  at  the
entire  community.  Neither  susceptibility  nor  risk  of  exposure  is  uniformly  distributed
throughout  the  community,  and  resources  available  for  control  may  be  limited.
Therefore, it is essential that data be used to determine the scope of the investigation
and  the  potential  for  spread  and  that  intervention  be  based  on  those  determinations
using  public  health  judgment  to  guide  investigation  and  control  efforts.  The  primary
strategy is achieving a high level of immunity in the population affected. [28] State and
local  health  departments  should  use  their  judgment  to  prioritize  such  investigations
according to epidemiology and identified transmission settings. Settings at highest risk
of transmission based on the epidemiology of the outbreak may be prioritized for public
health  response.  If  suspected  and  probable  cases  are  investigated,  postexposure
prophylaxis  of  household  contacts  without  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  should

not be delayed pending the return of laboratory results. Other high priority groups for
contact  investigation  are  1)  close  contacts  other  than  household  (e.g.,  persons  who
shared the same room or airspace in various settings), 2) health care settings because
of  the  risk  of  transmission  to  persons  at  high  risk  of  serious  complications,  and  3)
schools/child care centers, colleges or other close settings where a defined number of
persons  have  congregated  (e.g.,  churches)  because  of  high  contact  rates  and
transmission  potential.  In  all  these  settings,  exposures  usually  result  in  an  identified
number of susceptible contacts to follow up on individually. However, efforts to identify
the likelihood of exposure in larger settings such as hospitals (e.g., patients and health
care personnel in ER) may be helpful. In particular, one should identify individuals at
high
 risk
 for
 severe
 disease
 including
 infants
 who
 are
 not
 vaccinated,
immunocompromised  individuals,  and  pregnant  women.  Initial  preparation  for  major
control  activities  may  need  to  be  started  before  the  laboratory  results  are  known.
However,  it  is  reasonable  to  delay  major  control  activities,  such  as  checking
presumptive evidence of immunity and enforcing student exclusion, pending the return
of laboratory results, which should be obtained as quickly as possible (within 24 hours).
If  resources  are  constrained,  other  exposure  settings  will  more  commonly  be  lower
priority  to  investigate,  though  public  health  decisions  should  be  guided  by  the
epidemiologic  investigation.  For  exposures  at  such  venues  as  restaurants,  stadiums,
and  malls,  communicating  with  the  general  public  through  radio,  TV,  Epi-X,  or  other
media, may be used to reach potentially exposed persons rather than individual contact
tracing.  Persons  can  be  guided  to  their  physicians  or  the  health  department  for
assessment of immunity status and the need for vaccination. Additional guidelines for
enhancing
 surveillance
 are
 given
 in
 Chapter
 19,
 “Enhancing
 Surveillance.”
Case-patients should be isolated for four days post rash onset. Exposed persons who
cannot readily document presumptive evidence of measles immunity should be offered
postexposure  prophylaxis  (PEP)  or  excluded  from  the  setting  (school,  hospital,  day

care). For assessment of presumptive evidence of immunity of contacts, only doses of
vaccine with written documentation of the date of receipt should be accepted as valid.
Verbal  reports  of  vaccination  without  written  documentation  should  not  be  accepted.
Persons who have been exempted from measles vaccination for medical, religious, or
other reasons and who do not receive appropriate postexposure prophylaxis within the
appropriate  time  should  be  excluded  from  affected  institutions  in  the  outbreak  area
until  21  days  after  the  onset  of  rash  in  the  last  case  of  measles.  Quarantine  (most
commonly voluntary quarantine) of exposed persons has been implemented especially
where  unvaccinated  or  populations  at  high  risk  were  affected.  In  such  situations,
quarantine  has  helped  to  contain  the  spread  of  the  disease  to  the  surrounding
community.[18,38,39,42]Compliance with quarantine can be ensured at the discretion
of the health department. When deciding about quarantine, factors to consider include
Imposing  quarantine  measures  for  outbreak  control  is  both  difficult  and  disruptive  to
schools and other institutions. Under special circumstances, such as during outbreaks in
schools attended by large numbers of persons who refuse vaccination, restriction of an
event  or  other  quarantine  measures  might  be  warranted.  Presumptive  evidence  of
measles immunity should be assessed for all identified contacts. The MMR vaccine, if
administered within 72 hours of initial measles exposure, and immunoglobulin (IG), if
administered within six days of exposure, may provide some protection or modify the
clinical course of disease among susceptible persons. However, vaccination should be
offered  at  any  interval  following  exposure  in  order  to  offer  protection  from  future
exposures. There is limited data regarding the effectiveness of MMR vaccine and IG PEP
against  disease  prevention.  Thus,  individuals  who  receive  MMR  vaccine  or  IG  as  PEP
should be monitored for signs and symptoms consistent with measles for at least one
incubation  period.  [28]  IG  may  prolong  the  incubation  period  so  extending  the
monitoring  period  for  individuals  who  received  IG  as  PEP  may  be  considered  (see
Prevention  and  control  strategies  in  medical  settings).  Infectious  or  potentially

infectious persons requiring medical attention (e.g., a susceptible contact in quarantine
who develops measles-like symptoms), should be advised to call ahead before visiting a
clinic or emergency department to ensure appropriate precautions are in place prior to
the  medical  encounter.  Except  in  health  care  settings,  unvaccinated  persons  who
receive  their  first  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  within  72  hours  postexposure  may  return  to
childcare,  school,  or  work.  Individuals  who  are  at  risk  for  severe  disease  and
complications from measles (e.g., infants <12 months of age, pregnant women without
evidence of measles immunity, and severely immunocompromised persons regardless
of  vaccination  status  because  they  might  not  be  protected  by  the  vaccine)  should
receive  IG.  IG  administered  intramuscularly  (IGIM)  is  recommended  for  infants  <12
months
 of
 age,
 and
 IG
 administered
 intravenously
 (IGIV)
 for
 severely
immunocompromised persons and pregnant women who are exposed to measles. For
infants  6  through  11  months  of  age,  MMR  vaccine  can  be  given  in  place  of  IG,  if
administered within 72 hours of exposure.[28] IGIM can be given to other persons who
do  not  have  evidence  of  measles  immunity,  but  priority  should  be  given  to  persons
exposed  in  settings  with  intense,  prolonged,  close  contact  (e.g.,  household,  daycare,
classroom).  However,  postexposure  use  of  IGIM  might  be  limited  because  of  volume
limitations;  persons  who  weigh  >30  kg  will  receive  less  than  the  recommended  dose
and will have lower titers than recommended. For exposed persons without evidence of
measles  immunity,  a  rapid  IgG  antibody  test  can  be  used  to  inform  immune  status,
provided that administration of IG is not delayed. After receipt of IG, individuals cannot
return  to  health  care  settings.  In  other  settings  such  as  childcare,  school,  or  work,
factors  such  as  immune  status,  intense  or  prolonged  contact,  and  presence  of
populations at risk, should be taken into consideration before allowing these individuals
to  return.  These  factors  may  decrease  the  effectiveness  of  IG  or  increase  the  risk  of
disease and complications depending on the setting to which they are returning. The
recommended dose of IG given intramuscularly is 0.5 mL/kg of body weight (maximum

dose  =  15  mL)  and  the  recommended  dose  of  IG  given  intravenously  is  400  mg/kg.
Note that children vaccinated before their first birthday should be revaccinated when
they  are  12–15  months  old  and  again  when  they  are  4–6  years  of  age.  Also,  any
nonimmune person exposed to measles who received IG should subsequently receive
MMR  vaccine,  which  should  be  administered  no  earlier  than  6  months  after  IGIM
administration or 8 months after IGIV administration, provided the person is then ≥12
months of age and the vaccine is not otherwise contraindicated. IG should not be used
to  control  measles  outbreaks,  but  rather  to  reduce  the  risk  for  infection  and
complications in the person receiving it. Physicians in affected communities should use
the opportunity of a confirmed measles case for reminder/recall to ensure that all their
patients are up to date with MMR vaccine requirements. Community-wide vaccination
clinics  are  rarely  indicated  but  targeted  clinics  may  be  held  to  reach  affected
populations (e.g., vaccination for health care workers, a work setting clinic with affected
adults, or offering clinics at health departments in under-immunized communities). For
outbreaks  with  sustained,  community-wide  transmission  affecting  preschool-aged
children or adults and with ongoing risk of exposure, health departments may consider
a  second  dose  for  children  aged  1  through  4  years  or  adults  in  these  affected  areas
(including visitors) who have received 1 dose; the second dose given at least 28 days
after  the  first  dose.  For  outbreaks  with  sustained,  community-wide  transmission
affecting  infants  <12  months  of  age  and  with  ongoing  risk  of  exposures  to  infants,
health  departments  may  consider  vaccination  of  infants  aged  6-11  months  in  these
affected  areas  (including  visitors)  with  1  dose  of  MMR  vaccine.  This  recommendation
should be made following careful assessment of the benefit of early protection against
measles during a period of increased transmission and exposure, and risk of decreased
immune  response  following  subsequent  MMR  doses  in  infants  vaccinated  at  <12
months  of  age  compared  with  infants  vaccinated  at  ≥12  months  of  age[41,42].  
Decisions  to  vaccinate  infant  visitors  <12  months  of  age  should  follow  local  health

department  guidance  of  the  affected  area  (e.g.,  if  no  recommendation  was  made  to
vaccinate infant residents, vaccination of infant visitors is not recommended). This dose
does not count as one of the two recommended doses; infants who receive one dose of
MMR vaccine before their first birthday should receive two more doses according to the
routinely  recommended  schedule  (one  dose  at  12  through  15  months  of  age  and
another dose at 4 through 6 years of age or at least 28 days later). [28] Measles cases
in  schools,  colleges,  and  other  institutions,  such  as  day  care  centers  where  close
contact  may  exist,  require  rapid  public  health  investigation  for  response  and  for
evaluation  of  risk  of  further  transmission.  In  educational  institutions  where  there  are
high  rates  of  vaccine  exemptors,  the  potential  risk  of  spread  of  the  disease  is  high.
Control  measures  include  the  following  actions:  All  students  and  all  school  personnel
born in or after 1957 who cannot provide adequate presumptive evidence of immunity
should be vaccinated. Persons receiving their second dose and previously unvaccinated
persons  receiving  their  first  dose  appropriately  (i.e.,  before,  or  within  72  hours  of,
exposure) as part of the outbreak control program may be immediately readmitted to
school.  However  these  individuals  should  be  monitored  for  signs  and  symptoms  of
measles.  Persons  who  work  in  health  care  settings  (including  volunteers,  trainees,
nurses, physicians, technicians, receptionists, and other clerical and support staff) are
at  increased  risk  of  exposure  to  measles  and  at  increased  risk  of  transmission  to
persons at high risk of severe measles. All persons who work in such settings and have
the  potential  for  exposure  to  potentially  infectious  patients  or  materials  (e.g.,
contaminated  air)  should  have  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to  measles  to
prevent  any  potential  outbreak.[21,44]  Health  care  personnel  (HCP)  have  slightly
different criteria for acceptable presumptive evidence of immunity. All HCP should have
presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to  measles.[21,44]  This  information  should  be
documented  and  readily  available  (ideally  through  electronic  medical  records)  at  the
work location. Presumptive evidence of immunity to measles for health care personnel

includes any of the following: Although birth before 1957 is considered as presumptive
evidence  of  immunity,  for  unvaccinated  HCP  born  before  1957  that  lack  laboratory
evidence  of  measles  immunity  or  laboratory  confirmation  of  disease,  health  care
facilities should consider vaccinating personnel with two doses of MMR vaccine at the
appropriate  interval.  *The  first  dose  of  measles-containing  vaccine  should  be
administered on or after the first birthday; the second dose should be administered no
earlier than 28 days after the first dose. †Measles immunoglobulin (IgG) in the serum;
equivocal results should be considered negative. ‡The majority of persons born before
1957  are  likely  to  have  been  infected  naturally  and  may  be  presumed  immune,
depending  on  current  state  or  local  requirements.  For  unvaccinated  personnel  born
before  1957  who  lack  laboratory  evidence  of  measles  immunity  or  laboratory
confirmation  of  disease,  health  care  facilities  should  consider  vaccinating  personnel
with 2 doses of MMR vaccine at the appropriate interval. For unvaccinated personnel
born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory  evidence  of  measles  immunity  or  laboratory
confirmation  of  disease,  health  care  facilities  should  recommend  2  doses  of  MMR
vaccine  during  an  outbreak  of  measles.  In  a  medical  setting,  both  the  occupational
health and infection prevention and control practitioners have a role. When a measles
case occurs in a health care setting, including outpatient and long-term care facilities,
the following measures should be undertaken: An effective vaccination program is the
best  approach  to  prevent  health  care  associated  measles  transmission.  Health  Care
Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and CDC have recommended
that secure, preferably computerized, systems should be used to manage vaccination
records for HCP so records can be retrieved easily as needed. [44] Failure to have such
records can be costly and can increase resources needed to respond to the outbreak.
[46] If a measles case or an outbreak occurs within or in the areas served by a hospital,
clinic, or other medical or nursing facility, all personnel regardless of birth year, should
receive two doses of MMR vaccine, unless they have other documentation of measles

immunity.  [44]  Birth  year  before  1957  is  not  acceptable  presumptive  evidence  of
immunity during an outbreak. Health care facilities should provide MMR vaccine to all
personnel without presumptive evidence of measles immunity at no charge. Recently
vaccinated HCP (i.e., prior to exposure or the outbreak) do not require any restriction in
their  work  activities.  Those  with  documentations  of  one  vaccine  dose  may  remain  at
work  and  should  receive  the  second  dose.  Because  of  the  possibility,  albeit  low,  of
measles vaccine failure in HCP, all staff entering the room of a person with suspect or
confirmed measles should use respiratory protection consistent with airborne infection
control precautions (i.e., use of an N95 respirator), regardless of presumptive immunity
status.  [44]  Serologic  screening  of  HCP  during  an  outbreak  to  determine  measles
immunity  prior  to  vaccination  is  not  recommended,  because  preventing  measles
transmission  requires  the  rapid  vaccination  of  HCP  without  presumptive  evidence  of
immunity,  which  can  be  impeded  by  the  need  to  screen,  wait  for  results,  and  then
contact  and  vaccinate  susceptible  persons.  Results  from  serological  testing,  if
performed,  can  inform  on  need  for  the  second  MMR  vaccine  dose.  HCP  without
presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  who  have  been  exposed  to  measles  should  be
relieved from patient contact and excluded from work from the 5th day after the first
exposure  through  the  21st  day  after  the  last  exposure,  regardless  of  whether  they
received vaccine or intramuscular immune globulin after the exposure. Personnel who
develop measles should be relieved from all patient contact and excluded from work for
four days after they develop rash. [44] Hospital patient contacts of a case, who do not
have  presumptive  evidence  of  measles  immunity,  should  be  vaccinated  or  offered
immune  globulin  or  placed  on  airborne  precautions  until  21  days  after  their  last
exposure to the case-patient or four days after the onset of rash should they develop
measles. [45] If immune globulin is administered to an exposed person, observations
should continue for signs and symptoms of measles for 28 days after exposure since
immune  globulin  may  prolong  the  incubation  period.  [44]  Because  investigating  an

outbreak  requires  many  person-days  of  work,  personnel  are  frequently  transferred  to
the  activity  from  other  areas  in  the  health  department  or  from  other  health
departments and may only be involved in outbreak investigation for a few days before
they  are  replaced  by  others.  This  turnover  in  personnel  can  cause  problems  unless
activities  are  organized  so  that  the  status  of  the  investigation  is  documented  at  all
times.  Some  practical  suggestions  for  organizing  this  activity  are  listed  here.  Prior
versions of this chapter were authored by Preeta Kutty, Jennifer Rota, William Bellini,
Albert  Barskey,  and  Gregory  Wallace.   Top  of  Page  Top  of  Page  To  receive  email
updates about this page, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt07-measles.html
