 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Infections  caused  by
methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)  (Figure)  are  common  in  hospitals
and 
nursing  homes.  Because  MRSA  is  resistant  to  all  commonly  prescribed  beta-lactam
antibiotics (e.g., penicillins and 
cephalosporins), these infections require treatment with alternative antimicrobial drugs.
In  addition,  because  antimicrobial  drugs  usually  must  be  selected  before  identifying
MRSA as the cause of infection, treatment presents a challenge for clinicians. MRSA 
has emerged recently as a more frequent cause of skin and soft tissue infections in the
community, particularly in 
correctional facilities such as prisons, jails, and detention centers 
(1--3). This report summarizes recent investigations of 
MRSA transmission among inmates of correctional facilities in Georgia, California, and
Texas.  Inadequate  personal  hygiene,  barriers  to  medical  care,  and  other  factors
contributed to transmission. Information from these investigations has been used in the
development  of  recently  released  Federal  Bureau  of  Prisons  guidance  for  control  of
MRSA 
(4),  which  recommends  improvements  in  inmate  hygiene,  infection  control,  and
targeted antimicrobial treatment.

Case Definition
 For the investigations described in this report, a confirmed case of MRSA infection was
defined as illness, compatible 
with  staphylococcal  disease,  in  an  inmate  with  laboratory  evidence  of  MRSA  from
culture of tissue or blood. A possible case of MRSA was defined as an illness, compatible
with  staphylococcal  infection,  in  an  inmate  who  had  an  epidemiologic  link  to  a
laboratory-confirmed  case  but  did  not  have  cultures  performed.  A  case  of  MRSA
infection was defined as invasive if 
MRSA  was  isolated  from  cultures  of  a  normally  sterile  site  such  as  blood  or
cerebrospinal fluid. 
Georgia
 Since 2001, the Georgia Division of Public Health has 
assisted the Georgia Department of Corrections (GDC) and 
local health departments with three investigations of MRSA skin infection outbreaks in
three different types of correctional facilities. These investigations are described below.
 Investigation  1.  During  June--September  2001,  a  total  of  11  cases  of  MRSA  skin
infections  were  identified  in  an  all-male,  200-bed,  minimum-security  state  detention
center with an average incarceration duration of 90 days. Of the 11 
inmates,  five  had  repeated  MRSA  skin  infection  occurring  after  the  initial  lesion  (i.e.,
recurrent disease). A case-control study identified prolonged (>36 days) incarceration
and  outdoor  work  duty  as  risk  factors  for  MRSA  infection.  Other  possible  risk  factors
included inadequate wound care by medical staff and limited access to soap for hand

washing and general bathing (soap 
was locked in inmate cells away from sinks and showers). In response to this outbreak,
the detention center implemented facility-wide screening for skin disease, standardized
antimicrobial  treatment  recommendations,  inmate  education,  and  introduction  of
alcohol-based hand rubs. During December 2001--May 2002, no MRSA cases occurred;
however, during 
June--November  2002,  a  total  of  14  cases  were  reported.  Staff  reviewed  previous
recommendations  for  hygiene  education  with  inmates  and  reinforced  proper  wound
care and antimicrobial use. Chlorhexidine-containing soap was provided daily for 3 days
among 
the  entire  inmate  population.  During  December  2002--April  2003,  five  cases  of  MRSA
occurred.  
Investigation 2. During April--July 2002, a total of 11 cases of MRSA were reported from
a 1,500-bed, 
maximum-security  state  prison  with  an  average  incarceration  duration  of  591  days.
Infections ranged from small furuncles to deeper abscesses; no deaths or bacteremias
occurred, and no inmates were hospitalized. A case-control study identified risk 
factors,  including  previous  antimicrobial  use,  self-draining  of  boils,  skin  laceration
(intentional or accidental), washing clothes by hand, sharing soap, and recent arrival at
the prison (since 2001). On the basis of these findings, the prison 
implemented appropriate laundering, improved access to wound care, 
increased availability and quantity of soap, and began inmate 
hygiene education. Monitoring of MRSA infections from the beginning of the outbreak in
April  2002  until  February  2003  identified  73  inmates  with  infection,  10  of  whom  had

recurrent disease. 
 During July--August 2002, a total of 23 cases of MRSA 
occurred in 19 inmates. Interventions were implemented during 
late  July--August;  however,  six  cases  of  MRSA  occurred  among  inmates  during
September--October. In response, in February 2003, the prison housed a cohort of 
MRSA-infected inmates separately and provided a 5-day supply 
of chlorhexidine-containing soap for personal hygiene. Despite these measures, during
March--May 2003, an additional 29 
cases  of  MRSA  were  reported.  GDC  and  prison  staff  are  working  to  improve
implementation of recommended interventions 
for preventing additional cases of MRSA among inmates. 
 Investigation  3.  During  June--October  2002,  a  2,800-bed  county  jail  with  an  average
incarceration duration of 25 
days identified 13 cases of skin lesions, initially thought to be spider bites, from which
MRSA  was  isolated.  Three  inmates  were  hospitalized  for  wound  care.  A  retrospective
chart review identified 16 cases and 29 possible cases of MRSA skin infections that had
occurred during this period. Infections included folliculitis, furunculosis, and abscess. In
December, the jail implemented screening for active skin lesions among the inmates,
standardized treatment protocols including treatment with non--beta-lactam antibiotics
for suspected 
S. aureus infections, hygiene education for inmates, and changes in 
laundry  practices.  Through  increased  use  of  bacterial  cultures  to  evaluate  skin
infections,  59  additional  MRSA  cases  were  identified  during  February--April  2003.  A
review  of  medical  records  of  50  patients  who  received  antimicrobials  identified  13
(26%) instances in which beta-lactam antimicrobials were used 

inappropriately for nine (18%) inmates treated before culture 
results  and  for  four  (8%)  inmates  treated  after  results  indicated  culture-confirmed
MRSA. 
Los Angeles County, California
 The  Los  Angeles  (LA)  County  jail  system,  the  largest  in  the  country,  houses  an
estimated 20,000 inmates daily and has 
an average duration of incarceration of 44 days. After an increase in reports of spider
bites,  the  jail  developed  a  protocol  in  September  2001  that  included  culture  of  any
lesions suspected to be spider bites. The LA County Department of 
Health  Services  (LACDHS)  was  notified  after  MRSA  was  found  as  the  cause  of  many
"spider bite" lesions 
(2). In 2002, a total of 921 MRSA skin infections were identified; 726 (79%) inmates had
data available for review. The median time from incarceration to MRSA culture was 45
days (range: 1--1,160 days); 65 (9%) MRSA cases were identified within 5 days after 
incarceration. During January--June 2003, a total of 776 
inmates with MRSA infections were identified (14% identified within 5 days 
after incarceration), yielding 1,697 cases reported since the jail 
began surveillance for skin lesions. Investigators 
observed inadequate infection-control measures in the clinic area; 
enhanced administrative controls were necessary to ensure 
frequent
 showering
 and
 appropriate
 personal
 hygiene
 for
 inmates.
 LACDHS
recommended improvements for skin lesion 

surveillance,  standardized  treatment  protocols  including  empiric  treatment  with
non--beta-lactam antimicrobials for all wound infections, hygiene education for inmates,
environmental cleaning, and increased frequency of laundry changes. 
Improvements in antimicrobial treatment of MRSA infections have occurred; however,
other recommendations have yet to be implemented fully.
Texas
 The  Texas  Department  of  Criminal  Justice  (TDCJ)  operates  105  facilities  housing
145,000 inmates. In 1996, 
TDCJ  implemented  a  comprehensive  set  of  treatment  and  prevention  guidelines  for
MRSA skin infections that included 
six components: 1) surveillance, 2) hygiene education for inmates, 3) access to proper
wound care, 4) standardized 
antimicrobial  therapy  based  on  drug  susceptibility  data  (including  directly  observed
therapy),  5)  early  treatment  of  skin  disease,  and  6)  eradication  of  MRSA  from
asymptomatic carriers who have recurrent MRSA infections. Since 1998, TDCJ has 
required culturing of all draining skin lesions and reporting of results to the TDCJ Office
of
 Preventive
 Medicine.
 The
 proportion
 of
 S.
 aureus
 infections
 that
 were
methicillin-resistant increased from 24% (864 of 3,520) in 1998 to 66% (5,684 of 8,633)
in 
2002.  In  December  2000,  a  case-control  study  (16  cases  and  32  controls)  was
performed  for  all  cases  of  MRSA  identified  during  November  2000  at  the  correctional
system's largest intake facility. The study identified previous skin infections and recent
close  contact  with  an  MRSA-infected  inmate  as  risk  factors  for  infection.  Of  10,942

cases of MRSA reported from 
the beginning of surveillance during January 1996--July 2002, a total of 189 (1.7%) were
invasive. The remainder were either unknown site (397 [3.6%]) or skin and soft tissue 
infections (10,356 [94.6%]). During 1999--2001, three deaths 
were attributed to MRSA infections. Skin infection screening at the time of incarceration
was added to the guidelines in 
2003. Implementation of guidelines and a continued multidisciplinary approach to MRSA
infections has not led to 
substantial  decreases  in  the  incidence  of  MRSA.  Additional  interventions  and  their
effects on infection and carriage are being 
evaluated,  and  barriers  to  efficient  implementation  of  the  guidelines  are  being
investigated. 
 Reported by: M Tobin-D'Angelo, MD, K Arnold, MD, S Lance-Parker, DVM, Georgia Div of
Public Health; M LaMarre, Office of 
Health Svcs, Georgia Dept of Corrections. E Bancroft, MD, A Jones, MPH, 
A Itano, MPH, M Chambers, MD, L Mascola, MD, Los Angeles 
County  Dept  of  Health  Svcs;  J  Clark,  MD,  M  Tadesse,  Los  Angeles  County  Jail,  Los
Angeles, California; M Kelley, MD, Texas Dept of Criminal Justice; N Pascoe, Texas Dept
of Health. M Kuehnert, MD, S Fridkin, MD, 
D Jernigan, MD, Div of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center 
for Infectious Diseases; E Beltrami, MD, Epidemiology Program Office; SH Wootton, MD,
B Coignard, MD, EIS officers, CDC.
Editorial Note:
  The investigations described in this report identified four factors that contributed to
spread of MRSA 
among  inmates.  First,  investigators  identified  barriers  to  routine  inmate  hygiene.

Access  to  soap  often  was  limited  or  was  restricted  for  security  reasons,  and  new
alcohol-based  hand  rubs  were  difficult  to  introduce  because  of  misuse  of  these
products. 
Mental health and behavior problems among inmates might have contributed to poor
adherence and hindered efforts to 
improve  hygiene.  Inmates'  clothing  was  washed  by  hand  or  in  bulk  loads,  and
potentially contaminated laundry might not 
have  undergone  sufficiently  high  water  temperatures  or  drying  to  eliminate  bacteria.
Second, proper 
access to medical care was hindered by co-payments required for acute care visits and
by inadequate supplies and staff for wound care. Third, frequent medical staff turnover
was a challenge to providing education on proper infection-control procedures. Finally,
MRSA 
might  have  been  an  unrecognized  cause  of  skin  infections  among  inmates;  wounds
often  were  attributed  to  spider  bites,  and  cultures  might  have  been  collected
infrequently even in cases in which antimicrobial treatment failed. 
 The emergence of MRSA as a cause of inmate skin and soft tissue infections presents a
challenge to correctional 
facilities, health-care providers, and public health agencies. The potential public health
impact  of  MRSA  disease  transmission  in  correctional  facilities  is  substantial;  during
2002, approximately 2 million prisoners in the United States were incarcerated at any
given time, and one in every 142 U.S. residents was in prison or jail 
(5). Barriers to control of communicable diseases 
such as viral hepatitis and tuberculosis in correctional facilities are well known 
(3,6--8). Because of these barriers, prisons and 

jails
 can
 serve
 as
 amplifiers
 of
 MRSA
 skin
 disease.
 In
 areas
 where
community-associated MRSA appears to be increasing (e.g., 
LA  County),  correctional  facilities  with  shorter  durations  of  incarceration  might
represent settings in which MRSA is 
imported  from  the  community  and  exported  back  to  the  community  via  released
inmates. 
 A strategy to improve hygiene and infection-control practices in correctional facilities
will likely be the most 
effective approach for long-term success. Such a strategy should 
include 1) skin infection screening and monitoring (e.g., maintaining 
a log of skin infections and visual skin screening on intake), 2) culturing suspect lesions
and  providing  targeted  antimicrobial  therapy,  3)  efforts  to  improve  inmate  hygiene
(e.g., education about appropriate hand and body hygiene, 
appropriate laundering techniques, measures to limit use of shared items, and greater
availability  of  soap),  and  4)  improved  access  to  wound  care  and  trained  health-care
staff. Adapting traditional hospital-based approaches to preventing MRSA 
transmission  (e.g.,  placing  infected  persons  in  a  separate  area  or  eradicating  nasal
colonization) might not be feasible in most correctional facilities.
 Some  state  public  health  agencies  have  developed  their  own  approaches  for
addressing MRSA in correctional settings. 
In  July  2003,  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Prisons  issued  guidelines  to  prevent  and  control
MRSA  in  correctional  facilities  (4).  Facilities  detecting  a  substantial  number  of  MRSA
infections  should  implement  improved  hygiene,  infection-control,  and  treatment
practices. Correctional facilities experiencing outbreaks of MRSA should seek assistance
from  their  local  and  state  health  departments.  Preventing  MRSA  disease  in  inmates

might be an important measure for preventing MRSA in 
the  community  outside  the  correctional  facility.  Additional  information  about  MRSA  is
available at 
      http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/hip/aresist/mrsa.htm  
References
 
 
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of

Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
  Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 10/16/2003 

    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 10/16/2003
 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5241a4.htm
