Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Authors:  Nina  B.  Masters,  PhD;  Jessica  Leung,  MPH;  Jamie
Tappe,  MPH;  Mona  Marin,  MD;  Stephen  N.  Crooke,  PhD;  Bettina  Bankamp,  PhD;  Sara
Oliver, MD; Paul Rota, PhD Mumps is an acute viral illness caused by a paramyxovirus
and  typically  presents  as  swelling  of  the  parotid  (parotitis)  or  other  salivary  gland[s].
Mumps  parotitis  may  be  unilateral  or  bilateral  and  usually  lasts  about  3  to  7  days
(average 5 days); most cases of parotitis resolve within 10 days of onset. Nonspecific
prodromal symptoms may precede parotitis by several days, including low-grade fever,
which  may  last  3–4  days,  myalgia,  anorexia,  malaise,  and  headache.  The  incubation
period  for  mumps  ranges  from  12–25  days,  but  parotitis  typically  develops  16  to  18
days after exposure to mumps virus.[1] Fully vaccinated persons can get infected with
mumps  virus  but  are  at  much  lower  risk  for  mumps  illness  and  its  complications.
Mumps reinfection in patients who previously had natural infection or recurrent mumps
(parotid swelling resolves and then weeks to months later occurs on the same or other
side)  can  also  occur.  [2–4]  Mumps  infection  may  present  only  with  nonspecific  or
primarily  respiratory  symptoms  or  may  be  asymptomatic.[5]  Among  unvaccinated
people,  approximately  20%  of  infections  can  be  asymptomatic;[6–8]  the  frequency  of
asymptomatic  infection  among  vaccinated  people  is  unknown.  The  most  common
complications of mumps include orchitis, oophoritis, mastitis, pancreatitis, hearing loss,
meningitis, and encephalitis. Complications may occur in the absence of parotitis.[9,10]
The  frequency  of  complications  is  lower  in  vaccinated  patients  compared  with
unvaccinated  patients  (Table  1).[11-14]  Among  vaccinated  patients,  complications  of
mumps are uncommon but occur more frequently among adults than children, mainly
due to higher rates of orchitis among post-pubertal males.[8] Up to half of patients with
mumps  orchitis  develop  atrophy  of  the  affected  testicle(s).[15,16]  While  there  is  a

theoretical risk for temporary sterility or subfertility from oligospermia, azoospermia, or
asthenospermia among men with mumps orchitis,[15] no studies have assessed risk for
permanent  infertility.  Nephritis,  myocarditis,  and  other  sequelae,  including  paralysis,
seizures, cranial nerve palsies, and hydrocephalus have also been reported in mumps
patients  but  are  uncommon.  Death  due  to  mumps  is  exceedingly  rare.  Table  1.
Frequency of complications among unvaccinated and vaccinated patients with mumps
Mumps  virus  is  transmitted  person  to  person  through  direct  contact  with  saliva  or
respiratory  droplets  of  a  person  infected  with  mumps  (i.e.,  droplet  transmission).
Mumps  is  not  as  easily  transmitted  as  measles  or  varicella,  viruses  that  spread  via
predominately airborne transmission. Mumps typically requires close contact to spread,
especially  among  vaccinated  populations.  Close  contact*  is  defined  for  mumps  as:  A
person with mumps is considered infectious from 2 days before through 5 days after
parotitis  onset.[22]  Although  mumps  virus  has  been  isolated  from  7  days  before
through  11–14  days  after  parotitis  onset,[22–24]  the  highest  percentage  of  rRT-PCR
positive results and the highest virus loads occur closest to parotitis onset and decrease
rapidly thereafter.[22,25,26] As a result, specimens for PCR testing should be collected
within 10 days, ideally within 0–3 days, of parotitis onset (specimen collection details
can  be  found  in  the  mumps  chapter  of  the  Laboratory  Support  for  Surveillance  of
Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases).   Transmission  may  also  occur  from  persons  with
asymptomatic  infections  or  only  prodromal  symptoms.[27]  No  studies  have  assessed
peak  infectiousness  in  mumps  patients  who  do  not  have  parotitis  (e.g.,  patients  who
only have nonspecific respiratory symptoms or only have complications like orchitis). In
lab-confirmed patients without parotitis, onset of first symptom can be used in place of
onset  of  parotitis  to  estimate  a  patient’s  infectious  period.  Mumps  virus  has  been
isolated up to 14 days in urine[28] and semen[29], but for optimal specimen collection
and interpretability of results, specimens for PCR testing should be collected within 10
days of parotitis onset (specimen collection details can be found in the mumps chapter

of the Laboratory Support for Surveillance of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases).  No studies
have assessed if mumps virus can be transmitted through either of these fluids. Mumps
infection that occurs in pregnant women is generally benign and not more severe than
in  women  who  are  not  pregnant.  Few  studies  have  been  conducted  to  determine  if
there  is  a  risk  that  mumps  infection  in  pregnant  women  may  cause  complications
during  pregnancy.  One  study  from  1966  reported  an  association  between  maternal
mumps infection during the first trimester of pregnancy and an increase in the rate of
spontaneous abortion or intrauterine fetal death,[30] but this association was not found
in another study.[31] Another study did not find a significant association between low
birth weight and mumps infection during pregnancy.[32] While there are case reports of
congenital  malformations  in  newborns  born  to  mothers  who  had  mumps  during
pregnancy,[33]  the  only  prospective,  controlled  study  found  rates  of  malformations
were similar between newborns of mothers who had mumps and those of mothers who
did  not  have  mumps  during  pregnancy.[34]  Not  all  cases  of  parotitis—especially
sporadic ones—are due to mumps infection. Parotitis can be caused by parainfluenza
virus  types  1‒3,  Epstein  Barr  virus,  influenza  A  virus  (H3N2),  human  herpes  virus  6A
and  6B,  herpes  simplex  viruses  1  and  2,  Coxsackie  A  virus,  echovirus,  adenoviruses,
lymphocytic  choriomeningitis  virus,  and  human  immunodeficiency  virus.[35]  There
have also been limited case reports of parotitis associated with COVID-19. Parotitis can
also result from noninfectious causes such as drugs, tumors, immunologic diseases, and
obstruction of the salivary duct. However, other causes do not produce parotitis on an
epidemic scale.[36,37] Top of Page In the prevaccine era, mumps was a notable cause
of  morbidity  in  the  United  States,  with  well  over  100,000  cases  reported  each  year.
During  that  time,  mumps  was  a  universal  childhood  disease,  with  highest  incidence
among  children  5–9  years  of  age.[38,39]  Permanent  unilateral  deafness  caused  by
mumps occurred in 1 of 20,000 infected persons. Bilateral, severe hearing loss was very
rare.[19] Before 1967, mumps accounted for approximately 10% of all cases of aseptic

meningitis.[40]  In  1967,  mumps  encephalitis  accounted  for  36%  of  all  reported
encephalitis  cases.[38]   During  1962–1967,  there  were  3  deaths  per  10,000  reported
mumps
 cases.[38]
 Mumps
 also
 substantially
 affected
 US
 armies
 during
mobilization.[41]  The  average  annual  rate  of  hospitalization  resulting  from  mumps
during  World  War  I  was  55.8  per  1,000,  which  was  exceeded  only  by  the  rates  for
influenza  and  gonorrhea.[41]  Mumps  vaccine  was  licensed  in  the  United  States  in
1967.[38] In 1977, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) made a
recommendation  for  1  dose  of  mumps  vaccine  for  all  children  at  any  age  after  12
months.[42] In 1989, children began receiving 2 doses of mumps vaccine because of
implementation  of  a  2-dose  measles  vaccination  policy  using  the  combined  measles,
mumps, and rubella vaccine (MMR).[43] In 2006, ACIP recommended a 2-dose mumps
vaccine  policy  routinely  for  school-aged  children,  students  at  post-high  school
educational  institutions,  health-care  personnel,  and  international  travelers,  and
recommended that a second dose be considered in outbreak settings for children aged
1-4 years and adults who had received 1 dose.[44] Following mumps vaccine licensure
and  ACIP  recommendations  for  its  use,  reported  cases  of  mumps  steadily  decreased
from  >152,000  cases  in  1968  to  2,982  cases  in  1985.[45]  During  1986–1987,  a
resurgence occurred with more than 20,000 reported mumps cases. The primary cause
of this resurgence was low vaccination levels among adolescents and young adults.[45]
In  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s,  outbreaks  were  reported  among  primary  and
secondary  school  children  who  had  previously  received  1  dose  of  mumps-containing
vaccine. [46,47] The second dose of MMR vaccine recommended in 1989 subsequently
improved mumps control as well. The launch of the Vaccines for Children’s program in
1994 further expanded access to routine childhood immunizations, including MMR. By
the early 2000s, reported mumps cases declined to an average of less than 300 cases
annually.[48]  Starting  in  2006,  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  number  of  mumps
cases  and  outbreaks  reported  in  the  United  States,  with  several  peak  years.  The

epidemiology  has  shifted  from  the  majority  of  cases  occurring  among  unvaccinated
children  during  the  pre-vaccine  era  to  most  cases  occurring  in  fully  vaccinated
adolescents  and  young  adults,  mainly  driven  by  outbreaks  on  college  campuses,
close-knit communities, and other congregate settings. Although this resurgence began
with geographically localized large outbreaks, it has since transitioned to outbreaks of
varying  sizes  and  settings  across  most  US  states.  In  2006,  the  first  peak  year,  6,584
cases were reported, predominately among midwestern college students.[12] In the 6
states  where  most  cases  were  reported,  approximately  63%  of  patients  with  known
vaccination  status  had  received  2  doses  of  MMR  vaccine.[12]  In  2007  and  2008,  the
number of annual cases nationwide declined to 800 and 454 cases, respectively.[49,50]
From  2009  to  2010,  2  large  outbreaks  occurred,  the  first  among  Orthodox  Jewish
communities in the Northeast (3502 cases)[13] and the second in the U.S. Territory of
Guam (505 cases).[14] Cases in these outbreaks were mainly among fully vaccinated
children  and  adolescents.[13,14]  Between  July  2010  and  December  2015,  at  least  23
large outbreaks (20–485 cases per outbreak) were reported in 18 states, most of which
occurred among fully vaccinated young adults of college age.[51] Following a relative
decline in cases from 2011–2013 (~200–500 cases reported annually), cases began to
increase  again  in  2016  and  2017,  peaking  with  >6,000  cases  reported  in  both
years.[52,53] From January 2016 through June 2017, 39 health departments (37 states,
New  York  City,  Washington  DC)  reported  150  outbreaks,  accounting  for  >9,000
cases.[54,55]  Median  outbreak  size  was  10  cases  (range:  3–2,954  cases).  Outbreaks
occurred in many different settings, including universities, schools, athletics teams and
facilities, church groups, workplaces, large parties or events, and households. Of 7,187
(78%) patients with known vaccination status, 75% had ≥2 doses of MMR vaccine.[55]
Since  2007,  patients  aged  <18  years  account  for  approximately  1/3  of  all  reported
mumps cases, with the majority being vaccinated (among patients aged ≥1 year with
known  vaccination  status,  74%  of  1–4-year-olds  had  received  ≥1  MMR  and  86%  of

5–17-year-olds had received ≥2 MMR doses).[56]  In 2019, there were approximately
3,800 cases reported, occurring in a range of different outbreak settings[57] with 898
cases  reported  in  detention  facilities  across  several  states,  primarily  among  adult
migrants.[58]  During  2020–2022,  there  has  been  a  large  reduction  in  mumps  cases
likely  due  to  social  distancing  and  the  other  COVID-19  prevention  measures,  with
150–700  reported  annually.[57]  A  Cochrane  review  and  meta-analysis  published  in
2021  found  a  pooled  estimate  of  vaccine  effectiveness  of  two  doses  of  MMR  vaccine
against clinical mumps disease of 86% (RR 0.12, CI: 0.04-0.35), and 1 dose of 72% (RR
0.24, CI: 0.07-0.76),[59] lower than for the other two components of the MMR vaccine
(97% for measles after two doses and 97% for rubella after one dose). While evidence is
limited, experts believe that several factors contribute to some vaccinated people being
at  risk  for  mumps  infection,  including:  Introduction  of  mumps  virus  into  settings  with
intense  or  frequent  close  contact  exposures  that  facilitate  transmission  can  lead  to
outbreaks  among  highly  vaccinated  people.  Examples  of  intense  close  contact
exposures include physical contact, such as attendance at a crowded party, or during
dancing,  contact  sports,  kissing  or  sexual  activity  and  sharing  of  gym  equipment  or
drinks. Examples of frequent close contact exposures include prolonged contact such as
living  in  confined  or  shared  spaces;  repeated  contact  such  as  meeting  regularly,  or
sharing a daily routine. In 2012, CDC issued interim guidance on consideration of the
use  of  a  third  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  during  mumps  outbreaks  for  specific  target
populations.  One  study  conducted  during  a  large  university  outbreak  in  2015–2016
found that students who received a third MMR vaccine dose had a 78% lower risk of
mumps than those with 2 doses.[60] The increased burden of mumps and results from
this  study,  led  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  to  examine
the evidence on use of a third dose of MMR vaccine during mumps outbreaks.[61] In
October  2017,  ACIP  recommended  a  third  dose  of  a  mumps-containing  vaccine₸  for
people  who  are  identified  by  public  health  authorities  as  being  part  of  a  group  or

population  at  increased  risk  for  mumps  because  of  an  outbreak.   Subsequently,  CDC
developed guidance for health departments on implementation of the recommendation.
The duration of protection from a third dose of MMR vaccine is unknown. Immunological
studies  suggest  the  added  protection  from  a  third  MMR  dose  may  be  short  term,  as
people  who  received  a  third  dose  were  observed  to  have  a  boost  in  neutralizing
antibodies one month after vaccination that then declined to near-baseline levels after
one year [62]. More studies are needed to assess vaccine effectiveness over time and if
other  mechanisms  of  the  immune  response  may  provide  longer  term  protection.
Therefore, a third dose of MMR vaccine is recommended only for additional individual
protection against mumps during outbreaks, as demonstrated by vaccine effectiveness
studies  conducted  during  outbreaks.  ACIP  currently  recommends  two  doses  of  MMR
vaccine  for  routine  vaccination;  there  is  no  recommendation  for  routine  vaccination
with a third dose. Worldwide, mumps is not as well controlled as measles and rubella.
From 1999–2019, on average, about 500,000 mumps cases were reported to the World
Health Organization annually [63]; however, global mumps incidence is challenging to
estimate as mumps is not a notifiable disease in many countries. As of 2021, mumps
vaccine  is  routinely  used  in  123  of  194  (63%)  countries.[64]  Since  the  mid-2000s,
mumps outbreaks have also been reported among populations with high 2-dose MMR
coverage  in  other  countries,  including  United  Kingdom,[65]  Ireland,[66]  New
Zealand,[67] Canada,[68] Netherlands,[69] Spain,[70] and Norway.[71] Most sequenced
mumps  specimens  in  these  recent  outbreaks  were  genotype  G  [68,  69,  71].  Despite
these  outbreaks,  mumps  incidence  is  still  much  higher  in  countries  that  do  not  have
routine  mumps  vaccination.  Top  of  Page  For  specific  information  about  mumps
vaccination, refer to the Pink Book, which provides general recommendations, including
vaccine  use  and  scheduling,  immunization  strategies  for  providers,  vaccine  content,
adverse events and reactions, vaccine storage and handling, and contraindications and
precautions.  Top  of  Page  The  following  case  definition  for  mumps  was  updated  and

approved by the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists in 2023.[72] to improve
the specificity of the case definition for mumps, particularly for sporadic cases. In the
absence  of  a  more  likely  alternative  diagnosis,  an  acute  illness  characterized  by:
Confirmed:  Probable:  Suspect:  Top  of  Page  If  mumps  is  suspected,  laboratory  testing
should  be  performed.  rRT-PCR  testing  is  preferred  to  serologic  testing  for  mumps
whenever  possible.  This  is  because  rRT-PCR  testing  allows  for  opportunities  for
molecular  characterization  of  circulating  mumps  viruses.  Additionally,  in  vaccinated
persons,  the  IgM  response  may  not  be  detectable,  and  there  are  also  concerns  with
cross-reactivity  to  other  viruses.   All  specimens  sent  to  CDC  or  Association  of  Public
Health  Laboratories  (APHL)-Vaccine  Preventable  Diseases  (VPD)  Reference  Centers
should  be  accompanied  by  complete  information  on  the  case’s  symptom  onset  date
and  vaccination  status.  Refer  to  Chapter  22,  “Laboratory  Support  for  Surveillance  of
Vaccine-Preventable Diseases” for detailed information on laboratory testing for mumps
and specific information on specimen collection and shipment. To help local and state
health departments conserve public health resources during mumps outbreaks, CDC, in
collaboration  with  CSTE  and  APHL,  developed  guidance  to  optimize  mumps  testing
practices.  This  guidance  is  intended  to  reduce  the  testing  burden  during  outbreaks.
CDC Guidance for Optimizing Mumps Testing can be found on the CDC website. Health
departments can also distribute the CDC Mumps Testing Job-Aid Flow Charts to educate
providers  on  scenarios  where  specimen  collection  is  appropriate.  Public  health
laboratories are encouraged to send select specimens (Guidance on mumps testing can
be found in the Laboratory Testing Chapter in the CDC Manual for the Surveillance of
Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases  and  on  the  CDC  Mumps  Laboratory  Testing  website)  to
CDC or the APHL VPD Reference Center laboratories for routine molecular surveillance
(e.g.,  sequencing  the  small  hydrophobic  (SH)  gene  to  determine  the  mumps  virus
genotype). Molecular surveillance is important to monitor any changes in the genotype
or strain prevalence over time and to trace pathways of transmission. Since 2006, over

98%  of  sequenced  mumps  isolates  in  the  United  States  are  from  the  same  genotype
(genotype G), with limited sequence diversity within the genotype [73]. The high level
of similarity among US sequences limits the usefulness of routine genotyping to inform
the  epidemiologic  investigation  during  outbreak(s).  However,  if  the  epidemiology
suggests  a  case(s)  may  not  be  related  to  an  outbreak,  a  notable  difference  (i.e.,
different  genotype  or  strain)  can  help  identify  sporadic  cases  and  inform  outbreak
response efforts. More research is needed to evaluate the minimum difference needed
between  sequences  to  determine  if  cases  are  epidemiologically  related.  With  wide
global distribution of genotype G viruses, and the same circulating Sheffield reference
strain endemic in Canada,[74] sequencing larger segments of the mumps genome may
be useful to identify sources and epidemiologic linkages.[75] However, information on
the  distribution  of  mumps  lineages  around  the  world  is  currently  limited  and  not
sufficient  to  identify  country  of  origin  for  imported  cases.  Specimen  collection  and
shipping are important steps in obtaining laboratory diagnosis or disease confirmation.
Guidelines  have  been  published  for  specimen  collection  and  handling  for  viral  and
microbiologic agents. Information is also available on using CDC laboratories as support
for reference and disease surveillance; this includes: Specific instructions for specimen
collection  may  be  obtained  via  the  Specimen  Collection,  Storage,  and  Shipment  site.
For questions regarding laboratory testing, Mumps contacts are listed in Table 1 of the
Laboratory  Support  for  Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  Top  of  Page
Mumps is currently a reportable condition in all US states. Each state and US territory
has  regulations  or  laws  governing  the  reporting  of  diseases  and  conditions  of  public
health  importance.[76]  These  regulations  and  laws  list  the  diseases  that  are  to  be
reported  and  describe  those  persons  or  groups  responsible  for  reporting,  such  as
healthcare  providers,  hospitals,  laboratories,  schools,  daycare  and  childcare  facilities,
and  other  institutions  (e.g.,  correctional  and  detention  facilities).  Persons  reporting
these  conditions  should  contact  their  Local  or  State  Health  Department  for

state-specific  reporting  requirements.  Provisional  notifications  of  all  probable  and
confirmed mumps cases should be sent by the State Health Department to CDC using
event  code  10180  via  the  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System
(NNDSS)  within  7  days  (i.e.,  the  next  reporting  cycle).  Electronic  reporting  of  case
records  should  not  be  delayed  because  of  incomplete  information  or  lack  of
confirmation.  Following  completion  of  case  investigations,  case  records  should  be
updated with any new information and resubmitted to CDC. Final laboratory results may
not  be  available  for  the  initial  report  but  should  be  submitted  via  NNDSS  when
available. The state in which the patient resides at the time of diagnosis should submit
the  case  notification  to  CDC.  For  people  who  may  be  under  the  custody  of  a  law
enforcement agency, the state of the facility in which the patient was housed at onset
of  parotitis,  or  onset  of  first  symptom  in  the  absence  of  parotitis,  should  submit  the
case notification to CDC. For further inquiries, please email: ncirddvdmmrhp@cdc.gov
The  following  data  should  be  collected  during  mumps  case  investigation.  Additional
information may be collected at the direction of the Local or State Health Department.
Demographic information  Reporting source  Clinical information  Outcome Laboratory 
*CDC  currently  only  accepts  buccal  swabs  for  rRT-PCR,  check  with  your  local
laboratory/VPD  reference  center  to  see  what  sample  types  are  acceptable.  Vaccine
information   Epidemiologic   *Internationally  imported  cases  would  be  those  with
international travel within 25 days of symptom onset and no known exposure to mumps
virus  in  the  U.S.  during  that  time.  Top  of  Page  Information  obtained  through
surveillance  is  used  to  monitor  disease  trends  in  the  population  and  to  characterize
populations  requiring  additional  disease  control  measures.  Regular  monitoring  of
surveillance indicators can help identify specific areas of the surveillance and reporting
system  that  need  improvement.  The  following  indicators  should  be  monitored  by  the
state health department.   Top of Page All persons with suspected mumps should be
investigated.  Identification  and  investigation  of  mumps  cases  is  important  in  the

initiation of control measures to prevent the spread of the disease. In settings with high
risk  for  transmission,  such  as  schools,  universities,  close-knit  communities,  and
correctional/detention facilities, health departments may want to be more proactive. In
these settings, health departments should consider conducting case investigations and
providing  recommendations  before  laboratory  results  are  known  or  before  additional
cases are identified. Implementation of control measures may be contingent on setting,
likelihood  of  ongoing  transmission,  and  available  resources.  The  Mumps  Surveillance
Worksheet  (Appendix  10)  provides  key  information  to  be  collected  during  a  case
investigation.  Additional  guidance  on  case  investigation  can  be  found  in  the
section Investigate and confirm suspected mumps in the Strategies for the Control and
Investigation of Mumps Outbreaks web page.  Top of Page A mumps outbreak is defined
as 3 or more cases linked by time and place. Every suspect case of mumps should be
investigated  to  determine  if  they  are  part  of  an  outbreak.  A  critical  part  of  case
investigation during an outbreak is to determine if the case and their close contacts are
part of a group or population at increased risk for mumps. All people in the group at
increased  risk  should  be  recommended  to  receive  an  additional  dose  (“outbreak”  or
third  dose)  of  MMR  vaccine  for  added  personal  protection.  Guidance  on  mumps
outbreak response and control, including use of a third dose of MMR vaccine, can be
found on the CDC Strategies for the Control and Investigation of Mumps Outbreaks web
page.  Setting  specific  guidance  is  also  provided  on  the  Strategies  for  the  Control  of
Outbreaks  page,  including  responding  to  mumps  in  healthcare  settings,  universities,
and  correctional/detention  facilities.  Top  of  Page  To  receive  email  updates  about  this
page, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt09-mumps.html
