Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  This  notice  has  been  superseded.  For  the  latest  NIOSH
guidance
 on
 this
 topic,
 please
 see
 the
 updated
 notice:
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/resources/pressrel/letters/conformitymanuf/CA-2018-1
010-R1.html NIOSH CA 2018-1010
November  2018  Beginning  December  1,  2018,  the  National  Institute  for  Occupational
Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH)  will  accept  applications  to  implement  the  coordinated
regulatory  process  to  exempt  a  subset  of  filtering  facepiece  respirators  (FFRs)  from
Food & Drug Administration (FDA) premarket notification requirements. The N95 FFRs
and data provided by the applicant must demonstrate: Any device approved under this
Guidance will be labeled with a protection of “N95-F.” This protection indicates that the
NIOSH-approved  device  meets  the  intended  flammability,  fluid  resistance,  and
biocompatibility requirements and can be used in healthcare settings. Monthly NIOSH
Certified  Equipment  List  updates  will  include  searchable  information  about  approved
N95-F respirators. Additionally, N95-F respirator approval labels will have a new caution
and limitation “WW” defined as: This respirator conforms to recognized standards for
biocompatibility,  flammability,  and  fluid  resistance.  The  approval  label  is  no  longer
required to have the caution and limitation “P” – NIOSH does not evaluate respirators
for use as surgical masks. Four specific situations are noted: If an applicant has never
previously submitted any type of respiratory protective device for NIOSH approval, the
applicant  must  first  apply  to  NIOSH  for  a  three-character  Manufacturer’s  Code  by
completing the Prospective Approval Holder Form and returning it to the NIOSH NPPTL
Records  Room.  Obtain  this  form  by  contacting  the  NIOSH  NPPTL  Records  Room  at
recordsroom@cdc.gov.  After  obtaining  the  Manufacturer’s  Code,  the  manufacturer
seeking  approval  for  an  N95-F  must  follow  this  Guidance.  The  applicant  will  use  the

NIOSH  Standard  Application  Procedure  (SAP)  to  complete  the  Standard  Application
Form.  When  completing  the  reason  for  application  section  (C.9),  the  applicant  will
indicate they are using the consolidated process and seeking approval within the terms
of the FDA Final Order and the MOU. The approval label provided as part of the NIOSH
application  must  include  the  new  caution  and  limitation  “WW”  defined  as:  This
respirator conforms to recognized standards for biocompatibility, flammability, and fluid
resistance.  Applicants  are  required  to  provide  documentation  to  NIOSH  to  indicate
conformance
 to
 the
 FDA
 thresholds
 for
 flammability,
 fluid
 resistance,
 and
biocompatibility.  All  data  must  be  received  in  electronic  formats  as  indicated  in  the
NIOSH SAP. While NIOSH completes testing of hardware in accordance with 42 CFR 84
Subpart K, NIOSH is not conducting testing to verify the flammability, fluid resistance,
or biocompatibility performance of the respirator as part of the N95-F approval process.
During  the  NIOSH  document  review  process,  NIOSH  will  review  flammability,  fluid
resistance, and biocompatibility test data and results provided by the applicant and in
accordance  with  the  FDA  Threshold  Criteria.  In  accordance  with  the  MOU,  N95-F
Approval Holders are required to fulfill the general control provisions, under section 510
of the FD&C Act, including annual registration and listing obligations. Claims exceeding
the threshold criteria defined in the MOU will result in a denied application for N95-F
approval (MOU Appendix, Section 2). A manufacturer making such claims and seeking
approval must apply using the current, pre-MOU, process for approval by NIOSH, as an
N95 FFR, and clearance by the FDA, with finalization of the labeling by NIOSH. The FDA
will  continue  to  be  responsible  for  the  review  of  510(k)  submissions  for  N95  FFRs
regulated  under  21  CFR  878.4040  that  exceed  the  conditions  and  limitations  of
exemption  outlined  within  the  Final  Order  and  ensuring  manufacturers  comply  with
applicable  regulations.  Note:  Tuberculosis  protection  claims  in  accordance  with  CDC
Guidance are allowed. Applicants are reminded to consider FDA recommendations for
labeling  medical  products  to  inform  users  that  the  product  is  not  made  with  natural

rubber  latex.  NIOSH  is  developing  a  methodology  for  conducting  product  audit
evaluations of NIOSH-approved N95-F FFRs. These product audit evaluations will include
NIOSH  assessment  of  the  flammability  and  fluid  resistance  performance.  FDA  Final
Order
FDA Postmarket Requirements (Devices)
Approval of Respiratory Protective Devices, 42 C.F.R, Part 84
MOU 225-18-006 (also included below) Reference: MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
(MOU)  225-18-006),  November  2017  This  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU)
between the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), acting through its Center for Devices
and  Radiological  Health  (CDRH),  and  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention
(CDC), acting through its National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH),
National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL) (herein referred to as “the
Agencies”),  provides  a  framework  for  coordination  and  collaboration  between  the
Agencies  relating  to  their  regulation  of  Surgical  N95  Respirators  and  N95  Filtering
Facepiece Respirators (FFRs)1 used in healthcare settings (herein collectively referred
to as “N95s”).1 A coordinated process will help to ensure that the various regulatory
activities  of  each  agency  related  to  N95s  are  streamlined  and  harmonized  when
possible. The intent of this MOU is to help reduce conflicting and duplicative premarket
processes  for  these  devices  so  that  stakeholders  can  easily  and  seamlessly  discern
what  steps  must  be  taken  to  satisfy  the  applicable  regulatory  requirements.
Specifically,  this  MOU  (1)  describes  the  mechanisms  by  which  specific  information
pertaining  to  N95s  may  be  exchanged  between  the  two  Agencies  and  (2)  provides  a
framework for efficient and coordinated regulatory oversight of N95s intended for use in
healthcare settings. Definitions of specific terms used in this MOU are provided in this
section. Also, please note that the respirators described in this section and throughout
this  MOU  are  designed  to  be  used  in  the  context  of  a  comprehensive  respiratory
protection program as required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration

(OSHA)  in  29  CFR  1910.134.  Applicant:  An  individual,  partnership,  company,
corporation, association, or other organization that designs, manufactures, assembles,
or  controls  the  assembly  of  a  respirator  and  who  seeks  to  obtain  a  certificate  of
approval  [from  NIOSH]  for  such  respirator.2  Device:  An  instrument,  apparatus,
implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related
article, including any component, part, or accessory, which is: Hazardous Atmosphere:
Any atmosphere containing a toxic or disease producing gas, vapor, dust, fume, mist, or
pesticide,  either  immediately  or  not  immediately  dangerous  to  life  or  health;  or  any
oxygen-deficient  atmosphere.4  Healthcare  Personnel  (HCP):  All  persons,  paid  and
unpaid, working in healthcare settings who have the potential for exposure to patients
and/or  to  infectious  materials,  including  body  substances,  contaminated  medical
supplies  and  equipment,  contaminated  environmental  surfaces,  or  contaminated  air.
HCP include, but are not limited to, physicians, nurses, nursing assistants, therapists,
technicians,  emergency  medical  service  personnel,  dental  personnel,  pharmacists,
laboratory personnel, autopsy personnel, students and trainees, contractual personnel,
home  healthcare  personnel,  and  persons  not  directly  involved  in  patient  care  (e.g.,
clerical, dietary, house-keeping, laundry, security, maintenance, billing, chaplains, and
volunteers) but potentially exposed to infectious agents that can be transmitted to and
from HCP and patients.5 Healthcare Settings: Healthcare settings include, but are not
limited  to,  acute-care  hospitals;  long-term  care  facilities,  such  as  nursing  homes  and
skilled nursing facilities; physicians’ offices; urgent-care centers, outpatient clinics; and
home  healthcare.  Examples  of  settings  that  are  not  included  in  this  definition  are
schools  and  worksites.  However,  elements  of  this  MOU  may  be  applicable  to  specific
sites within non-healthcare settings where care is routinely delivered (e.g., a medical
clinic embedded within a workplace or school)). Labeler: A “labeler” is any person who
causes  a  label  to  be  applied  to  a  device,  or  who  causes  the  label  of  a  device  to  be
replaced  or  modified,  with  the  intent  that  the  device  will  be  commercially  distributed

without  any  subsequent  replacement  or  modification  of  the  label,  except  that  the
addition  of  the  name  of,  and  contact  information  for,  a  person  who  distributes  the
device,  without  making  any  other  changes  to  the  label,  is  not  a  modification  for  the
purposes of determining whether a person is a labeler.7 Labeling: As defined in section
201(m)  of  the  FD&C  Act.  N95  Filtering  Facepiece  Respirator  (FFR):  Single-use,
disposable half-mask respiratory protective device (RPD) that covers the user’s airway
(nose and mouth) and offers protection from particulate materials at an N95 filtration
efficiency level per 42 CFR 84.181. Such an N95 FFR used in a healthcare setting is a
class  II  device,  regulated  by  FDA  under  21  CFR  878.4040  (FDA  product  code  MSH).
N95s: Includes N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirator (FFR) used in healthcare settings and
Surgical  N95  Respirator.  NIOSH  Approval:  Approval  means  a  certificate  or  formal
document  issued  by  NIOSH  stating  that  an  individual  respirator  or  combination  of
respirators  has  met  the  minimum  requirements  of  42  CFR  Part  84  and  that  the
applicant is authorized to use and attach an approval label to any respirator, respirator
container,  or  instruction  card  for  any  respirator  manufactured  or  assembled  in
conformance with the plans and specifications upon which the approval was based, as
evidence of such approval. Particulate Material: Solid or liquid particles found in the air.
These particles may include dust, dirt, soot, smoke, and drops of liquid, and airborne
particles  transmitted  to  and  from  HCP  and  patients.  Respiratory  Protective  Device
(RPD): Any device designed to protect the user’s respiratory tract against the inhalation
of  a  hazardous  atmosphere.8  Surgical  N95  Respirator:  Single-use,  disposable
respiratory  protective  device  (RPD)  used  in  a  healthcare  setting  that  is  worn  by  HCP
during  procedures  to  protect  both  the  patient  and  HCP  from  the  transfer  of
microorganisms,  body  fluids,  and  particulate  material  at  an  N95  filtration  efficiency
level per 42 CFR 84.181. A surgical N95 respirator is a class II device, regulated by FDA
under 21 CFR 878.4040 (FDA product code MSH).9 FDA and NIOSH are sister Agencies
within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Both Agencies’ missions

include protecting the public health. Both Agencies are authorized to regulate certain
RPDs,  but  have  different  statutory  authorities  and  responsibilities.  The  distinctions
between NIOSH and FDA regulation of N95s may create confusion among stakeholders.
The collaboration outlined below, which is intended to streamline regulatory oversight
of N95s used in healthcare settings, is expected to help ensure the availability of safe
and  effective  products,  particularly  during  times  of  increased  demand.  The  Agencies
may update this MOU to include other RPDs utilized within the healthcare setting at a
future date. However, note that any updates to the MOU will not automatically revise
the conditions or limitations of exemption from 510(k). We note that the MOU is drafted
on  the  assumption  that  FDA  has  issued  a  notice  in  the  Federal  Register  exempting
certain  N95s  from  510(k)  review  (subject  to  applicable  conditions  and  limitations  of
exemption,  such  as  21  CFR  878.9  and  21  CFR  878.4040(b)(1)).  Generally,  21  CFR
878.4040(b)(1)  exempts  those  N95s  that  (1)  are  determined  not  to  exceed  the
threshold  evaluation  criteria  and  (2)  have  met  the  approval  criteria  and  have  NIOSH
approval  under  its  regulation.  If  such  a  notice  is  not  finalized  this  MOU  would  not
become  effective  (see  section  IX)  or  may  need  to  be  amended  before  becoming
effective. a. FDA The FD&C Act grants FDA authority to regulate devices, as defined in
section  201(h)  of  the  FD&C  Act  (21  U.S.C.  321(h)).  FDA  classifies  devices  into  one  of
three regulatory classes – class I, II, or III – based on the level of control necessary to
ensure  the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  the  device.  Class  I  devices  are  subject  to  the
fewest  regulatory  controls  and  class  III  devices  are  subject  to  the  most  regulatory
controls. Generally, class II devices must receive premarket clearance from FDA under
section  510(k)  of  the  FD&C  Act  (21  U.S.C.  360(k))  before  they  can  be  legally
marketed.10  FDA  provides  premarket  clearance  for  devices  that  are  “substantially
equivalent”—as the term is defined in section 513(i)(1)(A) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C.
360c(i)(1)(A))—to a predicate device. In certain circumstances, FDA can exempt class II
devices from this 510(k) requirement (see section 510(m) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C.

360(m))).  N95s  are  regulated  by  the  FDA  as  class  II  devices  under  21  CFR  878.4040
(FDA product code MSH). As of the effective date of this MOU (see section IX), N95s are
exempt  from  510(k)  requirements  (subject  to  applicable  conditions  and  limitations  to
the exemption, such as those in 21 CFR 878.9 and 21 CFR 878.4040(b)(1)). Generally,
21  CFR  878.4040(b)(1)  exempts  N95s  if  (1)  they  are  determined  not  to  exceed  the
threshold  evaluation  criteria  and  (2)  have  met  the  approval  criteria  and  have  NIOSH
approval. b. NIOSH NIOSH is responsible for approval of RPDs intended for occupational
use. The authority is granted to NIOSH in accordance with standards established in 42
CFR  Part  84.  NIOSH  also  addresses  quality  assurance  requirements  for  the
manufacturing  of  respiratory  protective  equipment.  Enforcement  agencies,  such  as
OSHA,  require  employers  to  provide  NIOSH-approved  respirators.  In  addition,  private
sector certification scheme owners such as the National Fire Protection Association use
the NIOSH approval as the basis for their certification. This MOU applies to N95s used in
healthcare  settings,  which  protect  both  the  patient  and  HCP  from  the  transfer  of
microorganisms, body fluids, and particulate material.11 Future iterations of this MOU
may  extend  this  scope  to  other  RPDs  utilized  in  a  healthcare  setting  based  on
concurrence between the Agencies. However, note that any updates to the MOU will not
revise  the  conditions  or  limitations  to  the  exemption  for  510(k)  as  identified  in  the
Federal Register Notice. Under this MOU, the Agencies agree to the following roles and
responsibilities: 1. FDA and CDC recognize and agree that information exchanged under
this MOU that contains any of the following types of information must be protected from
unauthorized use and disclosure: (1) confidential commercial information, such as the
information that would be protected from public disclosure pursuant to Exemption 4 of
the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  (FOIA);  (2)  personal  privacy  information,  such  as  the
information that would be protected from public disclosure pursuant to Exemption 6 or
7(C) of the FOIA; or (3) information that is otherwise protected from public disclosure by
Federal statutes and their implementing regulations (e.g., Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S.C.

1905)), the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a), other FOIA exemptions not mentioned above (5
U.S.C. 552(b)), the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.), the Health Insurance Portability
and  Accountability  Act  (HIPAA),  Pub.  L.  104-191),  Section  319L(e)  of  the  PHS  Act  (42
U.S.C.  247d-7e(e)),  and  disclosure  restrictions  subject  to  41  U.S.C.  2101-2107
(Procurement Integrity Act) and 48 CFR 3.104 (Federal Acquisition Regulation). 2. Both
parties will establish safeguards to ensure that any nonpublic information shared under
this  MOU  is  protected  from  unauthorized  disclosure  or  use.  Those  safeguards  should
include the marking of any confidential materials as “confidential” prior to disclosure to
the  other  party  or  the  use  of  encryption  technologies  when  appropriate.  Information
consisting  of  confidential  commercial  information  or  trade  secrets  may  be  shared
pursuant  to  the  procedures  set  forth  in  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  Between
FDA and CDC, which describes information sharing procedures between FDA and CDC
(FDA
 MOU
 No.
 225-24-0017,
 available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/aboutfda/partnershipscollaborations/memorandaofunderstandingmo
us/domesticmous/ucm402130.htm). 3. Each agency agrees to promptly notify the other
of  any  actual  or  suspected  unauthorized  disclosure  of  information  shared  under  this
MOU. 4. If records provided by either party under this agreement are the subject of a
FOIA request submitted to the party that received the records, that party will refer the
FOIA request and relevant records to the party that provided the records for processing.
If the FOIA request seeks both parties’ records or if the request is for records created by
one party that incorporates information provided by the other party, in accordance with
the  HHS  FOIA  regulations  at  45  CFR  pt.  5,  the  party  receiving  the  FOIA  request  will
forward all such requests to the respective FOIA offices for disposition. This MOU does
not  affect  fees  assessed  by  NIOSH  and  FDA  in  alignment  with  their  current  fee
structure.  N95s  that  are  exempt  from  510(k)  requirements  are  not  subject  to  the
medical  device  user  fees  associated  with  submission  of  a  510(k)  (i.e.,  fees  under
section  738(a)(2)(A)(viii)  of  the  FD&C  Act  (21  U.S.C.  379j(a)(2)(A)(viii))).  Director,

National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL)
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Pittsburgh,
 PA
 Director,
 Emergency
 Preparedness/Operations
 and
 Medical
Countermeasures
Center for Devices and Radiological Health
Food and Drug Administration
Silver Spring, MD 1. Review Processes for N95s: NIOSH and FDA review processes for
N95s consist of the following steps (also see Figure 1): NIOSH Approval Review. NIOSH
will perform its approval review of these N95s using the mutually agreed upon approval
criteria  (see  Appendix  Section  3  for  specific  criteria)  and  share  information  from  this
review with FDA such that it can be considered in FDA’s 510(k) review. Figure 1. N95
Review Processes Flowchart * NIOSH makes a recommendation regarding whether an
applicant’s device exceeds the threshold evaluation criteria, this recommendation does
not  change  any  requirements  of  a  device  manufacturer  under  the  FD&C  Act.  This
includes general controls under the FD&C Act and the requirement for manufacturers to
assess  whether  their  device  exceeds  the  conditions  and  limitations  of  exemption  as
identified  in  21  CFR  878.4040(b)(1)  and  878.9.  **Refer  to  Appendix  Section  2  for
threshold  evaluation  criteria  2.  Threshold  Evaluation  Criteria:  An  N95  EXCEEDS  the
threshold  evaluation  criteria  (and  thus  would  likely  not  be  exempt  from  510(k)
requirements even if subsequently approved by NIOSH), if: 3. Approval Criteria: NIOSH
will assess the performance of the N95 with respect to differential pressure, particulate
filtration efficiency (PFE), exhalation valve leakage, biocompatibility, flammability, and
fluid resistance. The evaluation of flammability, fluid resistance, and biocompatibility on
the final finished N95 will be new assessments for NIOSH; they have historically been a
part  of  FDA’s  premarket  evaluation  only.  The  mutually  agreed  upon  approval  criteria
are described in greater detail below. An N95 intended to be used in healthcare settings

will be evaluated for the following approval criteria: Approved and Accepted CDC/NIOSH
Maryann D’Alessandro, Ph.D
Director
National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory
November 2017 Approved and Accepted FDA
Jeffrey Shuren, M.D., J.D
Director
Center for Devices and Radiological Health
November 2017 Interim guidance regarding applications for NIOSH Approval of Filtering
Facepiece Respirators in accordance with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Final
Order published May 17, 2018, and FDA/NIOSH MOU 225-18-006, dated November 2017
[PDF – 359 KB]

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/resources/pressrel/letters/conformitymanuf/CA-2018-1010.html
