  Janine  K.  Runfola,  MS1,  Jennifer  House,  DVM2,  Lisa  Miller,  MD2,  Leah  Colton,  PhD2,
Donna Hite1, Alex Hawley1, Paul Mead, MD3, Martin Schriefer, PhD3, Jeannine Petersen,
PhD3, Colleen Casaceli, MPH4, Kristine M. Erlandson, MD5, Clayton Foster, MD5, Kristy
L.  Pabilonia,  DVM,  PhD6,  Gary  Mason,  DVM,  PhD6,  John  M.  Douglas,  Jr.,  MD1  (Author
affiliations at end  of text) On  July  8, 2014, the Colorado  Department of Public  Health
and  Environment  (CDPHE)  laboratory  identified  Yersinia  pestis,  the  bacterium  that
causes plague, in a blood specimen collected from a man (patient A) hospitalized with
pneumonia.  The  organism  had  been  previously  misidentified  as  Pseudomonas  luteola
by an automated system in the hospital laboratory. An investigation led by Tri-County
Health  Department  (TCHD)  revealed  that  patient  A's  dog  had  died  recently  with
hemoptysis. Three other persons who had contact with the dog, one of whom also had
contact with patient A, were ill with fever and respiratory symptoms, including two with
radiographic  evidence  of  pneumonia.  Specimens  from  the  dog  and  all  three  human
contacts  yielded  evidence  of  acute  Y.  pestis  infection.  One  of  the  pneumonia  cases
might  have  resulted  through  human-to-human  transmission  from  patient  A,  which
would be the first such event reported in the United States since 1924. This outbreak
highlights  1)  the  need  to  consider  plague  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of  ill  domestic
animals,  including  dogs,  in  areas  where  plague  is  endemic;  2)  the  limitations  of
automated diagnostic systems for identifying rare bacteria such as Y. pestis; and 3) the
potential  for  milder  plague  illness  in  patients  taking  antimicrobial  agents.  Hospital
laboratorians  should  be  aware  of  the  limitations  of  automated  identification  systems,
and  clinicians  should  suspect  plague  in  patients  with  clinically  compatible  symptoms
from  whom  P.  luteola  is  isolated.  Patient  A,  a  previously  healthy  middle-aged  man,
developed fever and cough on June 28. Over the next 24 hours his condition worsened
with increasing cough and the production of bloody sputum. He was admitted to a local
hospital where he was diagnosed with pneumonia (Figure). Blood cultures collected on
June  30  grew  a  gram-negative  rod  that  was  initially  identified  as  P.  luteola  using  an

automated  identification  system.  Over  the  next  6  days  patient  A's  respiratory  status
deteriorated, and he was transferred to another facility where he required intubation.
Because  of  the  severity  of  his  illness  and  previous  reports  of  misidentification  of  Y.
pestis  as  P.  luteola  (1,2),  the  isolate  was  sent  to  the  CDPHE  laboratory  for  further
testing.  On  July  8  the  specimen  was  correctly  identified  as  Y.  pestis,  and  patient  A
received a diagnosis of pneumonic plague. Patient A was treated with broad-spectrum
antibiotics, including levofloxacin and streptomycin, and recovered after hospitalization
for  23  days.  TCHD  initiated  an  investigation,  consisting  of  interviews  with  patient  A's
family,  evaluation  of  potential  exposures  to  the  patient,  and  an  environmental
assessment  to  determine  the  risk  for  further  disease  transmission.  The  investigation
revealed that patient A's dog, a male American pit bull terrier aged 2 years, became ill
with fever, jaw rigidity, drooling, and right forelimb ataxia on June 24 (Table). The dog
was  kept  overnight  at  a  veterinary  clinic  and  humanely  euthanized  the  following  day
after developing dyspnea and bloody sputum. Patient A had close contact with the dog
during  euthanasia.  Necropsy  revealed  gastric  and  pulmonary  hemorrhage.  Samples
tested
 negative
 for
 evidence
 of
 rabies
 virus
 infection
 and
 anticoagulants;
histopathologic examination of the tissues was declined by patient A. Following patient
A's diagnosis with plague, liver and lung tissues from the dog were tested for Y. pestis,
and  results  were  positive  by  both  polymerase  chain  reaction  assay  and  culture.
Archived  formalin-fixed  tissues  from  the  dog  were  processed  for  histopathology,
revealing
 severe
 acute
 bronchopneumonia
 with
 intra-alveolar
 bacteria.
 The
investigation also identified three other persons who had been in close contact with the
ill  dog,  one  of  whom  who  also  had  contact  with  patient  A.  All  three  subsequently
received  diagnoses  of  plague,  and  all  three  recovered  (Table,  Figure).  On  June  30,  2
days  after  patient  A  became  ill,  patient  B,  a  female  veterinary  clinic  employee,
developed a fever and cough and visited an urgent care facility, where bronchitis was
diagnosed.  She  reported  close  contact  with  the  ill  dog  on  June  24–25.  After  her

symptoms  failed  to  improve  with  self-initiated  amoxicillin/clavulanic  acid,  patient  B
visited  an  emergency  department  on  July  5,  received  a  diagnosis  of  pneumonia,  and
was  treated  with  azithromycin,  with  improvement  over  the  next  several  days.  After
notification on July 10 of her exposure to plague, she visited a health care provider and
was  treated  with  oral  levofloxacin.  A  polymerase  chain  reaction  test  on  a  sputum
specimen  was  positive  for  Y.  pestis.  Subsequent  testing  of  paired  acute  and
convalescent serum specimens demonstrated a fourfold increase in antibody titers to Y.
pestis,  indicative  of  recent  infection  (Table).  Patient  C,  a  female  veterinary  clinic
employee, also had close contact with the dog on June 24–25 and self-initiated a 6-day
course of oral doxycycline on June 25. On July 4, she experienced fever, chills, myalgia,
and fatigue; symptoms progressed to chest tightness and cough. Following notification
of  the  exposure  to  plague  on  July  9,  patient  C  self-initiated  a  second  course  of
doxycycline  and  was  medically  evaluated  later  that  day.  Crackles  were  heard  during
chest auscultation; however, results of a chest radiograph were normal. A full course of
oral doxycycline was continued with resolution of symptoms. Initial and follow-up serum
specimens  tested  positive  for  antibody  to  Y.  pestis,  with  a  greater  than  fourfold
decrease in antibody titers at follow-up 6 months later (Table). On July 4, patient D, a
woman  who  was  a  close  contact  of  patient  A,  experienced  chest  tightness,  dyspnea,
and  fever.  She  was  evaluated  at  an  emergency  department,  received  a  diagnosis  of
pneumonia, and was treated with oral levofloxacin. Patient D handled the body of the
dog  on  June  25  after  it  died,  at  one  point  getting  blood  on  her  hands.  She  also  had
extended  close  contact  with  patient  A  on  June  29–30  while  he  was  coughing  bloody
sputum. On July 8, after patient A was identified with pneumonic plague, patient D was
hospitalized  and  treated  with  levofloxacin  and  streptomycin.  Paired  acute  and
convalescent  serum  specimens  for  patient  D  demonstrated  a  greater  than  fourfold
increase  in  antibody  titers  to  Y.  pestis  (Table).  TCHD  evaluated  potential  exposures
from each patient and conducted an environmental assessment to determine the risk

for further disease transmission. Case status was assigned according to case definitions
developed  by  the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists  for  CDC's  National
Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System.*  Medical  personnel  and  personal  contacts  of
all  four  patients  were  notified  of  their  possible  exposure  to  plague.  A  total  of  114
persons had close contact with the dog or one or more of the human patients: 36 in
veterinary  settings,  58  in  human  health  care  settings,  and  20  as  close  personal
contacts.  Antimicrobial  prophylaxis  was  recommended  for  88  persons  interviewed
within  7 days  of  exposure.  The remaining  26 were advised  to  monitor for fever for 7
days and to seek medical attention immediately if symptoms occurred.  On July 9, TCHD
surveyed patient A's property for evidence of plague. Live rabbits were observed on the
property  but  no  other  wildlife.  Inactive  prairie  dog  burrows  were  present;  however,  it
was reported that the prairie dog colony had been intentionally eradicated in October
2013.  CDPHE  issued  press  releases  for  public  awareness  and  Health  Alert  Network
notifications to health care providers and veterinarians on July 9, 10, and 18. Medical
facilities were instructed to use droplet precautions for persons with suspected plague.
TCHD staff members distributed information on plague symptoms and transmission risk
to  homes  in  the  vicinity  of  the  index  patient.  No  further  cases  have  been  identified.
Plague  is  a  rare  but  life-threatening  zoonosis  caused  by  Y.  pestis.  A  median  of  eight
cases of human plague are reported annually in the United States (3), primarily among
residents of semirural areas in New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and California. Normally
a pathogen of rodents, Y. pestis is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected
rodent fleas or direct contact with the tissues or secretions of infected animals. Bubonic
plague,  characterized  by  fever  and  painful  regional  lymphadenopathy,  results  from
percutaneous  exposure  and  accounts  for  approximately  85%  of  reported  cases.
Pneumonic  plague  occurs  as  either  a  complication  of  untreated  bubonic  plague
(10%–13%  of  all  cases)  or  as  a  primary  pneumonia  following  inhalation  of  infectious
droplets (2% of all cases) (4). Untreated pneumonic plague has a fatality rate of ≥93%

and can be spread from person to person through aerosols generated during coughing.
A  third  clinical  form,  septicemic  plague,  is  characterized  by  fever  and  shock  without
localizing  signs  or  symptoms.  Laboratory  diagnosis  of  plague  is  based  on  culture  or
polymerase  chain  reaction  assays  of  blood,  sputum,  or  lymph  node  aspirates,  or  on
serology. Effective therapy includes aminoglycosides and doxycycline. In addition, the
fluoroquinolones  levofloxacin  and  ciprofloxacin  have  been  approved  recently  by  the
Food  and  Drug  Administration  based  on  animal  studies.†  The  advent  of  antimicrobial
therapy has reduced overall plague mortality from >60% to approximately 16% (3,5,6).
In  this  outbreak,  all  four  patients  had  laboratory-confirmed  plague,  including  three
patients (A, B, and D) with clinical and radiographic evidence of pneumonia. The fourth
patient (C) had an atypical presentation with respiratory symptoms but no radiographic
evidence  of  pneumonia,  possibly  as  a  result  of  partial  treatment  immediately  after
exposure. Three patients (A, B and C) became ill shortly after exposure to an ill infected
dog. The source of infection for patient D is less certain because she had exposure to
both  the  dog  on  June  25–26  (an  incubation  period  of  9–10  days)  and  to  patient  A  on
June  29–30  while  he  had  hemoptysis  (an  incubation  period  of  5–6  days).  The  shorter
incubation  period  is  more  typical  of  plague  and  therefore  supports  human-to-human
transmission (6). Nevertheless, transmission from the dog cannot be excluded given the
animal's role in the other three infections and because incubation periods of up to 10
days have been reported, although rarely (7). Primary pneumonic plague is rare in the
United States with only 74 cases reported during 1900–2012, and this event represents
the  largest  outbreak  and  the  first  instance  of  possible  human-to-human  transmission
since an outbreak in Los Angeles in 1924 (3,5). Y. pestis infection in dogs generally is
either  asymptomatic  or  the  cause  of  only  a  mild,  self-limiting  febrile  illness  (8).  Dogs
can play a role in human infection through transport of rodent fleas into the home (8,9).
This  outbreak  began  with  illness  in  a  pet  dog,  a  previously  unrecognized  source  of
plague  exposure  in  the  United  States.  The  only  previously  published  case  of  direct

transmission of plague from a dog to a human was reported from China in 2009 (10).
Although  symptomatic  plague  in  dogs  is  rare,  veterinarians  should  consider  the
possibility of Y. pestis infection in ill dogs with wildlife exposure in areas where plague
is endemic. This outbreak is notable for the several factors that delayed its recognition.
First, patient A's bacterial isolate initially was identified as P. luteola by an automated
blood culture system, and the correct identification of Y. pestis was only made 7 days
later.  This  delay  resulted  in  the  exposure  of  numerous  medical  personnel.
Misidentification  and  a  resulting  delayed  diagnosis  have  been  previously  reported,
reinforcing  the  need  for  critical  evaluation  of  results  from  automated  systems  and
education of hospital microbiologists regarding this limitation (1,2). Among 12 Y. pestis
isolates  obtained  from  U.S.  patients  during  2010–2013,  at  least  three  (25%)  were
originally  misidentified  by  automated  systems  (Division  of  Vector-borne  Diseases,
National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, unpublished data,
2015). Second, the spectrum of disease was broader than usual for pneumonic plague
(7), with two of the four patients not requiring hospitalization. The clinical course of the
milder cases might have been modified by self-administration of antibiotics or medical
prescription of azithromycin, an antibiotic not recommended for plague. Pneumonia is
the only form of plague with the potential for human-to-human transmission. Delayed
recognition  because  of  inaccurate  laboratory  test  results  and  atypical  clinical
presentations can lead to high numbers of potential exposures to health care workers,
laboratory workers, and other close contacts. Although human plague is rare in North
America, it remains a public health concern in the western United States where Y. pestis
circulates  among  wild  rodent  populations.  The  risk  for  plague  can  be  minimized  by
avoidance of possibly infected rodents (e.g., prairie dogs) and their fleas. All suspected
or confirmed plague cases and rodent die-offs in areas where plague is endemic should
be reported immediately to public health officials so that exposures can be minimized
to prevent additional transmission. Once plague is suspected, appropriate precautions

and  treatment  should  be  initiated  immediately,  and  clinical  specimens  should  be
collected  and  tested  as  soon  as  possible.  Early  recognition  of  plague,  especially  the
pneumonic form, is critical to effective clinical management and a timely public health
response.  Veterinarians  should  consider  plague  in  the  differential  diagnosis  of  ill
domestic  animals,  including  dogs,  in  areas  where  plague  is  endemic.  Gary  Sky,  Sara
Garrington,  MA,  Veronica  Moody,  Jennifer  Chase,  MS,  Tri-County  Health  Department,
Colorado;  Jennifer  Burke,  Janell  Bezdek  Nichols,  Mary  Kate  Cichon,  Justin  Nucci,  Larry
Sater, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment; Laurel Respicio-Kingry,
John  Young,  Ryan  Pappert,  CDC;  Colorado  State  University  Veterinary  Diagnostic
Laboratories;  Infection  Prevention  and  Control  Team,  University  of  Colorado  Hospital.
1Tri-County Health Department, Colorado; 2Colorado Department of Public Health and
Environment;  3Division  of  Vector-Borne  Diseases,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC, 4Platte Valley Medical Center, Colorado; 5University
of  Colorado  Anschutz  Medical  Campus;  6Colorado  State  University  Veterinary
Diagnostic  Laboratories   Corresponding  author:  Janine  Runfola,  jrunfola@tchd.org,
720-200-1530
 *Available
 at
http://wwwn.cdc.gov/NNDSS/script/casedef.aspx?CondYrID=800&DatePub=1/1/1996.
†Available
 at
 http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm088619.pdf
(levofloxacin)
 and
 http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm246794.pdf
(ciprofloxacin).  What  is  already  known  on  this  topic?  Rapid  identification  of  plague  is
critical in patients who live in, or who have recently traveled to, regions where plague is
endemic, including the western United States. The three most common forms of plague
are  bubonic,  pneumonic,  and  septicemic,  with  the  majority  of  cases  presenting  as
bubonic.  Although  the  rarest  form  of  plague  (approximately  2%  of  reported  cases),
primary pneumonic plague has a high (≥93%) mortality rate when left untreated. What
is  added  by  this  report?  The  outbreak  in  Colorado  represents  the  largest  outbreak  of
pneumonic plague in the United States since 1924. The source of the outbreak was a

dog with pneumonic plague, an atypical occurrence because dogs infected with Yersinia
pestis generally are either asymptomatic or exhibit mild self-limiting febrile illness and
are not considered a direct source of human infection. Four persons developed plague
after exposure to the ill dog; one of the patients also had close contact with the index
patient  after  he  developed  plague  pneumonia,  supporting  possible  human-to-human
transmission. Diagnosis in the index case was delayed because of misidentification of a
bacterial  isolate  as  Pseudomonas  luteola  by  an  automated  blood  culture  system.  The
spectrum  of  disease  in  this  outbreak  was  broader  than  usual  for  pneumonic  plague,
with  two  of  the  four  patients  not  requiring  hospitalization,  possibly  as  a  result  of
self-administration  of  antibiotics  or  medical  prescription  of  azithromycin,  an  antibiotic
not  recommended  for  plague.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?
Plague should be considered in the differential diagnosis of dogs with respiratory illness
in  areas  where  plague  is  endemic.  The  results  of  automated  blood  culture  systems
should  be  evaluated  critically  when  rare  diseases  are  suspected.  Patients  with
suspected  pneumonic  plague  should  be  isolated  before  laboratory  confirmation  and
treated with appropriate antibiotics. Blood or sputum cultures should be sent to state
public  health  laboratories  for  confirmation.  FIGURE.  Timeline  of  diagnoses  and
treatment  for  patients  identified  in  a  pneumonic  plague  outbreak  —  Colorado,  2014  
Alternate Text: The figure above is a timeline of diagnoses and treatment for patients
identified in a pneumonic plague outbreak in Colorado during 2014.
                 TABLE. Dates of exposure and illness onset and test results for patients
identified in a pneumonic plague outbreak — Colorado, June–July 2014 Patient Date of
exposure  (source)  Onset  of  illness  Chest  radiograph  findings  Hospitalized  Laboratory
test  results  Polymerase  chain  reaction  Culture  Serologic  testing  Initial  Follow-up
Specimen  Date  +/-  Specimen  Date  +/-  Specimen  Date  Titer  Date  Titer  Dog  Unknown
June 24 PNA Yes Liver/lung tissue June 26 + Liver/lung tissue June 26 + NT NT NT NT NT
A June 25 June 28 PNA Yes Blood June 29 + Blood June 29 + NT NT NT NT NT B June 25

June 30 PNA No Sputum July 10 + Sputum, blood July 10 - Blood July 10 1:64 July 24
1:64 Jan 12 2015 1:256 C June 25 July 4 no evidence of PNA No Blood July 9 - Blood July
9 - Blood July 9 1:32 July 24 1:32 Jan 12 2015 - D June 25 (dog) July 5 PNA Yes Blood July
6  -  Blood  July  6  -  Blood  July  6  -  July  12  1:32  June  29  (patient  A)  July  23  1:32
Abbreviations:  PNA  =  pneumonia;  +  =  positive  test  result;  -  =  negative  test  result;
NT = not tested. Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6416a1.htm
