Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Wildfires  may  present  a  major  health  hazard  to  outdoor
workers  from  exposure  to  smoke.  Image  by  NIOSH.  Wildland  fires  include  wildfires,
prescribed fires (intentionally set fires for ecological benefit), and fires occurring in the
wildland-urban  interface  (where  wildland  vegetation  and  urban  areas  meet).  Wildfire
smoke is a complex mixture of gases and particles from burning vegetation and other
materials. As a wildfire burns, different compounds are released in the smoke, such as
carbon  monoxide,  carbon  dioxide,  hydrocarbons,  particulate  matter  (PM),  benzene,
acrolein,  and  aldehydes.  While  exposure  to  wildfire  smoke  has  been  of  interest  to
researchers and public health professionals for decades, it continues to be one of the
least  understood  hazards  of  wildland  fires.  This  is  primarily  due  to  the  complexity  of
wildfire  smoke,  as  the  smoke  is  made  up  of  many  different  types  and  amounts  of
potentially toxic compounds and can change very quickly depending on factors in the
wildfire  environment,  such  as  weather,  fire  behavior,  and  the  type  of  vegetation
burning.  Because  of  this,  workers  may  be  exposed  to  varying  types  and  amounts  of
compounds in wildfire smoke throughout their work shift or during different fire events.
There is very limited information about how exposure to wildfire smoke impacts outdoor
workers. However, taken together with research studies examining exposure to smoke
from  wildland  fires  among  the  general  public,  along  with  assessments  of  the  health
effects of exposures to specific components of wildfire smoke, there is clear potential
for  such  exposures  to  result  in  adverse  health  outcomes.  The  risk  of  experiencing
symptoms  and  adverse  health  effects  due  to  smoke  exposure  varies  from  person  to
person.  Workers  can  have  different  individual  risk  factors  such  as  age  and  health
conditions (e.g., pre-existing heart or lung disease) that make them more likely to be
affected by wildfire smoke. Some health effects known or suspected to be caused by

wildfire  smoke  include:  Workers  may  also  experience  varying  health  effects  when
exposed to smoke. Long work schedules and physical demands of the work performed
(resulting  in  higher  breathing  rates)  may  impact  a  worker’s  exposures  and  health
response  to  wildfire  smoke.  Still,  the  scientific  community  does  not  fully  understand
how  long-term,  repeated  exposures,  or  exposures  to  high  concentrations  of  wildfire
smoke  may  affect  a  worker’s  health.  Additionally,  very  little  is  known  about  how
exposure  to  many  different  compounds  at  the  same  time,  including  compounds
released  from  the  burning  of  man-made  materials  (such  as  those  found  in  the
wildland-urban  interface),  may  affect  a  worker’s  health.  Employers  should  be  aware
that wildfire smoke may adversely affect the health of their workforce and prepare to
take action to limit their workers’ exposures when a wildfire is emitting smoke in and
around their work environment. Employers and workers should prepare for and plan to
implement procedures to reduce exposures to smoke when necessary. If workers must
work in areas with high levels of smoke, especially for long periods, or if a worker is
sensitive  to  wildfire  smoke  and  feels  their  health  or  safety  is  negatively  impacted  by
smoke exposure, the following steps can be implemented to reduce smoke exposure:
Controlling exposures to occupational hazards is the fundamental method of protecting
workers.  NIOSH  recommends  using  the  hierarchy  of  controls  to  determine  how  to
implement feasible and effective workplace hazard control solutions. While elimination,
substitution, and engineering and administrative controls are most effective in reducing
workplace hazards, in some situations the use of personal protective equipment (PPE),
such  as  the  use  of  respirators,  may  be  considered  to  limit  a  worker’s  exposure  to  a
hazard in the workplace. A NIOSH Approved® filtering facepiece respirator (FFR), like
an  N95®  respirator,  can  be  used  to  reduce  exposure  to  airborne  particulates  from
wildfire smoke when the recommendations listed above cannot be implemented and it
is feasible to obtain respirators. It is important to understand that FFRs do not protect
against  gases,  such  as  carbon  monoxide.  If  an  employer  requires  their  employees  to

use  respiratory  protection  to  limit  smoke  exposure  in  an  occupational  setting,  they
must  always  do  it  as  part  of  a  comprehensive  respiratory  protection  program  as
required under the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s (OSHA) Respiratory
Protection standard (29 CFR 1910.134)external icon. This includes medical evaluations,
respirator  fit  testing,  and  training  of  the  workers  required  to  wear  respirators.
 Additionally, when required in the occupational setting, tight-fitting respirators cannot
be used by people with facial hair that interferes with the face seal. When respirators
are used on a voluntary basis in an occupational setting, employers should follow the
requirements  for  the  voluntary  use  of  respirators.  This  information  can  be  found  on
the  OSHA  websiteexternal  icon.  Respirators,  such  as  an  N95®,  may  be  one  of  the
easiest controls to implement for limiting a worker’s exposure to the particulate matter
in wildland smoke, and in some cases may be the only option to protect some workers.
Employers,  however,  may  need  to  consider  alternative  controls  and  solutions  when
respirators  are  not  easily  available.  California  and  Oregon  OSHA  have  adopted
permanent  rules  to  regulate  on-the-job  wildfire  smoke  exposure.  As  of  May  2023,
Washington  Department  of  Labor  and  Industries  proposed  draft  language  for  a
permanent wildfire smoke rule and encourages employers to voluntarily follow safety
measures  in  the  expired  Wildfire  Smoke  emergency  rule.  Preparing  and  planning  for
how to best implement the recommendations above in the workplace is critical. This is
especially  true  in  areas  where  wildfire  smoke  exposure  is  common  and  workers  are
required to perform their jobs even when the air quality is considered unhealthy or even
hazardous. Working together, employers and workers can take steps to reduce workers’
exposures to wildfire smoke. NIOSH National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Cal/OSHA  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles  Labor  Occupational  Safety  and  Health
Program

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/firefighting/wffsmoke.html
