Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Introduction   The purpose of this
report is to clarify and supplement the
 CDC
publication entitled "Recommendations for Prevention of HIV
Transmission  in  Health-Care  Settings"  (1).*   In  1983,  CDC  published  a  document
entitled "Guideline for
Isolation Precautions in Hospitals" (2) that contained a section
entitled "Blood and Body Fluid Precautions." The recommendations
 in
this section called for blood and body fluid precautions when a
patient was known or suspected to be infected with bloodborne
pathogens. In August 1987, CDC published a document entitled
"Recommendations for Prevention of HIV Transmission in Health-Care
Settings" (1). In contrast to the 1983 document, the 1987 document
recommended that blood and body fluid precautions be consistently
 used
for all patients regardless of their bloodborne infection status.
 This
extension of blood and body fluid precautions to all patients is
referred to as "Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions" or
"Universal Precautions." Under universal precautions, blood and
certain body fluids of all patients are considered potentially
infectious for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B

 virus
(HBV), and other bloodborne pathogens.  Universal precautions are intended to prevent
parenteral,
 mucous
membrane, and nonintact skin exposures of health-care workers to
bloodborne pathogens. In addition, immunization with HBV vaccine
 is
recommended as an important adjunct to universal precautions for
health-care  workers  who  have  exposures  to  blood  (3,4).   Since  the  recommendations
for universal precautions were
 published
in August 1987, CDC and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
 have
received requests for clarification of the following issues: 1)
 body
fluids to which universal precautions apply, 2) use of protective
barriers, 3) use of gloves for phlebotomy, 4) selection of gloves
 for
use while observing universal precautions, and 5) need for making
changes in waste management programs as a result of adopting
 universal
precautions.  Body Fluids to Which Universal Precautions Apply   Universal precautions
apply to blood and to other body fluids
containing visible blood. Occupational transmission of HIV and HBV
 to
health-care workers by blood is documented (4,5). Blood is the
 single

most important source of HIV, HBV, and other bloodborne pathogens
 in
the occupational setting. Infection control efforts for HIV, HBV,
 and
other bloodborne pathogens must focus on preventing exposures to
 blood
as well as on delivery of HBV immunization.   Universal precautions also apply to semen
and vaginal
 secretions.
Although both of these fluids have been implicated in the sexual
transmission of HIV and HBV, they have not been implicated in
occupational transmission from patient to health-care worker. This
observation is not unexpected, since exposure to semen in the
 usual
health-care setting is limited, and the routine practice of
 wearing
gloves for performing vaginal examinations protects health-care
workers from exposure to potentially infectious vaginal
 secretions.  Universal precautions also apply to tissues and to the
 following
fluids: cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), synovial fluid, pleural fluid,
peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid. The risk
 of
transmission of HIV and HBV from these fluids is unknown;
epidemiologic studies in the health-care and community setting are

currently inadequate to assess the potential risk to health-care
workers from occupational exposures to them. However, HIV has been
isolated from CSF, synovial, and amniotic fluid (6-8), and HBsAg
 has
been detected in synovial fluid, amniotic fluid, and peritoneal
 fluid
(9-11). One case of HIV transmission was reported after a
 percutaneous
exposure to bloody pleural fluid obtained by needle aspiration
 (12).
Whereas aseptic procedures used to obtain these fluids for
 diagnostic
or therapeutic purposes protect health-care workers from skin
exposures, they cannot prevent penetrating injuries due to
contaminated  needles  or  other  sharp  instruments.   Body  Fluids  to  Which  Universal
Precautions  Do  Not  Apply    Universal  precautions  do  not  apply  to  feces,  nasal
secretions,
sputum, sweat, tears, urine, and vomitus unless they contain
 visible
blood. The risk of transmission of HIV and HBV from these fluids
 and
materials is extremely low or nonexistent. HIV has been isolated
 and
HBsAg has been demonstrated in some of these fluids; however,
epidemiologic studies in the health-care and community setting

 have
not implicated these fluids or materials in the transmission of
 HIV
and HBV infections (13,14). Some of the above fluids and
 excretions
represent a potential source for nosocomial and community-acquired
infections with other pathogens, and recommendations for
 preventing
the transmission of nonbloodborne pathogens have been published
 (2).   Precautions  for  Other  Body  Fluids  in  Special  Settings    Human  breast  milk  has
been implicated in perinatal
 transmission of
HIV, and HBsAg has been found in the milk of mothers infected with
 HBV
(10,13). However, occupational exposure to human breast milk has
 not
been implicated in the transmission of HIV nor HBV infection to
health-care workers. Moreover, the health-care worker will not
 have
the same type of intensive exposure to breast milk as the nursing
neonate. Whereas universal precautions do not apply to human
 breast
milk, gloves may be worn by health-care workers in situations
 where
exposures to breast milk might be frequent, for example, in breast

milk banking.  Saliva of some persons infected with HBV has been shown to
 contain
HBV-DNA at concentrations 1/1,000 to 1/10,000 of that found in the
infected person's serum (15). HBsAg-positive saliva has been shown
 to
be infectious when injected into experimental animals and in human
bite exposures (16-18). However, HBsAg-positive saliva has not
 been
shown to be infectious when applied to oral mucous membranes in
experimental primate studies (18) or through contamination of
 musical
instruments or cardiopulmonary resuscitation dummies used by HBV
carriers (19,20). Epidemiologic studies of nonsexual household
contacts of HIV-infected patients, including several small series
 in
which HIV transmission failed to occur after bites or after
percutaneous inoculation or contamination of cuts and open wounds
 with
saliva from HIV-infected patients, suggest that the potential for
salivary transmission of HIV is remote (5,13,14,21,22). One case
report from Germany has suggested the possibility of transmission
 of
HIV in a household setting from an infected child to a sibling
 through
a human bite (23). The bite did not break the skin or result in

bleeding. Since the date of seroconversion to HIV was not known
 for
either child in this case, evidence for the role of saliva in the
transmission of virus is unclear (23). Another case report
 suggested
the possibility of transmission of HIV from husband to wife by
 contact
with saliva during kissing (24). However, follow-up studies did
 not
confirm  HIV  infection  in  the  wife  (21).   Universal  precautions  do  not  apply  to  saliva.
General
 infection
control practices already in existence -- including the use of
 gloves
for digital examination of mucous membranes and endotracheal
suctioning, and handwashing after exposure to saliva -- should
 further
minimize the minute risk, if any, for salivary transmission of HIV
 and
HBV (1,25). Gloves need not be worn when feeding patients and when
wiping saliva from skin.  Special precautions, however, are recommended for dentistry
 (1).
Occupationally acquired infection with HBV in dental workers has
 been
documented (4), and two possible cases of occupationally acquired
 HIV

infection involving dentists have been reported (5,26). During
 dental
procedures, contamination of saliva with blood is predictable,
 trauma
to health-care workers' hands is common, and blood spattering may
occur. Infection control precautions for dentistry minimize the
potential for nonintact skin and mucous membrane contact of dental
health-care workers to blood-contaminated saliva of patients. In
addition, the use of gloves for oral examinations and treatment in
 the
dental setting may also protect the patient's oral mucous
 membranes
from exposures to blood, which may occur from breaks in the skin
 of
dental workers' hands.  Use of Protective Barriers   Protective barriers reduce the risk of
exposure of the
 health-care
worker's skin or mucous membranes to potentially infective
 materials.
For universal precautions, protective barriers reduce the risk of
exposure to blood, body fluids containing visible blood, and other
fluids to which universal precautions apply. Examples of
 protective
barriers include gloves, gowns, masks, and protective eyewear.
 Gloves

should reduce the incidence of contamination of hands, but they
 cannot
prevent penetrating injuries due to needles or other sharp
instruments. Masks and protective eyewear or face shields should
reduce the incidence of contamination of mucous membranes of the
mouth, nose, and eyes.  Universal precautions are intended to supplement rather than
replace recommendations for routine infection control, such as
handwashing and using gloves to prevent gross microbial
 contamination
of hands (27). Because specifying the types of barriers needed for
every possible clinical situation is impractical, some judgment
 must
be exercised.  The risk of nosocomial transmission of HIV, HBV, and other
bloodborne pathogens can be minimized if health-care workers use
 the
following general guidelines:**  
    Take care to prevent injuries when using needles, scalpels,
 and
    other sharp instruments or devices; when handling sharp
    instruments after procedures; when cleaning used instruments;
 and
    when disposing of used needles. Do not recap used needles by
 hand;
    do not remove used needles from disposable syringes by hand;
 and
    do not bend, break, or otherwise manipulate used needles by

 hand.
    Place used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades,
 and
    other sharp items in puncture-resistant containers for
 disposal.
    Locate the puncture-resistant containers as close to the use
 area
    as is practical.  
    Use protective barriers to prevent exposure to blood, body
 fluids
    containing visible blood, and other fluids to which universal
    precautions apply. The type of protective barrier(s) should be
    appropriate for the procedure being performed and the type of
    exposure anticipated.  
    Immediately and thoroughly wash hands and other skin surfaces
 that
    are contaminated with blood, body fluids containing visible
 blood,
    or other body fluids to which universal precautions apply.
    Glove  Use  for  Phlebotomy   Gloves  should  reduce  the  incidence  of  blood
contamination of
 hands
    during phlebotomy (drawing blood samples), but they cannot prevent
    penetrating injuries caused by needles or other sharp instruments.
 The

    likelihood of hand contamination with blood containing HIV, HBV,
 or
    other bloodborne pathogens during phlebotomy depends on several
    factors: 1) the skill and technique of the health-care worker, 2)
 the
    frequency with which the health-care worker performs the procedure
    (other factors being equal, the cumulative risk of blood exposure
 is
    higher for a health-care worker who performs more procedures), 3)
    whether the procedure occurs in a routine or emergency situation
    (where blood contact may be more likely), and 4) the prevalence of
    infection with bloodborne pathogens in the patient population. The
    likelihood of infection after skin exposure to blood containing
 HIV or
    HBV will depend on the concentration of virus (viral concentration
 is
    much higher for hepatitis B than for HIV), the duration of
 contact,
    the presence of skin lesions on the hands of the health-care
 worker,
    and -- for HBV -- the immune status of the health-care worker.
    Although not accurately quantified, the risk of HIV infection
    following intact skin contact with infective blood is certainly
 much

    less than the 0.5% risk following percutaneous needlestick
 exposures
    (5). In universal precautions, all blood is assumed to be
 potentially
    infective for bloodborne pathogens, but in certain settings (e.g.,
    volunteer blood-donation centers) the prevalence of infection with
    some bloodborne pathogens (e.g., HIV, HBV) is known to be very
 low.
    Some institutions have relaxed recommendations for using gloves
 for
    phlebotomy procedures by skilled phlebotomists in settings where
 the
    prevalence of bloodborne pathogens is known to be very low.  Institutions that judge
that routine gloving for all
 phlebotomies
    is not necessary should periodically reevaluate their policy.
 Gloves
    should always be available to health-care workers who wish to use
 them
    for phlebotomy. In addition, the following general guidelines
 apply: 
    Use gloves for performing phlebotomy when the health-care
 worker
    has cuts, scratches, or other breaks in his/her skin.  
    Use gloves in situations where the health-care worker judges

 that
    hand contamination with blood may occur, for example, when
    performing phlebotomy on an uncooperative patient.  
    Use gloves for performing finger and/or heel sticks on infants
 and
    children.  
    Use gloves when persons are receiving training in phlebotomy.
    Selection of Gloves  The Center for Devices and Radiological Health, FDA, has
    responsibility for regulating the medical glove industry. Medical
    gloves include those marketed as sterile surgical or nonsterile
    examination gloves made of vinyl or latex. General purpose utility
    ("rubber") gloves are also used in the health-care setting, but
 they
    are not regulated by FDA since they are not promoted for medical
 use.
    There are no reported differences in barrier effectiveness between
    intact latex and intact vinyl used to manufacture gloves. Thus,
 the
    type of gloves selected should be appropriate for the task being
    performed.  The following general guidelines are recommended: 
    Use sterile gloves for procedures involving contact with
 normally
    sterile areas of the body.  
    Use examination gloves for procedures involving contact with
    mucous membranes, unless otherwise indicated, and for other

    patient care or diagnostic procedures that do not require the
 use
    of sterile gloves.  
    Change gloves between patient contacts.  
    Do not wash or disinfect surgical or examination gloves for
 reuse.
    Washing with surfactants may cause "wicking," i.e., the
 enhanced
    penetration of liquids through undetected holes in the glove.
    Disinfecting agents may cause deterioration.  
    Use general-purpose utility gloves (e.g., rubber household gloves) for 
    housekeeping chores involving potential blood contact and for instrument 
    cleaning and decontamination procedures. Utility gloves may be 
    decontaminated and reused but should be discarded if they are peeling, 
    cracked, or discolored, or if they have punctures, tears, or other evidence 
    of deterioration. 
Waste Management   Universal precautions are not intended to change waste
 management
    programs previously recommended by CDC for health-care settings
 (1).
    Policies for defining, collecting, storing, decontaminating, and
    disposing of infective waste are generally determined by
 institutions
    in accordance with state and local regulations. Information
 regarding
    waste management regulations in health-care settings may be
 obtained

    from state or local health departments or agencies responsible for
    waste management.
    Reported by: Center for Devices and Radiological Health, Food and
 Drug
    Administration. Hospital Infections Program, AIDS Program, and
    Hepatitis Br, Div of Viral Diseases, Center for Infectious
 Diseases,
    National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, CDC.
    Editorial Note:   Implementation of universal precautions does not
    eliminate the need for other category- or disease-specific
 isolation
    precautions, such as enteric precautions for infectious diarrhea
 or
    isolation for pulmonary tuberculosis (1,2). In addition to
 universal
    precautions, detailed precautions have been developed for the
    following procedures and/or settings in which prolonged or
 intensive
    exposures to blood occur: invasive procedures, dentistry,
 autopsies or
    morticians' services, dialysis, and the clinical laboratory. These
    detailed precautions are found in the August 21, 1987,
    "Recommendations for Prevention of HIV Transmission in Health-Care

    Settings" (1). In addition, specific precautions have been
 developed
    for research laboratories (28).
References 
    Centers for Disease Control. Recommendations for prevention of
 HIV
    transmission in health-care settings. MMWR 1987;36(suppl no.
 2S).  
    Garner JS, Simmons BP. Guideline for isolation precautions in
    hospitals. Infect Control 1983:4;245-325.  
    Immunization Practices Advisory Committee. Recommendations for
    protection against viral hepatitis. MMWR
 1985;34:313-24,329-35.  
    Department of Labor, Department of Health and Human Services.
    Joint advisory notice: protection against occupational
 exposure to
    hepatitis B virus (HBV) and human immunodeficiency virus
 (HIV).
    Washington, DC:US Department of Labor, US Department of Health
 and
    Human Services, 1987.  
    Centers for Disease Control. Update: Acquired immunodeficiency
    syndrome and human immunodeficiency virus infection among
    health-care workers. MMWR 1988;37:229-34,239.  

    Hollander H, Levy JA. Neurologic abnormalities and recovery of
    human immunodeficiency virus from cerebrospinal fluid. Ann
 Intern
    Med 1987;106:692-5.  
    Wirthrington RH, Cornes P, Harris JRW, et al. Isolation of
 human
    immunodeficiency virus from synovial fluid of a patient with
    reactive arthritis. Br Med J 1987;294:484.  
    Mundy DC, Schinazi RF, Gerber AR, Nahmias AJ, Randall HW.
 Human
    immunodeficiency virus isolated from amniotic fluid. Lancet
    1987;2:459-60.  
    Onion DK, Crumpacker CS, Gilliland BC. Arthritis of hepatitis
    associated with Australia antigen. Ann Intern Med
 1971;75:29-33.  
    Lee AKY, Ip HMH, Wong VCW. Mechanisms of maternal-fetal
    transmission of hepatitis B virus. J Infect Dis
 1978;138:668-71.  
    Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Favero MS. Hepatitis B
 virus in
    peritoneal dialysis fluid: A potential hazard. Dialysis and
    Transplantation 1982;11:592-600.  
    Oskenhendler E, Harzic M, Le Roux J-M, Rabian C, Clauvel JP.
 HIV
    infection with seroconversion after a superficial needlestick
    injury to the finger (Letter). N Engl J Med 1986;315:582.  

    Lifson AR. Do alternate modes for transmission of human
    immunodeficiency virus exist? A review. JAMA 1988;259:1353-6.  
    Friedland GH, Saltzman BR, Rogers MF, et al. Lack of
 transmission
    of HTLV-III/LAV infection to household contacts of patients
 with
    AIDS or AIDS-related complex with oral candidiasis. N Engl J
 Med
    1986;314:344-9.  
    Jenison SA, Lemon SM, Baker LN, Newbold JE. Quantitative
 analysis
    of hepatitis B virus DNA in saliva and semen of chronically
    infected homosexual men. J Infect Dis 1987;156:299-306.  
    Cancio-Bello TP, de Medina M, Shorey J, Valledor MD, Schiff
 ER. An
    institutional outbreak of hepatitis B related to a human
 biting
    carrier. J Infect Dis 1982;146:652-6.  
    MacQuarrie MB, Forghani B, Wolochow DA. Hepatitis B
 transmitted by
    a human bite. JAMA 1974;230:723-4.  
    Scott RM, Snitbhan R, Bancroft WH, Alter HJ, Tingpalapong M.
    Experimental transmission of hepatitis B virus by semen and
    saliva. J Infect Dis 1980;142:67-71.  
    Glaser JB, Nadler JP. Hepatitis B virus in a cardiopulmonary
    resuscitation training course: Risk of transmission from a
 surface

    antigen-positive participant. Arch Intern Med 1985;145:1653-5.
  
    Osterholm MT, Bravo ER, Crosson JT, et al. Lack of
 transmission of
    viral hepatitis type B after oral exposure to HBsAg-positive
    saliva. Br Med J 1979;2:1263-4.  
    Curran JW, Jaffe HW, Hardy AM, et al. Epidemiology of HIV
    infection and AIDS in the United States. Science
 1988;239:610-6.  
    Jason JM, McDougal JS, Dixon G, et al. HTLV-III/LAV antibody
 and
    immune status of household contacts and sexual partners of
 persons
    with hemophilia. JAMA 1986;255:212-5.  
    Wahn V, Kramer HH, Voit T, Bruster HT, Scrampical B, Scheid A.
    Horizontal transmission of HIV infection between two siblings
    (Letter). Lancet 1986;2:694.  
    Salahuddin SZ, Groopman JE, Markham PD, et al. HTLV-III in
    symptom-free seronegative persons. Lancet 1984;2:1418-20.  
    Simmons BP, Wong ES. Guideline for prevention of nosocomial
    pneumonia. Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human
 Services,
    Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1982.  
    Klein RS, Phelan JA, Freeman K, et al. Low occupational risk
 of
    human immunodeficiency virus infection among dental

 professionals.
    N Engl J Med 1988;318:86-90.  
    Garner JS, Favero MS. Guideline for handwashing and hospital
    environmental control, 1985. Atlanta: US Department of Health
 and
    Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease
    Control, 1985; HHS publication no. 99-1117.  
    Centers for Disease Control. 1988 Agent summary statement for human 
    immunodeficiency virus and report on laboratory-acquired infection with 
    human immunodeficiency virus. MMWR 1988;37(suppl no. S4:1S-22S). 
     *The August 1987 publication should be consulted for general 
    information and specific recommendations not addressed in this update. **The 
    August 1987 publication should be consulted for general information and 
    specific recommendations not addressed in this update. Copies of this report 
    and of the MMWR supplement entitled Recommendations for Prevention of HIV 
    Transmission in Health-Care Settings published in August 1987 are available 
    through the National AIDS Information Clearinghouse, P.O. Box 6003, 
    Rockville, MD 20850.  
Disclaimer
   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 

    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 
 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00000039.htm
