Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Authors: Amy Blain, MPH; Tami Skoff, MS; Pam Cassiday, MS;
Maria  Lucia  Tondella,  PhD;  Anna  Acosta,  MD  Pertussis,  more  commonly  known  as
whooping  cough,  is  a  contagious,  respiratory  disease  caused  by  the  bacterium
Bordetella  pertussis.  The  illness  is  typically  characterized  by  a  prolonged  paroxysmal
cough  that  is  often  accompanied  by  an  inspiratory  whoop.  Disease  presentation  can
vary  with  age  and  history  of  previous  exposure  or  vaccination.  Young  infants  may
present to a clinic or hospital with apnea and no other disease symptoms. Adults and
adolescents with some immunity may exhibit only mild symptoms or have the typical
prolonged paroxysmal cough. In all persons, cough can continue for months. Pertussis
rarely  causes  severe  complications  among  healthy,  vaccinated  persons.  Infants,
however,  are  at  greatest  risk  for  pertussis-related  complications  and  mortality.
Pneumonia  is  the  most  common  complication  in  all  age  groups;  seizures  and
encephalopathy are rare and generally occur only among very young infants. Death is
infrequent  and  most  likely  to  occur  in  unvaccinated  infants,  although  fatalities  are
occasionally  reported  among  older  children  and  adults  with  serious  underlying  health
conditions.[1] In addition to B. pertussis, 3 other Bordetella species can cause disease
in humans: B. parapertussis, B. holmesii, and B. bronchiseptica. B. parapertussis causes
a  pertussis-like  illness  that  is  generally  milder  than  pertussis,  likely  because  the
bacteria  do  not  produce  pertussis  toxin.  Co-infection  of  B.  pertussis  and  B.
parapertussis  can  occur  but  is  uncommon.  Disease  attributable  to  Bordetella  species
other  than  B.  pertussis  is  not  reportable  to  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention  (CDC).  In  the  pre-vaccine  era,  pertussis  was  a  common  childhood  disease
and a major cause of child and infant mortality in the United States. Routine childhood
vaccination  led  to  a  reduction  in  disease  incidence  from  an  average  of  150  reported

cases per 100,000 persons between 1922 and 1940, to 0.5 cases per 100,000 persons
in 1976.[2] The incidence of reported pertussis began increasing in the 1980s, however,
and significant peaks in disease have been observed in recent years. In 2012, 48,277
cases  were  reported  nationwide,  exceeding  levels  observed  since  1955.  Reported
pertussis cases have decreased since 2012, with 18,975 cases reported during 2017;
however, levels remain significantly increased compared to those observed during the
1990s  and  early  2000s.  Multiple  factors  have  likely  contributed  to  the  increase,
including waning immunity from acellular pertussis vaccines, heightened provider and
public awareness, improved diagnostic testing, and possibly molecular changes within
the  pertussis  bacterium.  The  incidence  of  pertussis  remains  highest  among  young
infants.  From  2012  through  2017,  66.7%,  of  all  pertussis-related  deaths  (n  =  72)
reported to CDC were among infants less than two months of age, who were too young
to have received DTaP vaccine. As of 2017, the second highest incidence of pertussis
continues  to  occur  among  school-aged  children  and  adolescents.[3–5]  Early  diagnosis
and  treatment  of  pertussis  might  limit  its  spread  to  other  susceptible  people.  When
pertussis is strongly suspected, attempts to identify and provide chemoprophylaxis to
household  and  other  close  contacts  at  high  risk  should  proceed  without  waiting  for
laboratory  confirmation.  When  suspicion  of  pertussis  is  low,  the  investigation  can  be
delayed
 until
 there
 is
 laboratory
 confirmation
 of
 the
 diagnosis.
 However,
chemoprophylaxis of pregnant women and infants, as well as their household contacts,
should not be delayed. Surveillance data collected through case investigations are used
to  assess  the  impact  of  disease  and  monitor  changes  in  epidemiology  over  time.
Surveillance  data  are  also  used  to  guide  public  health  policy  and  development  of
prevention  and  control  strategies.  CDC  uses  surveillance  data  to  monitor  national
trends in pertussis and identify populations at risk. Local and state health departments
use  surveillance  data  to  identify  clusters  of  related  cases  that  might  indicate  an
outbreak.  Laboratory  surveillance  to  monitor  changes  in  the  B.  pertussis  organism  is

also  important.  Isolates  of  B.  pertussis  collected  through  routine  surveillance  have
provided researchers with the resources necessary to identify such changes, including
recent changes in the organism at the molecular level.[6–9] This information is vital to
understanding  the  evolution  of  B.  pertussis  and  how  those  changes  may  impact  the
current pertussis vaccination program and other prevention strategies. See Section VII,
“Laboratory  Testing”  for  more  details.  As  part  of  the  Healthy  People  2020  project,
disease  reduction  goals  of  2,500  indigenous  pertussis  cases  per  year  in  children  <1
year of age and 2,000 cases per year among adolescents 11 through 18 years of age
were proposed.[10] In 2017, 2,276 cases were reported among infants less than 1 year
of  age,  while  6,171  cases  were  observed  among  adolescents  11  through  18  years  of
age.[5]   Top  of  Page  The  following  case  definition  for  pertussis  was  approved  by  the
Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) in June 2019 and went into effect
January 1, 2020.[11] In the absence of a more likely diagnosis, a cough illness lasting
≥2 weeks with at least one of the following signs or symptoms: Probable:  Confirmed: 
Collection of epidemiologic and clinical data is essential for reporting cases that meet
the  clinical  case  definition.  Investigators  should  make  every  attempt  to  collect
information on paroxysms of cough, whoop, posttussive vomiting, apnea, and duration
of cough, as these variables are required to determine whether an individual meets the
pertussis  clinical  case  definition.  When  feasible,  case  investigations  initiated  shortly
after cough onset should include follow-up calls to collect information on cough duration
of at least 14 days. Follow-up is essential regardless of confirmatory test results so that
cases meeting the clinical case definition can be reported. Both probable and confirmed
pertussis  cases  should  be  reported  to  the  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance
System  (NNDSS)  by  the  state  health  department  via  the  National  Electronic
Telecommunications  System  for  Surveillance  (NETSS)  or  National  Electronic  Disease
Surveillance  System  (NEDSS).  Laboratory  confirmation  of  pertussis  is  important
because  other  pathogens  can  cause  symptoms  similar  to  pertussis.  All  patients  with

cough and a positive B. pertussis culture or PCR should be reported as confirmed, even
those  with  cough  lasting  less  than  14  days.   Top  of  Page  Refer  to  Chapter  22,
“Laboratory  Support  for  Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases”  for  detailed
information on laboratory testing for pertussis and for specific information on specimen
collection  and  shipment.  Specimen  collection  and  shipping  are  important  steps  in
obtaining laboratory diagnosis or disease confirmation. Guidelines have been published
for  specimen  collection  and  handling  of  microbiologic  agents.  Information  is  also
available on using CDC laboratories as support for reference and disease surveillance;
this  includes  Determining  who  has  pertussis  and  who  does  not  can  be  difficult.
Whenever  possible,  a  nasopharyngeal  swab  or  aspirate  should  be  obtained  from  all
persons with suspected pertussis. A properly obtained nasopharyngeal swab or aspirate
is  essential  for  optimal  laboratory  diagnosis.  Health  department  personnel  and  other
healthcare  practitioners  who  are  asked  to  obtain  these  specimens  should  receive
training  and  supervision  from  persons  experienced  in  collection  of  nasopharyngeal
specimens.  CDC  has  developed  two  short  training  videos  for  collection  of
nasopharyngeal  aspirate  and  swab  specimens,  which  can  be  accessed  on  the  CDC
pertussis website.  Top of Page Each state and territory (jurisdiction) has regulations or
laws  governing  the  reporting  of  diseases  and  conditions  of  public  health  importance.
[12]  These  regulations  and  laws  list  the  diseases  to  be  reported  and  describe  those
persons  or  institutions  responsible  for  reporting,  including  healthcare  providers,
hospitals, laboratories, schools, daycare and childcare facilities, and other institutions.
Persons  reporting  should  contact  the  jurisdiction/state  health  department  for
jurisdiction-specific  reporting  requirements.  Notifications  by  jurisdiction/state  health
departments of all probable and confirmed pertussis cases should be sent to CDC using
event code 10190 through NNDSS via NETSS or NEDSS. When provisional information is
reported to NNDSS, NETSS and NEDSS reports can be updated as additional information
is collected. NETSS and NEDSS accept information about clinical symptoms, laboratory

confirmation,  and  vaccination  history;  this  information  is  included  in  the  Pertussis
Surveillance Worksheet (Appendix 11 [2 pages]) available for reference and use in case
investigation.  Case  notifications  should  not  be  delayed  because  of  incomplete
information  or  lack  of  confirmation.  Data  can  be  updated  electronically  as  more
information  becomes  available.  Case  investigation  should  include  collection  of  the
epidemiologic  information  listed  on  the  CDC  pertussis  surveillance  worksheet  (see
Appendix  11).  State  health  departments  often  supplement  the  suggested  CDC
investigation  questions  with  additional  information  relevant  to  cases  in  their
communities.  The  jurisdiction  in  which  the  patient  resides  at  the  time  of  diagnosis
should submit the case notification to CDC. When laboratory testing is not completed or
is negative, but the individual has symptoms consistent with pertussis, it is important to
determine duration of cough—specifically, whether it lasts 14 days or longer—in order
to  determine  if  a  person’s  illness  meets  the  definition  of  a  clinical  case.  If  the  first
interview is conducted within 14 days of cough onset and cough is still present at the
time  of  interview,  it  is  important  to  follow  up  at  14  days  or  later  after  cough  onset.
Pertussis  case  investigation  methods  vary  across  state  and  local  health  jurisdictions;
CDC  is  committed  to  helping  improve  standardization  of  surveillance  practices  for
pertussis. Please refer to Appendix 11 for a detailed instruction sheet describing each
data element outlined in the pertussis surveillance worksheet.  Top of Page For specific
information about the use of pertussis vaccines, refer to The Pink Book, which provides
general  recommendations,  including  vaccine  use  and  scheduling,  immunization
strategies for providers, vaccine content, adverse events and reactions, vaccine storage
and  handling,  and  contraindications  and  precautions.   Top  of  Page  A  number  of
surveillance  activities  can  improve  detection  and  reporting  of  cases  as  well  as  the
completeness and accuracy of the case report form information reported. In addition to
those outlined below, Chapter 19, “Enhancing Surveillance,” lists activities that might
be applicable to pertussis surveillance. It is important that available diagnostic tests are

used appropriately. To ensure pertussis diagnosis and reporting is optimized, reporting
jurisdictions should assess the timing of diagnostic testing relative to cough onset for
cases  identified  through  routine  surveillance.  Bacterial  culture  for  pertussis  is  most
useful during the first 2 weeks of cough and prior to antibiotic use. PCR may effectively
diagnose pertussis from 2–4 weeks of cough onset, although sensitivity declines after 3
weeks. Appropriate serologic assays are most useful in the 2–8 weeks following cough
onset;  however,  this  testing  is  not  confirmatory  for  the  purpose  of  case  reporting.
Diagnostic  testing  at  inappropriate  times  may  result  in  both  false-positive  and
false-negative  results,  reducing  the  overall  quality  of  pertussis  diagnosis,  and
ultimately,  pertussis  surveillance.  Unlike  many  other  vaccine-preventable  diseases  of
childhood, pertussis remains endemic in the United States. Cases are expected to occur
in  all  communities;  a  period  of  several  years  in  which  no  cases  are  reported  from  a
jurisdiction  likely  reflects  failures  to  diagnose  and/or  report  disease  rather  than  an
absence of disease. The level of diagnostic testing being undertaken can be evaluated
by  reviewing  the  number  of  pertussis  diagnostic  tests  (e.g.,  cultures  or  PCR  results)
ordered by physicians within a jurisdiction. Regular monitoring of surveillance indicators
might  identify  specific  areas  of  the  surveillance  and  reporting  system  that  need
improvement. Some suggested surveillance indicators to monitor include:  Top of Page
CDC has partnered with 7 states (CO, CT, GA, MN, NM, NY, and OR) participating in the
Emerging  Infections  Program  (EIP)  Network  to  conduct  enhanced  surveillance  of
pertussis  (EPS)  and  other  Bordetella  species.  EPS  is  characterized  by  enhanced  case
ascertainment  and  augmented  data  collection  that  goes  beyond  what  is  requested
nationally  through  NNDSS.  Participating  sites  collect  isolates  and  specimens,  when
available, for further characterization at the CDC Pertussis and Diphtheria Laboratory.
EPS  sites  also  provide  the  infrastructure  for  conducting  pertussis  special  studies
including those aimed at evaluating pertussis prevention and control strategies. Other
states  interested  in  collecting  additional  pertussis  surveillance  information  may

consider  adding  the  following  data  elements  that  are  not  currently  included  on  the
national pertussis surveillance worksheet: Although many surveillance systems still rely
on  paper  and  pencil  for  data  collection,  use  of  data  from  sources  such  as  electronic
medical records, electronic case reporting [13–19], and clinical laboratory information
systems  (LIMS)  can  significantly  improve  reporting  speed,  enhance  data  quality,  and
reduce  workload.   Top  of  Page  Case  investigations  generally  include  reviews  of
laboratory, hospital, and clinic records, as well as immunization registries, which are the
best sources for information about diagnoses and immunization histories. Investigations
also include interviews of patients, which are necessary to identify sources of infections
and  contacts  at  risk.  Investigations  can  include  treatment  of  patients  and
chemoprophylaxis  and  or  vaccination  of  contacts.  Antimicrobial  treatment  does  not
generally lessen the severity of disease unless it is begun early in the course of illness,
prior  to  paroxysmal  coughing.  [20]  Early  treatment  reduces  transmission  and  is
essential for disease control. The spread of pertussis can be limited by decreasing the
infectivity  of  the  patient  and  by  protecting  close  contacts.[21]  Persons  with  pertussis
are  infectious  from  the  onset  of  symptoms  through  the  third  week  after  the  onset  of
paroxysms  or  until  5  days  after  the  start  of  effective  antimicrobial  treatment.  The
recommended  antimicrobial  agents  and  doses  are  the  same  for  treatment  and
chemoprophylaxis.[20]  Three  macrolides  (azithromycin,  erythromycin,  clarithromycin)
are recommended for treatment of pertussis. Azithromycin is most popular because it is
given  in  a  short,  simple  regimen  of  1  dose  each  day  for  5  days.  It  is  the  preferred
antimicrobial for use in infants younger than 1 month of age. For infants younger than 1
month  of  age,  macrolides  should  be  used  with  caution:  some  studies  have
demonstrated  an  association  between  erythromycin  and  azithromycin  with  infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHPS). However, infants younger than 1 month of age are
at  increased  risk  of  developing  severe  pertussis  and  life-threatening  complications.
These risks outweigh the potential risk of IHPS that has been associated with macrolide

use.  Resistance  of  B.  pertussis  to  macrolides  is  rare,  and  antimicrobial  susceptibility
testing  is  not  routinely  recommended.  Testing  is  appropriate  in  some  circumstances
and  is  recommended  when  treatment  failure  is  suspected.  Refer  to  Section  VII,
“Laboratory  Testing”  for  information  on  how  to  contact  the  CDC  Pertussis  and
Diphtheria  Laboratory  to  discuss  susceptibility  testing.  If  resistance  to  macrolides  is
suspected  or  if  their  use  is  contraindicated,  it  is  recommended  to  treat  with
trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole  (TMP-SMZ).  TMP-SMZ  should  not  be  used  to  treat
infants  younger  than  2  months  of  age.[20]  CDC  recommends  administration  of
chemoprophylaxis  to  contacts  at  high  risk  and  household  members  of  a  pertussis
patient. For more specific information on chemoprophylaxis, please see the Outbreak
Control  section  below.  Limited  available  data  suggest  B.  parapertussis  is  less
susceptible  to  antibiotics  than  pertussis,  although  some  studies  indicate  that
erythromycin,  azithromycin,  clarithromycin,  TMP-SMZ,  and  ciprofloxacin  have  activity
against B. parapertussis.[20-29] Because data on the clinical effectiveness of antibiotic
treatment are limited, treatment decisions should be based on clinical judgment with
particular  attention  towards  special  populations,  including  infants,  elderly,  and
immunocompromised  persons;  treatment  may  be  warranted  to  prevent  severe
outcomes  and  decrease  duration  of  illness.  During  the  course  of  a  pertussis
investigation, under-vaccinated contacts of pertussis cases may be identified. Contacts
who have not received the recommended number of pertussis-containing vaccinations
(i.e.,  DTaP,  Tdap)  should  follow  the  age  appropriate  catch-up  immunization
schedule.[30,31] Vaccination is not a substitute for chemoprophylaxis and is unlikely to
prevent illness in a person who has already been infected with B. pertussis.[30-33]  Top
of Page Pertussis outbreaks can be difficult to identify and manage. Other respiratory
pathogens  often  cause  clinical  symptoms  similar  to  pertussis,  and  co-circulation  with
other  pathogens  does  occur.  To  respond  appropriately  (e.g.,  provide  appropriate
chemoprophylaxis),  it  is  important  to  confirm  that  B.  pertussis  is  circulating  in  the

outbreak  setting  and  to  determine  whether  other  pathogens  are  contributing  to  the
outbreak. Because culture is the most specific test for pertussis, confirmation by culture
for at least one suspected pertussis case is recommended any time there is suspicion of
a pertussis outbreak. To reduce the risk of pertussis in new mothers and their infants,
especially those too young to be vaccinated, ACIP recommends that pregnant women
receive a dose of Tdap vaccine during each pregnancy. During outbreaks, prevention
measures  should  focus  on  efforts  to  improve  Tdap  coverage  during  pregnancy  to
reduce  severe  illness  and  possible  deaths  in  vulnerable  infants.  Pertussis  incidence
remains  elevated  in  the  United  States,  and  community  transmission  is  widespread.
Thus,  extensive  contact  tracing  and  broad-scale  use  of  chemoprophylaxis  among
contacts  may  not  be  an  effective  use  of  limited  public  health  resources.  While
antibiotics may prevent pertussis disease if given prior to symptom onset, there are no
data to indicate that widespread use of chemoprophylaxis among contacts effectively
controls or limits the scope of pertussis outbreaks. Another important consideration is
the  overuse  of  antibiotics;  CDC  promotes  the  judicious  use  of  antibiotics  among
healthcare  providers  and  patients.[34]  Given  these  considerations,  CDC  supports
targeting chemoprophylaxis through the following measures to persons at high risk of
developing severe pertussis and to persons who will have close contact with those at
high  risk  of  developing  severe  pertussis:  A  broader  use  of  chemoprophylaxis  may  be
appropriate in limited closed settings, when the number of identified cases is small, and
when  a  community-wide  outbreak  is  not  ongoing.  However,  when  continued
transmission  of  pertussis  is  evident,  multiple  rounds  of  antibiotics  would  not  be
recommended.  Rather  than  repeating  a  course  of  antibiotics,  contacts  should  be
monitored for onset of signs and symptoms of pertussis for 21 days. Active screening
for symptomatic patients with suspected pertussis can be considered during outbreaks
in  settings  such  as  schools,  daycare  centers,  and  hospitals.  Active  screening  for
suspected  cases  potentially  reduces  exposure  to  persons  with  pertussis,  encourages

timely medical evaluation and treatment of cases, and promotes prompt administration
of  antibiotics  to  close  contacts  at  high  risk  for  infection  or  complications  due  to
infection.[35-42] To receive email updates about this page, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt10-pertussis.html
