Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Tatiana Lanzieri, MD; Penina Haber, MPH; Joseph P. Icenogle,
PhD, MS; and Manisha Patel, MD, MS The 14th edition of the “Pink Book” was published
August  2021.  Vaccine-specific  recommendations  may  be  outdated.  Refer  to  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  Vaccine  Recommendations  and
Guidelines  for  the  most  updated  vaccine-specific  recommendations.  Printer  friendly
version [14 pages] The name rubella is derived from Latin, meaning “little red.” Rubella
was initially considered to be a variant of measles or scarlet fever. It was not until 1814
that  it  was  first  described  as  a  separate  disease  in  the  German  medical  literature,
hence the common name “German measles.” In 1914, Alfred F. Hess postulated a viral
etiology based on his work with monkeys. Following a widespread epidemic of rubella
infection in 1940, Norman Gregg, an Australian ophthalmologist, reported in 1941 the
occurrence of congenital cataracts among infants born following maternal rubella. This
was the first published recognition of congenital rubella syndrome (CRS). Rubella virus
was first isolated in 1962 by two independent groups, Paul D. Parkman and colleagues
and Thomas H. Weller and Franklin A. Neva. The first rubella vaccines were licensed in
1969. In 1971, a combined measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine was licensed
for  use  in  the  United  States.  In  2005,  a  combination  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and
varicella (MMRV) vaccine was licensed. Rubella virus is the sole member of the genus
Rubivirus, in the family Matonaviridae. It is an enveloped virus with a single-stranded
RNA  of  positive  polarity  and  has  a  single  antigenic  type.  Following  respiratory
transmission,  the  virus  replicates  in  the  nasopharynx  and  regional  lymph  nodes.  In  a
pregnant  woman,  placental  infection  occurs  during  viremia  and  may  lead  to
transplacental fetal infection. Fetal damage occurs through destruction of cells, as well
as  disruption  of  cell  division.  Fetal  infection  often  results  in  a  persistent  infection

typically  leading  to  hearing  impairment  and  ocular  and  cardiovascular  abnormalities.
The  average  incubation  period  of  rubella  is  14  days,  with  a  range  of  12  to  23  days.
Symptoms are often mild, and up to 50% of infections may be subclinical or inapparent.
In young children, rash is usually the first symptom. In older children and adults, there
may be a 1- to 5-day prodrome with low-grade fever, malaise, lymphadenopathy, and
upper respiratory symptoms preceding the rash. Lymphadenopathy may begin a week
before the rash and last several weeks. The rubella rash is maculopapular and occurs
14  to  17  days  after  exposure.  The  rash  usually  occurs  initially  on  the  face  and  then
progresses from head to foot. It lasts about 3 days and is occasionally pruritic. The rash
is fainter than a measles rash, does not coalesce, and is often more prominent after a
hot  shower  or  bath.  Postauricular,  posterior  cervical,  and  suboccipital  nodes  may  be
involved.  Arthralgia  (joint  pain)  and  arthritis  are  rare  in  children  and  adult  males  but
occur frequently in adult women. Joint symptoms tend to occur at about the same time
or shortly after the rash appears and may last for up to 1 month. Fingers, wrists, and
knees  are  often  affected.  Chronic  arthritis  is  rare.  Other  symptoms  of  rubella  include
conjunctivitis,  testalgia,  or  orchitis.  Small,  red  (Forschheimer)  spots  may  be  noted  on
the  soft  palate  but  are  not  diagnostic  for  rubella.  Complications  of  rubella  are  rare.
Hemorrhagic  manifestations  occur  in  approximately  1  per  3,000  cases.  These
manifestations  may  be  secondary  to  low  platelets  and  vascular  damage,  with
thrombocytopenic  purpura  being  the  most  common.  Gastrointestinal,  cerebral,  or
intrarenal hemorrhage may also occur. Effects may last from days to months, and most
patients recover. Encephalitis occurs in 1 in 6,000 cases and may be fatal. Additional
rare  complications  include  granulomas  in  persons  with  primary  immune  deficiencies,
orchitis,  neuritis,  and  a  late  syndrome  of  progressive  panencephalitis.  Prevention  of
congenital  rubella  syndrome  (CRS)  is  the  main  objective  of  rubella  vaccination
programs. Infection with rubella virus is most consequential in early gestation and can
lead to miscarriages, stillbirths, and severe birth defects in infants. The risk of CRS is

highest  when  a  woman  acquires  rubella  during  the  first  12  weeks  of  gestation.
Congenital  infection  with  rubella  virus  can  affect  many  organ  systems.  Congenital
rubella  syndrome  includes  a  constellation  of  birth  defects,  such  as  deafness,  eye
abnormalities (cataracts, glaucoma, retinopathy, microphthalmia), and congenital heart
disease.  Many  rash  illnesses  can  mimic  rubella  infection,  so  clinical  diagnosis  is
unreliable.  Acute  or  recent  rubella  infection  can  be  confirmed  by  detection  of  rubella
virus by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a significant rise in rubella specific immune
globulin  (Ig)G  antibody  from  paired  acute-  and  convalescent-phase  sera,  or  the
presence of rubella-specific IgM antibody. The optimal time for serum collection for IgM
detection is 5 days after onset of symptoms (fever and rash). If serum is collected less
than 5 days after onset and is IgM negative, a second sample is necessary to confirm or
rule out rubella using IgM detection. In persons with rubella infection, the virus may be
detected in nasal, throat, urine, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid specimens up to 10 days
after  rash  onset  (most  successful  within  3  days).  In  infants  with  suspected  CRS,
nasopharyngeal swabs and/or urine should be collected as close to birth as possible. If
CRS is confirmed, infants should be screened for viral shedding monthly after the age of
3  months  until  two  consecutive  negative  tests  are  obtained.  Viral  shedding  may  be
detected for up to one year. Rubella used to be a worldwide infection. Endemic rubella
and  CRS  were  eliminated  in  the  United  States  in  2004,  and  in  the  region  of  the
Americas in 2009. Rubella is a human disease. There is no known animal reservoir and
no  evidence  of  insect  transmission.  Infants  with  CRS  may  shed  rubella  virus  for  an
extended period. Rubella is spread from person-to-person via direct contact or droplets
shed from the respiratory secretions of infected persons. Rubella may be transmitted
by  persons  with  subclinical  or  asymptomatic  cases  (up  to  50%  of  all  rubella  virus
infections).  Since  rubella  elimination  in  the  United  States,  sporadic  cases  of  rubella
have been imported or linked to an imported case, with no temporal pattern. Rubella is
most contagious when the rash first appears, but virus may be shed from 7 days before

to 7 days after rash onset. Infants with CRS shed large quantities of virus from body
secretions  for  up  to  1  year  and  can  therefore  transmit  rubella  to  persons  caring  for
them  who  are  susceptible  to  the  disease.  Rubella  and  congenital  rubella  syndrome
became nationally notifiable diseases in 1966. Following vaccine introduction in 1969,
rubella  incidence  declined  dramatically.  Rubella  outbreaks  continued  to  occur  among
adolescents  and  young  adults  and  in  settings  where  unvaccinated  adults  gathered.
National recommendations to vaccinate susceptible postpubertal females, adolescents,
persons in military service, college students, and persons in certain work settings, as
well  as  increased  rubella  vaccination  efforts  in  the  Region  of  the  Americas,  led  to
further  declines  in  rubella  and  CRS  cases.  In  2004,  endemic  rubella  was  declared
eliminated in the United States, with fewer than 10 cases reported annually and less
than one CRS case per year. Since 2012, all rubella cases reported in the United States
had evidence the patients were infected outside the United States. In most CRS cases
reported since 1998, the mother was born outside the United States. Among nine CRS
cases reported in the United States between 2004 and 2014, all were import-associated
or  from  unknown  sources.  Among  children  born  during  2016–2017,  90.7%  received
measles,  mumps,  and  rubella-containing  vaccine  by  age  24  months;  this  was  not
statistically significantly different from the coverage of 90.3% for children born during
2014–2015.  In  1971,  a  combined  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  (MMR)  vaccine  was
licensed  for  use  in  the  United  States,  and  the  current  rubella  vaccine  component
(RA27/3) was licensed in 1979. In 2005, a combination measles, mumps, rubella, and
varicella (MMRV) vaccine was licensed. Rubella vaccine is available as measles, mumps,
and rubella vaccine (MMR [MMR-II]) and measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella vaccine
(MMRV  [ProQuad]).  Both  MMR  and  MMRV  vaccine  contain  live,  attenuated  viruses.
Single-antigen  rubella  vaccine  is  not  available  in  the  United  States.  The  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends that MMR or MMRV vaccine
be  used  when  any  of  the  individual  components  is  indicated.  MMR  vaccine  is  a

lyophilized  preparation  of  measles  virus  vaccine  live,  an  attenuated  line  of  measles
virus,  derived  from  Enders’  attenuated  Edmonston  strain  and  propagated  in  chick
embryo  cell  culture;  mumps  virus  vaccine  live,  the  Jeryl  Lynn  strain  of  mumps  virus
propagated in chick embryo cell culture; and rubella virus vaccine live, the Wistar RA
27/3  strain  of  live  attenuated  rubella  virus  propagated  in  WI-38  human  diploid  lung
fibroblasts.  MMRV  vaccine  contains  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  virus  of  equal  titer
and  identical  to  those  in  the  MMR  vaccine.  The  titer  of  Oka  varicella  zoster  virus  is
higher in MMRV vaccine than in single-antigen varicella vaccine, a minimum of 9,772
plaque-forming  units  (PFU)  versus  1,350  PFU,  respectively.  MMR  and  MMRV  vaccines
are supplied as a lyophilized (freeze-dried) powder and are reconstituted with sterile,
preservative-free  water  and  vaccine  contains  gelatin.  MMR  and  MMRV  vaccines  are
administered  by  the  subcutaneous  route.  Each  dose  of  MMR  and  MMRV  vaccine
contains  neomycin  as  an  antibiotic.  It  contains  no  adjuvant  or  preservative.  MMR
vaccine or MMRV vaccine can be used to implement the vaccination recommendations
for  prevention  of  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella.  MMR  vaccine  is  licensed  for  use  in
persons age 12 months or older. MMRV vaccine is licensed for use in persons age 12
months through 12 years; MMRV vaccine should not be administered to persons age 13
years or older. Two doses of MMR vaccine, separated by at least 4 weeks, are routinely
recommended for children age 12 months or older. Dose 1 of MMR vaccine should be
given at age 12 through 15 months. A second dose of MMR vaccine is recommended
based on previous observations of the failure of some to generate an immune response
to measles following dose 1. Dose 2 is routinely given at age 4 through 6 years, before
a child enters kindergarten or first grade. All students entering school should receive 2
doses  of  MMR  vaccine  (with  the  first  dose  administered  at  age  12  months  or  older)
before  enrollment.  Dose  2  of  MMR  vaccine  may  be  administered  as  soon  as  4  weeks
after  dose  1.  The  minimum  interval  between  doses  of  MMRV  vaccine  is  3  months,
although when dose 2 is administered 4 weeks following dose 1, it can be considered

valid. For the first dose of measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella vaccines at age 12
through  47  months,  either  separate  MMR  and  varicella  (VAR)  vaccines,  or  MMRV
vaccine, may be used. However, the risk of febrile seizures is about twice as high for
children  receiving  MMRV  vaccine  versus  separate  MMR  and  VAR  vaccines.  Providers
who are considering administering MMRV should discuss the benefits and risks of both
vaccination  options  with  the  parents.  Unless  the  parent  or  caregiver  expresses  a
preference for MMRV, separate MMR vaccine and VAR vaccine should be administered
for the first dose in this age group. For the second dose of measles, mumps, rubella,
and varicella vaccines at any age and for the first dose at age 48 months or older, the
use of MMRV generally is preferred over separate injections of its equivalent component
vaccines  (i.e.,  MMR  vaccine  and  VAR  vaccine).  Adults  born  in  1957  or  later  should
receive at least 1 dose of MMR vaccine unless they have documentation of vaccination
with  at  least  1  dose  of  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella-containing  vaccine  or  other
acceptable  presumptive  evidence  of  immunity  to  these  three  diseases.  Except  for
health  care  personnel,  who  should  have  documented  immunity,  birth  before  1957
generally can be considered acceptable evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, and
rubella.  Colleges  and  other  post-high-school  educational  institutions  are  potential
high-risk  areas  for  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  transmission  because  of  large
concentrations  of  persons.  Prematriculation  vaccination  requirements  for  measles
immunity have been shown to significantly decrease the risk of measles outbreaks on
college  campuses  where  such  requirements  are  implemented  and  enforced.  All
students  entering  colleges,  universities,  technical  and  vocational  schools,  and  other
institutions  for  post-high-school  education  should  receive  2  doses  of  MMR  vaccine  or
have  other  acceptable  evidence  of  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  immunity  before
entry.  For  unvaccinated  health  care  personnel  born  before  1957  who  lack  laboratory
evidence of measles, mumps, or rubella immunity or laboratory confirmation of disease,
health  care  facilities  should  have  policies  that  offer  2  doses  of  MMR  vaccine  at  the

appropriate  interval  for  measles  and  mumps  and  1  dose  of  MMR  vaccine  for  rubella,
respectively.  Health  care  facilities  should  also  have  policies  for  such  personnel  that
recommend 2 doses of MMR vaccine during an outbreak of measles or mumps and 1
dose during an outbreak of rubella. This recommendation is based on serologic studies
indicating  that  among  hospital  personnel  born  before  1957,  5%  to  10%  had  no
detectable measles, mumps, or rubella antibody. Adequate vaccination for health care
personnel born during or after 1957 consists of at least 1 dose of MMR for rubella, and 2
appropriately  spaced  MMR  doses  for  measles  and  mumps.  Elimination  of  indigenous
rubella  and  CRS  can  be  maintained  by  continuing  efforts  to  vaccinate  susceptible
adolescents and women of childbearing age, particularly those born outside the United
States. These efforts should include vaccinating in family planning clinics and sexually
transmitted disease (STD) clinics, and as part of routine gynecologic care. Efforts should
also be made to maximize use of premarital serology results when such tests assess
rubella  immunity;  emphasize  vaccination  for  college  students;  vaccinate  women
postpartum and postabortion; immunize female prison staff and, when possible, female
prison  inmates;  offer  vaccination  to  at-risk  women  through  the  special  supplemental
program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC); and implement vaccination programs
in  certain  workplaces,  particularly  those  employing  persons  born  outside  the  United
States. Measles-, mumps-, or rubella- virus-containing vaccine administered prior to age
12 months (e.g., for international travel) should not be counted as part of the 2-dose
series. Children vaccinated before age 12 months should be revaccinated with 2 doses
of appropriately spaced MMR or MMRV vaccine, the first dose administered when the
child  is age 12 through  15 months (12 months if the child  remains in  an  area  where
disease  risk  is  high)  and  the  second  dose  at  least  4  weeks  later.  Persons  who
experienced perinatal HIV-infection who may have received MMR vaccine prior to the
establishment  of  effective  combined  antiretroviral  therapy  (cART),  should  be
revaccinated with 2 appropriately spaced doses of MMR (i.e., the dose does not count)

unless they have other acceptable current evidence of immunity. MMR series should be
administered once effective cART has been established for at least 6 months and there
is  no  evidence  of  severe  immunosuppression.  Generally,  persons  can  be  considered
immune  to  rubella  if  they  were  born  before  1957,  have  serologic  evidence  of  rubella
immunity  (equivocal  test  results  should  be  considered  negative),  or  laboratory
confirmation  of  disease,  or  have  documentation  of  adequate  vaccination  for  rubella.
Birth before 1957 provides only presumptive evidence of rubella immunity; it does not
guarantee  that  a  person  is  immune  to  rubella.  Birth  before  1957  is  not  acceptable
evidence of rubella immunity for women who could become pregnant. Clinical diagnosis
of  rubella  is  unreliable  and  should  not  be  considered  in  assessing  immune  status.
Because many rash illnesses may mimic rubella infection and many rubella infections
are  unrecognized,  the  only  reliable  evidence  of  previous  rubella  infection  is  the
presence of serum rubella IgG antibody. Laboratories that regularly perform antibody
testing  are  generally  the  most  reliable.  At  least  95%  of  vaccinated  persons  age  12
months or older develop serologic evidence of rubella immunity after a single dose, and
more than 90% have protection against clinical rubella for at least 15 years. Follow-up
studies indicate that 1 dose of vaccine confers long-term, probably lifelong, protection.
Seroconversion rates are similar for MMR and MMRV vaccines. Although titers to rubella
wane in the years after vaccination, there is no evidence that this leads to significant
susceptibility  to  clinical  rubella  or  CRS.  Clinical  rubella  and  CRS-affected  pregnancies
are extremely rare in vaccinated persons the United States. *MMRV only As with other
vaccines, a history of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to a vaccine component
or  following  a  prior  dose  is  a  contraindication  to  further  doses.   Moderate  or  severe
acute  illness  (with  or  without  fever)  in  a  patient  is  considered  a  precaution  to
vaccination,  although  persons  with  minor  illness  may  be  vaccinated.  MMR  and  MMRV
vaccines both contain minute amounts of neomycin and gelatin. Persons with alpha-gal
allergy  may  wish  to  consult  their  physician  before  receiving  a  vaccine  that  contains

gelatin. Severe immunocompromise (e.g., from hematologic and solid tumors, receipt of
chemotherapy, congenital immunodeficiency, long-term immunosuppressive therapy or
patients with HIV infection who are severely immunocompromised) is a contraindication
for  MMR  and  MMRV  vaccination.  If  the  person’s  level  of  immunocompetence  is
uncertain, the decision to vaccinate should be made by the health care provider that
prescribed
 the
 immunosuppressive
 medication
 for
 those
 patients
 whom
immunocompromise  is  due  to  medication.  Patients  who  have  not  received
chemotherapy  for  at  least  3  months,  whose  disease  remains  in  remission,  and  who
have  restored  immunocompetence,  may  receive  MMR  or  MMRV  vaccine.  Healthy,
susceptible  close  contacts  of  severely  immunocompromised  persons  should  be
vaccinated. Persons receiving systemic high-dose corticosteroid therapy (2 milligrams
per  kilogram  of  body  weight  or  more  per  day  or  20  milligrams  or  more  per  day  of
prednisone) for 14 days or more should not receive MMR or MMRV vaccine because of
concern about vaccine safety. MMR or MMRV should not be administered for at least 1
month after cessation of systemic high-dose corticosteroid therapy. Although persons
receiving high doses of systemic corticosteroids daily or on alternate days for less than
14 days generally can receive MMR or MMRV immediately after cessation of treatment,
some experts prefer waiting until 2 weeks after completion of therapy Available data
indicate  that  vaccination  with  MMR  has  not  been  associated  with  severe  or  unusual
adverse  reactions  in  HIV-infected  persons  who  are  not  severely  immunosuppressed,
although  antibody  responses  have  been  variable.  MMR  vaccine  is  recommended  for
susceptible  HIV-infected  persons  age  12  months  or  older  with  no  evidence  of  current
severe  immunosuppression  (“no  evidence  of  current  severe  immunosuppression”  is
defined as CD4 percentages greater than or equal to 15% for 6 months or longer for
persons age 5 years or younger; and CD4 percentages greater than or equal to 15%
and  CD4  count  greater  than  or  equal  to  200  cells/mm3   for  6  months  or  longer  for
persons  older  than  age  5  years).  MMR  vaccine  is  not  recommended  for  HIV-infected

persons  with  evidence  of  severe  immunosuppression.  MMRV  is  not  approved  for  and
should not be administered to a person known to be infected with HIV. A family history
of congenital or hereditary immunodeficiency in first-degree relatives (e.g., parents and
siblings)  is  a  contraindication  for  MMR  or  MMRV  vaccine,  unless  the  immune
competence  of  the  potential  vaccine  recipient  has  been  substantiated  clinically  or
verified  by  a  laboratory.  *MMRV  only  A  history  of  thrombocytopenic  purpura  or
thrombocytopenia is a precaution for MMR and MMRV vaccine. Such persons may be at
increased risk for developing clinically significant thrombocytopenia after MMR or MMRV
vaccination.  Receipt  of  specific  antiviral  drugs  (e.g.,  acyclovir,  famciclovir,  or
valacyclovir) 24 hours before vaccination is a precaution for MMRV vaccine due to the
varicella  component.  These  drugs  should  be  avoided  for  14  days  after  vaccination.
Simultaneous  use  of  aspirin  or  aspirin-containing  products  is  a  precaution  for  MMRV
vaccine  due  to  the  varicella  component.  The  manufacturer  recommends  that  vaccine
recipients  avoid  the  use  of  salicylates  for  6  weeks  after  receiving  MMRV  vaccine
because  of  the  association  between  aspirin  use  and  Reye  syndrome  following
chickenpox.  A  personal  or  family  (i.e.,  sibling  or  parent)  history  of  seizures  of  any
etiology  is  a  precaution  for  MMRV  vaccine  but  not  MMR.  Children  with  a  personal  or
family  history  of  seizures  of  any  etiology  should  ideally  be  vaccinated  with  separate
MMR  and  VAR  vaccines  because  the  risks  for  using  MMRV  vaccine  in  this  group  of
children  generally  outweigh  the  benefits.  MMR  vaccine  may  be  administered  to
egg-allergic persons without prior routine skin testing or the use of special protocols.
The  effect  of  the  administration  of  antibody-containing  blood  products  (e.g.,  immune
globulin, whole blood or packed red blood cells, or intravenous immune globulin) on the
response to MMR or MMRV vaccine is unknown. Because of the potential inhibition of
the response to vaccination by passively transferred antibodies, neither MMR vaccine
nor MMRV vaccine (nor VAR vaccine) should be administered for 3 to 11 months after
receipt
 of
 antibody-containing
 blood
 products.
 The
 interval
 between
 the

antibody-containing blood product and receipt of MMR or MMRV vaccine is determined
by the type of product administered. Antibody-containing products should not be given
for 2 weeks following vaccination unless the benefits exceed those of the vaccine. In
such  cases,  vaccine  recipients  should  either  be  revaccinated  later  at  the  appropriate
intervals  (ranging  3  to  11  months)  or  tested  for  immunity  and  revaccinated  if
seronegative.  Need  for  tuberculin  skin  testing  or  interferon-gamma  release  assay
(IGRA)  testing  is  a  precaution  for  MMR  and  MMRV  vaccine.  Measles  vaccine  (and
possibly mumps, rubella, and varicella vaccines) may transiently suppress the response
to tuberculin skin test (TST) in a person infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. TST
and  measles-containing  vaccine  may  be  administered  at  the  same  visit  if  necessary.
Simultaneously  administering  TST  and  measles-containing  vaccine  does  not  interfere
with reading the TST result at 48 to 72 hours and ensures that the person has received
measles  vaccine.  If  the  measles-containing  vaccine  has  been  administered  recently,
TST  screening  should  be  delayed  for  at  least  4  weeks  after  vaccination.  Receipt  of
specific  antiviral  drugs  (e.g.,  acyclovir,  famciclovir,  or  valacyclovir)  24  hours  before
vaccination  is  a  precaution  for  MMRV  vaccine  due  to  the  varicella  component.  These
drugs should be avoided for 14 days after vaccination. Pregnancy is a contraindication
for MMR or MMRV vaccine. Pregnancy should be avoided for 4 weeks following MMR or
MMRV vaccine. Close contact with a pregnant woman is not a contraindication to MMR
or MMRV vaccination of the contact. If a pregnant woman inadvertently receives MMR
or  MMRV  vaccine,  termination  of  pregnancy  is  not  recommended  because  the  risk  to
the fetus appears to be extremely low. Instead, individual counseling for these women
is  recommended.  Data  from  321  susceptible  women  who  received  rubella  vaccine
showed  no  evidence  of  CRS  in  offspring.  Studies  conducted  in  six  Latin  American
countries  showed  a  negligible  or  absent  risk  for  CRS  after  administration  of  rubella
vaccine shortly before or during pregnancy. Of the 1,980 susceptible pregnant women
followed,  70  (3.6%)  of  the  infants  had  congenital  rubella  infection,  but  none  had

congenital  defects  associated  with  CRS.  MMR  MMRV  Studies  have  shown  MMR  and
MMRV  vaccines  are  safe  and  well-tolerated.  The  National  Academy  of  Medicine,
formerly  called  the  Institute  of  Medicine,  reviewed  the  evidence  between  MMR
vaccination and certain adverse events. The experts determined that evidence supports
a  causal  relation  between  MMR  vaccination  and  anaphylaxis,  febrile  seizures,
thrombocytopenic
 purpura,
 transient
 arthralgia,
 and
 measles
 inclusion
 body
encephalitis  in  persons  with  demonstrated  immunodeficiencies.  Most  adverse  events
reported  following  MMR  vaccination  (such  as  fever  and  rash)  are  attributable  to  the
measles component. After MMR vaccination, 5% to 15% of susceptible persons develop
a  temperature  of  103°F  (39.4°C)  or  higher,  usually  occurring  7  to  12  days  after
vaccination  and  generally  lasting  1  or  2  days.  Most  persons  with  fever  do  not  have
other symptoms. MMR vaccine is associated with a very small risk of febrile seizures;
approximately one case for every 3,000 to 4,000 doses of MMR vaccine administered.
The febrile seizures typically occur 6 to 14 days after vaccination and do not appear to
be associated with any long-term sequelae. Children with a personal or family history of
febrile  seizures  or  family  history  of  epilepsy  might  be  at  increased  risk  for  febrile
seizures after MMR vaccination. Allergic reactions following the administration of MMR
vaccine are rare. Most of these are minor and consist of a wheal and flare or urticaria at
the  injection  site.  Immediate,  anaphylactic  reactions  to  MMR  vaccine  occur  in  1.8  to
14.4 cases per million doses. Arthralgias and other joint symptoms are reported in up to
25%  of  adult  women  following  MMR  vaccine  and  are  associated  with  the  rubella
component. Transient lymphadenopathy sometimes occurs following receipt of MMR or
other rubella-containing vaccine, and parotitis has been reported rarely (less than 1%)
following receipt of MMR or other mumps-containing vaccine. Rarely, MMR vaccine may
cause  thrombocytopenia  within  two  months  after  vaccination.  The  clinical  course  of
these cases is usually transient and benign, although hemorrhage occurs rarely. Based
on case reports, the risk for MMR vaccine-associated thrombocytopenia may be higher

for  persons  who  have  previously  had  immune  thrombocytopenic  purpura,  particularly
for  those  who  had  thrombocytopenic  purpura  after  an  earlier  dose  of  MMR  vaccine.
Measles inclusion body encephalitis has been documented after measles vaccination in
persons with immune deficiencies. The illness is also known to occur within 1 year after
initial infection with wild-type measles virus and has a high death rate.  In the cases
after MMR vaccination, the time from vaccination to development of measles inclusion
body  encephalitis  was  4–9  months,  consistent  with  development  of  measles  inclusion
body  encephalitis  after  infection  with  wild-type  measles  virus.  In  MMRV  vaccine
prelicensure studies conducted among children age 12 to 23 months, fever (reported as
abnormal or elevated greater than or equal to 102°F oral equivalent) was observed 5 to
12 days after vaccination in 21.5% of MMRV vaccine recipients compared with 14.9% of
MMR vaccine and VAR vaccine recipients. Two postlicensure studies indicated that one
additional  febrile  seizure  per  2,300  to  2,600  children  age  12  through  23  months
occurred 5 to 12 days after the first dose of MMRV vaccine, compared with children who
had received the first dose of MMR vaccine and VAR vaccine administered as separate
injections  at  the  same  visit.  Data  from  postlicensure  studies  do  not  suggest  that  this
increased risk exists for children age 4 to 6 years receiving the second dose of MMRV
vaccine.  Multiple  studies,  as  well  as  a  National  Academy  of  Medicine  Vaccine  Safety
Review,  refute  a  causal  relationship  between  autism  and  MMR  vaccine  or  between
inflammatory  bowel  disease  and  MMR  vaccine.  For  MMR-II  and  Proquad  storage  and
handling specifics, refer to the manufacturer. For complete information on storage and
handling best practices and recommendations, please refer to CDC’s Vaccine Storage
and  Handling  Toolkit  [3  MB,  65  pages].  Rubella  and  congenital  rubella  syndrome
became  nationally  notifiable  diseases  in  1966.  For  information  on  guidance  for  state
and  local  health  department  staff  who  are  involved  in  surveillance  activities  for
vaccine-preventable  diseases,  please  consult  the  Manual  for  the  Surveillance  of
Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  The  editors  would  like  to  acknowledge  Zaney  Leroy,

Ginger  Redmon,  and  Greg  Wallace  for  their  contributions  to  this  chapter.  American
Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Rubella.  In:  Kimberlin  D,  Brady  M,  Jackson  M,  et  al.,  eds.  Red
Book:  2018  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Infectious  Diseases.  31st  ed.  Itasca,  IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics;2018:705–11. CDC. Control and prevention of rubella:
evaluation and management of suspected outbreaks, rubella in pregnant women, and
surveillance  for  congenital  rubella  syndrome.  MMWR  2001;50(No.  RR-12):1–23.  CDC.
Immunization  of  health-care  personnel.  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2011;60(RR-7):1–45. CDC. Notice to readers.
Revised
 ACIP
 recommendations
 for
 avoiding
 pregnancy
 after
 receiving
rubella-containing  vaccine.  MMWR  2001;50(49):1117.  CDC.  Prevention  of  measles,
rubella, congenital rubella syndrome, and mumps, 2013: summary recommendations of
the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  MMWR  2013;62(No.
RR-4):1–34.  CDC.  Rubella  vaccination  during  pregnancy—United  States,  1971–1988.
MMWR  1989;38(17):289–93.  CDC.  Use  of  combination  measles,  mumps,  rubella,  and
varicella  vaccine:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2010;59(No. RR-3):1–12. Frenkel L, Nielsen K, Garakian A, et al.
A search for persistent rubella virus infection in persons with chronic symptoms after
rubella and rubella immunization and in patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Clin
Infect Dis 1996;22:287–94. Lanzieri T, Redd S, Abernathy E, et al. Rubella. In Roush S,
Baldy
 L,
 Kirkconnell
 Hall
 M,
 eds.
 CDC
 Manual
 for
 the
 Surveillance
 of
Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  Atlanta,  GA:  US  Department  of  Health  and  Human
Services,  CDC;  2018.  Mellinger  A,  Cragan  J,  Atkinson  W,  et  al.  High  incidence  of
congenital
 rubella
 syndrome
 after
 a
 rubella
 outbreak.
 Pediatr
 Infect
 Dis
 J
1995;14(7):573–8.  Orenstein  W,  Hadler  S,  Wharton  M.  Trends  in  vaccine-preventable
diseases. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis 1997;8(1):23–33. Parkman P, Buescher E, Artenstein
M.  Recovery  of  rubella  virus  from  army  recruits.  Proc  Soc  Exp  Biol  Med
1962:111;225–30. Reef S, Frey T, Theall K, et al. The changing epidemiology of rubella

in the 1990s. JAMA 2002;287(4):464–72. Stratton K, Ford A, Rusch E, eds. Institute of
Medicine.  Adverse  Events  of  Vaccines:  Evidence  and  Causality.  Washington  D.C.:  The
National  Academies  Press,  2011.  Toizumi  M,  Motomura  H,  Vo  H,  et  al.  Mortality
Associated  with  Pulmonary  Hypertension  in  Congenital  Rubella  Syndrome.  Pediatrics
2014;134(2):e519–26.  Weller  T,  Neva  F.  Propagation  in  tissue  culture  of  cytopathic
agents
 from
 patients
 with
 rubella-like
 illness.
 Proc
 Soc
 Exp
 Biol
 Med
1962:111(1);215–25.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/rubella.html
