Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Penina Haber, MPH and Sarah Schillie, MD, MPH, MBA The 14th
edition
 of
 the
 “Pink
 Book”
 was
 published
 August
 2021.
 Vaccine-specific
recommendations may be outdated. Refer to the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices
 Vaccine
 Recommendations
 and
 Guidelines
 for
 the
 most
 updated
vaccine-specific recommendations. Printer friendly version [22 pages] Viral hepatitis is
a term commonly used for several diseases that are clinically similar but etiologically
and  epidemiologically  distinct.  Hepatitis  A  (formerly  called  “infectious  hepatitis”)  and
hepatitis  B  (formerly  called  “serum  hepatitis”)  have  been  recognized  as  separate
entities  since  the  early  1940s  and  can  be  diagnosed  with  specific  serologic  tests.
Hepatitis D, or Delta hepatitis, is an infection dependent on the hepatitis B virus (HBV).
It may occur as a coinfection with acute HBV infection or as superinfection of an HBV
carrier.  Epidemic  jaundice  was  described  by  Hippocrates  in  the  5th  century  BCE.  The
first  recorded  cases  of  serum  hepatitis  are  thought  to  be  those  that  followed  the
administration  of  smallpox  vaccine  containing  human  lymph  to  shipyard  workers  in
Germany in 1883. In the early and middle parts of the 20th century, serum hepatitis
was repeatedly observed following the use of contaminated needles and syringes. The
role of blood as a vehicle for virus transmission was further emphasized in 1943, when
Paul  Beeson  described  jaundice  that  had  occurred  in  seven  recipients  of  blood
transfusions.  Australia  antigen,  later  called  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (HBsAg),  was
first  described  in  1965,  and  the  Dane  particle  (complete  hepatitis  B  virion)  was
identified  in  1970.  Identification  of  serologic  markers  for  HBV  infection  followed  and
helped  to  clarify  the  natural  history  of  the  disease.  Ultimately,  HBsAg,  the  surface
protein  of  HBV,  was  manufactured  in  quantity  and  now  comprises  the  immunogen  in
highly effective vaccines for prevention of HBV infection. A plasma-derived Hepatitis B

(HepB) vaccine was first licensed for use in the United States in 1981. The vaccine was
safe and effective but was not well accepted, possibly because of unsubstantiated fears
of  transmission  of  live  HBV  and  other  blood-borne  pathogens.  Recombinant  HepB
vaccines  replaced  plasma-derived  HepB  vaccines  beginning  in  1986.  Plasma-derived
HepB vaccines are no longer used in the United States. HBV is a small, double-stranded
DNA  virus  in  the  family  Hepadnaviridae.  Serologic  markers  for  HBV  infection  include
HBsAg,  antibody  to  HBsAg  (anti-HBs),  immunoglobulin  class  M  (IgM)  antibodies  to
hepatitis B core antigen (IgM anti-HBc), and immunoglobulin class G (IgG) anti-HBc (IgG
anti-HBc).  At  least  one  serologic  marker  is  present  during  the  different  phases  of
infection.  Hepatitis  B  e  antigen  (HBeAg)  can  be  detected  in  persons  with  acute  or
chronic HBV infection; the presence of HBeAg correlates with viral replication, high viral
levels of HBV DNA, and high infectivity; antibody to HBeAg (anti-HBe) usually correlates
with the decrease of replicating virus, although reversion to HBeAg positivity can occur.
HBV  has  been  classified  by  two  separate  systems:  serologic  subtype  and  genotype.
Nine serologic subtypes based on the heterogeneity of HBsAg have been described. Ten
HBV  genotypes,  designated  A  through  J,  have  been  described.  HBV  serotypes  and
genotypes vary geographically. HBV genotypes are associated with the modes of HBV
transmission  (vertical  versus  horizontal)  and  with  the  risk  of  certain  outcomes  of
chronic infection, such as cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). For example, in
Alaska, HBV genotype F is associated with HCC in children as well as adults younger
than age 30 years, while in Asia as well as Alaska, HBV genotype C has been associated
with a significantly higher risk of HCC than other genotypes. Infection or immunization
with  one  HBV  genotype  generally  confers  immunity  to  all  genotypes.  HBV  remains
infectious  for  at  least  7  days  on  environmental  surfaces  and  is  transmissible  in  the
absence  of  visible  blood.  HBV  is  transmitted  by  parenteral  or  mucosal  exposure  to
HBsAg-positive  body  fluids  from  persons  who  have  acute  or  chronic  HBV  infection.  It
replicates  in  hepatocytes  through  a  unique  reverse  transcription  process.  The  clinical

course of acute hepatitis B is indistinguishable from that of other types of acute viral
hepatitis. The incubation period typically ranges from 60 to 90 days. Clinical signs and
symptoms  occur  more  often  in  adults  than  in  infants  or  children;  infants  and  young
children  usually  are  asymptomatic.  Approximately  50%  of  adults  who  have  acute
infections are asymptomatic. The preicteric, or prodromal, phase from initial symptoms
to onset of jaundice usually lasts 3 to 10 days. It is nonspecific and is characterized by
abrupt onset of fever, malaise, anorexia, nausea, abdominal discomfort, and dark urine
beginning  1  to  2  days  before  the  onset  of  jaundice.  The  icteric  phase  is  variable  but
usually lasts from 1 to 3 weeks and is characterized by jaundice, light or gray stools,
hepatic  tenderness,  and  hepatomegaly  (splenomegaly  is  less  common).  During
convalescence, malaise and fatigue may persist for weeks or months, while jaundice,
anorexia, and other symptoms disappear. Most acute HBV infections in adults result in
complete  recovery  with  elimination  of  HBsAg  from  the  blood  and  the  production  of
anti-HBs,  creating  immunity  to  future  infection.  In  contrast,  as  many  as  90%  of  HBV
infections in infants progress to chronic infection. Perinatal transmission from mother to
infant  at  birth  (vertical  transmission)  is  highly  efficient.  Prior  to  the  widespread
availability
 of
 postexposure
 prophylaxis,
 the
 proportion
 of
 infants
 born
 to
HBsAg-positive  women  that  acquired  HBV  infection  was  approximately  30%  for  those
born  to  HBeAg-negative  mothers  and  85%  for  those  born  to  HBeAg-positive  mothers.
With  postexposure  prophylaxis,  comprised  of  HepB  vaccine  and  hepatitis  B  immune
globulin  (HBIG)  at  birth,  followed  by  completion  of  the  HepB  vaccine  series,  0.7%
through 1.1% of infants develop infection; infants born to mothers with high viral loads
are at greatest risk for infection despite receipt of HepB vaccine and HBIG. While most
acute HBV infections in adults result in complete recovery, fulminant hepatitis occurs in
about 1% to 2% of acutely infected persons. Although the consequences of acute HBV
infection  can  be  severe,  most  of  the  serious  complications  associated  with  HBV
infection  are  due  to  chronic  infection.  The  proportion  of  persons  with  acute  HBV

infection who progress to chronic infection varies with age and immune status. As many
as 90% of infants who acquire HBV infection from their mothers at birth or in infancy
become chronically infected. Of children who become infected with HBV between age 1
and 5 years, 30% to 50% become chronically infected. The risk of acquiring chronic HBV
infection when infected during adulthood is approximately 5%. Acute HBV progresses to
chronic HBV in approximately 40% of hemodialysis patients and up to 20% of patients
with immune deficiencies. Persons with chronic infection are often asymptomatic and
may not be aware they are infected; however, they are capable of infecting others and
have been referred to as carriers. Chronic infection is responsible for most HBV-related
morbidity  and  mortality,  including  chronic  hepatitis,  cirrhosis,  liver  failure,  and  HCC.
Approximately 25% of persons who become chronically infected during childhood and
15% of those who become chronically infected after childhood will die prematurely from
cirrhosis  or  liver  cancer.  An  estimated  257  million  persons  worldwide  are  living  with
HBV infection. HBV infection is an established cause of acute and chronic hepatitis and
cirrhosis. The frequency of infection and patterns of transmission vary in different parts
of the world. In China, Southeast Asia, most of Africa, most Pacific Islands, parts of the
Middle  East,  and  the  Amazon  Basin,  8%  to  15%  of  the  population  has  chronic  HBV
infection. In these high-prevalence areas, most infections are acquired at birth or during
early  childhood  when  the  risk  of  developing  chronic  infections  is  greatest.  In  these
areas, because most infections are asymptomatic, very little acute disease related to
HBV occurs, but rates of chronic liver disease and liver cancer among adults are very
high. In the United States, Western Europe, and Australia, HBV infection is a disease of
low endemicity. Infection occurs primarily during adulthood, and only 0.1% to 0.5% of
the population has chronic HBV infection. Diagnosis is based on clinical, laboratory, and
epidemiologic  findings.  HBV  infection  cannot  be  differentiated  based  on  clinical
symptoms alone, and definitive diagnosis depends on the results of serologic testing.
Serologic markers of HBV infection vary depending on whether the infection is acute or

chronic. HBsAg is the most used test for diagnosing acute HBV infections or detecting
carriers. HBsAg can be detected as early as 1 or 2 weeks and as late as 11 or 12 weeks
after  exposure  to  HBV.  The  presence  of  HBsAg  indicates  that  a  person  is  infectious,
regardless of whether the infection is acute or chronic. Transient HBsAg positivity can
occur up to 18 days following vaccination (up to 52 days among hemodialysis patients)
and  is  clinically  insignificant.  Anti-HBs  is  a  protective,  neutralizing  antibody.  The
presence  of  anti-HBs  following  acute  HBV  infection  generally  indicates  recovery  and
immunity against reinfection. Anti-HBs can also be acquired as an immune response to
HepB vaccine or passively transferred by administration of HBIG. The level of anti-HBs
considered  as  a  protective  level  of  immunity  when  following  a  complete  vaccination
series  is  10  mIU/mL.  Persons  who  recover  from  natural  HBV  infection  are  typically
positive for both anti-HBs and anti-HBc, whereas persons who respond to HepB vaccine
are positive only for anti-HBs. Anti-HBc develops in all HBV infections, appears shortly
after HBsAg in acute disease, and indicates HBV infection at some undefined time in the
past.  Anti-HBc  generally  persists  for  life.  Persons  who  are  HBsAg-negative  and
anti-HBc-positive  can  experience  reactivation  of  infection  during  chemotherapy  or
immunosuppressive  therapy,  with  reappearance  of  HBsAg.  IgM  anti-HBc  appears  in
persons  with  acute  disease  about  the  time  of  illness  onset  and  indicates  recent
infection with HBV. IgM anti-HBc is generally detectable 4 to 6 months after onset of
illness and is the best serologic marker of acute HBV infection. HBeAg is a marker that
is associated with a high number of infective HBV particles in the serum and a higher
risk  of  infectivity.  Anti-HBe  correlates  with  a  reduction  of  replicating  virus  and  lower
infectivity, although reversion to HBeAg positivity can occur. HBV DNA assays are used
to monitor response to treatment, assess the likelihood of perinatal HBV transmission,
and detect the presence of occult HBV infection (i.e., infection in someone who tests
HBsAg-negative). In resource-limited settings, HBeAg may replace the use of HBV DNA
for  some  purposes,  e.g.,  assessment  of  perinatal  HBV  transmission  risk.  There  is  no

specific  therapy  for  acute  HBV  infection.  Treatment  is  supportive.  Guidelines  for
management  of  chronic  HBV  infection  in  children  and  adults,  including  disease
monitoring  and  antiviral  therapy,  are  available  from  the  American  Association  for  the
Study  of  Liver  Diseases  (AASLD,  https://www.AASLD.org).  Antiviral  therapy,  while  not
curative, can reduce the level of HBV DNA and quiet liver inflammation. Following the
AASLD Guidelines/Guidance, antiviral therapy should generally be initiated in patients
with chronic HBV infection who have high levels of virus and active liver inflammation
characterized by elevated liver transaminase levels. These persons are at high risk for
liver-related  morbidity.  AASLD  suggests  antiviral  therapy  to  reduce  perinatal  HBV
transmission  when  maternal  HBV  DNA  is  greater  than  200,000  IU/mL  starting  in  the
third  trimester.  Maternal  therapy  is  generally  discontinued  at  birth  to  3  months
postpartum.  Persons  with  acute  or  chronic  HBV  infections  should  prevent  their  blood
and other potentially infective body fluids from contacting other persons. They should
not donate blood or share toothbrushes or razors with household members. In health
care  settings,  patients  with  HBV  infection  should  be  managed  with  standard
precautions.  HBV  infection  occurs  worldwide.  The  frequency  of  infection  varies  in
different parts of the world but is more common in some countries in Asia, Africa, South
America, and the Caribbean. HBV infection affects humans. Additionally, some primates
(chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, gibbon) in Africa and Southeast Asia are infected with
HBV.  HBV  is  transmitted  by  parenteral  or  mucosal  exposure  to  HBsAg-positive  body
fluids  from  persons  who  have  acute  or  chronic  HBV  infection.  The  highest
concentrations  of  virus  are  in  blood  and  serous  fluids;  lower  titers  are  found  in  other
fluids,  such  as  saliva,  tears,  urine,  and  semen.  Semen  is  a  vehicle  for  sexual
transmission and saliva can be a vehicle of transmission through bites; other types of
exposure (e.g., to saliva through kissing) are unlikely modes of transmission. HBsAg is
also found in other body fluids (e.g., breast milk, bile, feces, nasopharyngeal washings,
and sweat). However, most body fluids are not efficient vehicles of transmission (unless

they contain blood) because they contain low quantities of infectious HBV. In the United
States, the most important routes of transmission are injection-drug use, perinatal, and
sexual  contact  with  an  infected  person.  Fecal-oral  transmission  does  not  appear  to
occur.  However,  transmission  occurs  among  men  who  have  sex  with  men  (MSM),
possibly via contamination from asymptomatic rectal mucosal lesions. In the 2000s and
2010s, outbreaks of hepatitis B occurred in long-term care facilities (e.g., assisted living
facilities  and  nursing  homes)  as  the  result  of  inadequate  infection  control  practices
related to blood glucose monitoring. Transmission occurs in households from persons
who  have  immigrated  from  endemic  areas  and  who  have  chronic  HBV  infection.  HBV
infection is reported throughout the year. There is no known temporal pattern. Persons
with either acute or chronic HBV infection should be considered infectious any time that
HBsAg is present in the blood. When symptoms are present in persons with acute HBV
infection, HBsAg can be found in blood and body fluids for 1 to 2 months before and
after the onset of symptoms. Direct, percutaneous inoculation of HBV by needles during
injection-drug  use  is  an  important  mode  of  transmission.  Breaks  in  the  skin  without
overt needle puncture, such as fresh, cutaneous scratches, abrasions, burns, or other
lesions, may also serve as routes for entry. Exposures such as transfusion of blood or
blood products, hemodialysis, use of meters and lancets for blood glucose monitoring,
insulin  pens,  and  needle-stick  or  other  sharps  injuries  sustained  by  health  care
personnel (HCP) have all resulted in HBV transmission. Outbreaks have been reported
among  patients  in  dialysis  centers  in  many  countries  through  failure  to  adhere  to
recommended  infection  control  practices.  Past  outbreaks  have  been  traced  to  tattoo
parlors,  acupuncturists,  and  barbers.  Hepatitis  B  became  nationally  notifiable  as  a
distinct entity during the 1970s after serologic tests to differentiate different types of
hepatitis became widely available. In 2018, a total of 3,322 cases of acute hepatitis B
were reported to CDC, for an overall incidence rate of 1.0 cases per 100,000 population.
After  adjusting  for  under-ascertainment  and  under-reporting,  an  estimated  21,600

acute  hepatitis  B  cases  occurred  in  2018.  The  rate  of  reported  acute  HBV  infections
declined  approximately  90%  since  recommendations  for  HepB  vaccination  were  first
issued,  from  9.6  cases  per  100,000  population  in  1982  to  1.0  cases  per  100,000
population in 2018. During 2009 through 2013, the combined incidence of acute HBV
infection in three states (Kentucky, Tennessee, and West Virginia) increased 114% and
was associated with increasing injection-drug use. Incidence is greatest for persons age
40  through  49  years  (2.5  per  100,000  population);  persons  age  19  years  or  younger
have the lowest incidence (0.02 cases per 100,000 population), likely a result of routine
infant  vaccination.  Although  HBV  infection  is  uncommon  among  adults  in  the  general
population  (the  lifetime  risk  of  infection  is  less  than  20%),  it  is  highly  prevalent  in
certain groups. Generally, the highest risk for HBV infection is associated with lifestyles,
occupations,  or  environments  in  which  contact  with  blood  from  infected  persons  is
frequent. Chronic HBV infection has been identified in 3.5% to 20.0% of persons who
inject drugs (PWID) in a variety of settings, and 22.6% of PWID have evidence of past
infection.  An  estimated  850,000  to  2.2  million  persons  in  the  United  States  are
chronically  infected  with  HBV.  Most  persons  in  the  United  States  with  chronic  HBV
infection  have  immigrated  from  endemic  countries  in  the  world.  While  screening
persons  who  immigrate  for  HBsAg,  anti-HBc  and  anti-HBs  is  recommended,  it  is  not
enforced. Therefore, clinicians and public health workers should screen all persons born
in countries with high endemicity of HBV virus. Among children born during 2015–2016,
75.0%  received  the  HepB  vaccine  birth  dose  administered  from  birth  through  age  3
days. This was an increase from 71.8% for children born during 2013–2014. By age 24
months,  91.0%  of  children  had  received  at  least  3  doses  of  HepB  vaccine.  In  2017,
25.8% of adults age 19 years or older had received at least 3 doses of HepB vaccine;
the  coverage  was  34.3%  and  16.6%  for  adults  age  19  through  49  years  and  age  50
years or older, respectively. Among HCP with direct patient contact, 70% had received
at  least  3  doses  of  HepB  vaccine.  HepB  vaccination  is  the  mainstay  of  hepatitis  B

prevention  efforts.  A  comprehensive  strategy  to  eliminate  HBV  transmission  includes
universal  vaccination  of  infants  beginning  at  birth,  routine  vaccination  of  previously
unvaccinated children less than age 19 years, and vaccination of adults at risk for HBV
infection, including those requesting protection from HBV without acknowledgement of
a specific risk factor. It also includes universal testing of pregnant women for HBsAg to
identify newborns who require immunoprophylaxis for prevention of perinatal infection
and  to  pregnant  women  who  can  benefit  from  antiviral  therapy  to  reduce  perinatal
transmission. The first recombinant HepB vaccine, Recombivax HB, was licensed in the
United States in 1986. A second recombinant vaccine, Engerix-B, was licensed in 1989.
Recombivax HB and Engerix-B are available in both pediatric and adult formulations. A
third recombinant vaccine with a novel adjuvant, Heplisav-B, was licensed in 2017 for
use  in  adults  age  18  years  or  older.  HBV  infection  cannot  result  from  use  of  the
recombinant vaccine since no potentially infectious viral DNA or complete viral particles
are  produced  in  the  recombinant  system.  There  are  two  combination  vaccines  that
contain  HepB  vaccine.  DTaP-HepB-IPV  (Pediarix)  is  licensed  for  children  age  6  weeks
through 6 years. HepA-HepB (Twinrix) is licensed for persons age 18 years or older. A
third  combination  vaccine,  DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB  (Vaxelis),  is  licensed  in  the  United
States.  Recombinant  HepB  vaccine  is  produced  by  inserting  a  plasmid  containing  the
gene for HBsAg into yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae or Hansenula polymorpha); HepB
vaccines  contain  yeast  protein.  HepB  vaccines  are  administered  by  intramuscular
injection.  Each  dose  of  HepB  vaccine  contains  aluminum  as  an  adjuvant  or,  for
Heplisav-B, a small synthetic immunostimulatory oligodeoxynucleotide 1018 adjuvant.
Each dose of DTaP-HepB-IPV contains antibiotics neomycin and polymyxin B; each dose
of DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB contains neomycin, polymyxin B, and streptomycin; each dose of
HepA-HepB  contains  neomycin.  HepB  vaccines  contain  no  preservative.  Presentations
of  HepB  vaccines  contain  latex  rubber.  Specific  ingredients  in  combination  vaccines
containing  HepB  vaccine  differ.  Recombivax  HB  and  Engerix-B  are  available  in  both

pediatric and adult formulations and are typically administered as a 3-dose series on a
0,  1,  6  month  schedule.  Although  their  antigen  content  differs,  the  two  vaccines  are
interchangeable except for a 2-dose series for adolescents age 11 through 15 years, for
which only Recombivax HB is approved. Heplisav-B is administered as a 2-dose series
on  a  0,  1  month  schedule  and  is  approved  for  persons  age  18  years  or  older.  HepB
vaccination  is  recommended  for  all  medically  stable  infants  weighing  at  least  2,000
grams within 24 hours of birth. Only single-component vaccine should be used for the
birth  dose  and  doses  administered  before  age  6  weeks.  The  usual  schedule  is  0,  1
through 2, and 6 through 18 months. All pregnant women found to be HBsAg-positive
should have their sera tested for HBV DNA. If HBV DNA levels are greater than 200,000
IU/mL,  Tenofovir  (preferable)  or  lamivudine  should  be  administered  to  the  pregnant
woman  starting  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  trimester  and  continued  one  to  three
months after birth. Infants born to mothers who are HBsAg-positive should receive the
HepB  vaccine  birth  dose  and  HBIG  within  12  hours  of  birth.  HepB  vaccine  and  HBIG
should be administered in separate limbs. For infants weighing less than 2,000 grams,
the  birth  dose  should  not  be  counted  as  part  of  the  vaccine  series  because  of
potentially  reduced  immunogenicity;  3  additional  doses  of  vaccine  (for  a  total  of  4
doses) should be administered beginning when the infant reaches age 1 month. Infants
whose mothers are HBsAg-positive should receive the last dose by age 6 months but
not  before  age  24  weeks.  Infants  born  to  mothers  whose  HBsAg  status  is  unknown
should receive the HepB birth dose within 12 hours of birth. Infants weighing less than
2,000  grams  should  also  receive  HBIG  within  12  hours  of  birth.  The  mother’s  HBsAg
status  should  be  assessed  as  soon  as  possible.  If  the  mother  is  determined  to  be
HBsAg-positive,   infants  weighing  at  least  2,000  grams  should  also  receive  HBIG  as
soon as possible but no later than age 7 days. As with infants born to HBsAg-positive
mothers,  for  infants  weighing  less  than  2,000  grams,  the  birth  dose  should  not  be
counted as part of the vaccine series because of potentially reduced immunogenicity; 3

additional doses of vaccine (for a total of 4 doses) should be administered beginning
when  the  infant  reaches  age  1  month.  Infants  with  mothers  whose  HBsAg  status  is
unknown should receive the last dose by age 6 months but not before age 24 weeks.
Preterm  infants  weighing  less  than  2,000  grams  have  a  decreased  response  to  HepB
vaccine  administered  before  1  month  of  age.  However,  by  chronologic  age  1-month
preterm  infants,  regardless  of  initial  birth  weight  or  gestational  age,  are  as  likely  to
respond as adequately as full-term infants. Preterm infants of low birth weight whose
mothers are HBsAg-negative can receive the first dose of HepB vaccine at chronologic
age  1  month.  Preterm  infants  discharged  from  the  hospital  before  chronologic  age  1
month  can  receive  HepB  vaccine  at  discharge  if  they  are  medically  stable  and  have
gained weight consistently, even if they are less than 2,000 grams. The third HepB dose
must be administered at least 8 weeks after the second dose, and at least 16 weeks
after  the  first  dose.  The  minimum  interval  between  the  first  and  second  dose  is  4
weeks. * Mothers should have blood drawn and tested for HBsAg as soon as possible
after  admission  for  delivery;  if  the  mother  is  found  to  be  HBsAg  positive,  the  infant
should receive HBIG as soon as possible but no later than age 7 days.
† Pediarix and Vaxelis should not be administered before age 6 weeks.
§ HBIG should be administered at a separate anatomical site from vaccine.
¶ The final dose in the vaccine series should not be administered before age 24 weeks
(164 days). † Pediarix and Vaxelis should not be administered before age 6 weeks.
§ HBIG should be administered at a separate anatomical site from vaccine.
¶ The final dose in the vaccine series should not be administered before age 24 weeks
(164 days). DTaP-HepB-IPV vaccine is approved for use as a 3-dose series for children
age 6 weeks through 6 years. It is administered to infants at age 2, 4, and 6 months.
The  minimum  intervals  for  DTaP-HepB-IPV  vaccine  are  determined  by  the  DTaP
component.  The  3  doses  must  be  separated  by  at  least  4  weeks  between  doses.
Because the minimum age for the first dose of DTaP-HepB-IPV vaccine is 6 weeks, this

vaccine  cannot  be  used  for  the  birth  dose  of  HepB  vaccine.  The  final  dose  of
DTaP-HepB-IPV vaccine should be administered at age 24 weeks or older, the minimum
age for completion of the HepB vaccine series. When DTaP-HepB-IPV vaccine is used to
provide 3 doses at age 2, 4, and 6 months (based on the DTaP and IPV schedules), this
will result in a 4-dose HepB vaccine series, which is acceptable. DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB is
approved  for  use  as  a  3-dose  series  for  children  age  6  weeks  through  4  years.  It  is
administered  to  infants  at  age  2,  4,  and  6  months.  The  minimum  intervals  for
DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB vaccine are determined by the DTaP component. The 3 doses must
be  separated  by  at  least  4  weeks  between  doses.  Because  the  minimum  age  for  the
first dose of DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB vaccine is 6 weeks, this vaccine cannot be used for the
birth  dose  of  HepB  vaccine.  The  final  dose  of  DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB  vaccine  should  be
administered at age 24 weeks or older, the minimum age for completion of the HepB
vaccine series. When DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB vaccine is used to provide 3 doses at age 2, 4,
and 6 months (based on the DTaP and IPV schedules), this will result in a 4-dose HepB
vaccine series, which is acceptable. Routine HepB vaccination is recommended for all
children and adolescents through age 18 years. All children not previously vaccinated
with HepB vaccine should be vaccinated. An alternative HepB vaccination schedule for
adolescents  age  11  through  15  years  consists  of  2  adult  doses  of  Recombivax  HB
separated  by  4  to  6  months.  The  2-dose  series  should  be  completed  by  the  16th
birthday.  HepB  vaccine  is  recommended  for  all  unvaccinated  adults  at  risk  for  HBV
infection and for all adults requesting protection from HBV infection. Acknowledgment
of a specific risk factor is not a requirement for vaccination. Adults recommended for
HepB vaccination include: In settings in which a high proportion of adults have risks for
HBV  infection  (e.g.,  STI/HIV  testing  and  treatment  facilities,  substance  use  disorder
treatment and prevention settings, health care settings targeting services to PWID or
MSM,  and  correctional  facilities),  ACIP  recommends  HepB  vaccination  for  all
unvaccinated  adults.  In  other  primary  care  and  specialty  medical  settings  in  which

adults  at  risk  for  HBV  infection  receive  care,  health  care  providers  should  inform  all
patients about the health benefits of vaccination, risks for HBV infection, and persons
for  whom  vaccination  is  recommended,  and  should  vaccinate  any  adults  who  report
risks for HBV infection or request protection from HBV infection. Heplisav-B is approved
for use in persons age 18 years or older. The schedule is 2 doses separated by 1 month.
Even  though  Heplisav-B  cannot  be  combined  with  a  different  HepB  vaccine  (e.g.,
Engerix-B,  Recombivax  HB,  Twinrix)  to  complete  a  series,  any  2  Heplisav-B  doses
separated by 4 weeks constitutes a complete HepB vaccine series, even if other doses
of Engerix-B, Recombivax HB, or Twinrix, are administered before, after, or between the
2  doses  of  Heplisav-B,  regardless  of  the  interval  between  these  other  vaccines  and
Heplisav-B. The vaccine is administered in a 3-dose series on a 0, 1, 6 months schedule.
Dose 1 and dose 3 should be separated by at least 6 months. Dose 1 and dose 2 should
be separated by at least 4 weeks, and dose 2 and dose 3 should be separated by at
least 5 months. An alternative Twinrix schedule consists of doses at 0, 7, 21–30 days,
and a booster dose at 12 months after the first dose. Because the HepB component of
Twinrix  is  equivalent  to  a  standard  adult  dose  of  HepB  vaccine,  Twinrix  can  be
administered  on  a  single-antigen  HepB  vaccine  schedule;  the  minimum  interval
recommendations will be met. Single-antigen HepB vaccine can be used to complete a
series  begun  with  Twinrix  or  vice  versa.  More  than  90%  of  infants,  children,  and
adolescents and more than 90% of healthy adults younger than age 40 years develop a
protective antibody response following a complete HepB vaccine series. However, there
is an age-specific decline in immunogenicity. By 60 years, only 75% develop protective
antibody titers. In adults receiving Heplisav-B, 90 to 100% develop adequate antibody
after the 2-dose series. Infants born to women who are HBsAg-positive are at high risk
of HBV transmission and chronic HBV infection. HepB vaccination and 1 dose of HBIG
administered within 24 hours after birth are 85% to 95% effective in preventing chronic
HBV infection. HepB vaccine administered alone beginning within 24 hours after birth is

70%  to  95%  effective  in  preventing  perinatal  HBV  infection.  HepB  vaccine  is  80%  to
100%  effective  in  preventing  infection  or  clinical  hepatitis  in  those  who  receive  the
complete vaccine series. Larger vaccine doses (2 to 4 times the normal adult dose) or
an  increased  number  of  doses  are  required  to  induce  protective  antibody  in  most
dialysis  patients  age  20  years  or  older  and  may  also  be  necessary  for  other
immunocompromised  persons  age  20  years  or  older.  The  recommended  dosage  of
vaccine  differs  depending  on  the  age  of  the  recipient  and  type  of  vaccine.  Available
data  show  that  vaccine-induced  antibody  levels  decline  with  time.  However,  immune
memory remains intact for more than 30 years following immunization, and both adults
and  children  with  declining  antibody  levels  are  still  protected  against  significant  HBV
infection  (i.e.,  clinical  disease,  HBsAg  antigenemia,  or  significant  elevation  of  liver
enzymes). Exposure to HBV results in an anamnestic anti-HBs response that prevents
clinically  significant  HBV  infection.  Chronic  HBV  infection  has  only  rarely  been
documented  among  those  who  responded  to  vaccine.  For  adults  and  children  with
normal  immune  status,  booster  doses  of  vaccine  are  not  recommended.  Routine
serologic  testing  to  assess  immune  status  of  persons  who  are  vaccinated  is  not
recommended.  The  need  for  booster  doses  after  longer  intervals  will  continue  to  be
assessed  as  additional  information  becomes  available.  For  dialysis  patients  who  did
respond to vaccine, the need for booster doses should be assessed by annual testing of
vaccine  recipients  for  antibody  levels,  and  a  booster  dose  should  be  provided  when
antibody  levels  decline  below  10  mIU/mL.  Seroconversion  rates  and  postvaccination
anti-HBs titers are similar among adolescents age 11 through 15 years vaccinated using
the 2 adult-dose Recombivax HB schedule compared to those vaccinated using 3 doses.
Prevaccination  Postvaccination  Vaccination  of  persons  immune  to  HBV  because  of
current or previous infection or HepB vaccination does not increase the risk for adverse
events.  However,  in  populations  that  have  high  rates  of  previous  HBV  infection,
prevaccination testing might reduce costs by avoiding vaccination of persons who are

already  immune.  Prevaccination  testing  consists  of  testing  for  HBsAg,  anti-HBs,  and
anti-HBc. Serologic testing should not be a barrier to vaccination of susceptible persons,
especially  in  populations  that  are  difficult  to  access.  Testing  is  not  a  requirement  for
vaccination, and in settings where testing is not feasible, vaccination of recommended
persons  should  continue.  The  first  dose  of  HepB  vaccine  should  typically  be
administered  immediately  after  collection  of  the  blood  for  serologic  testing.
Prevaccination  testing  is  recommended  for  household,  sexual,  or  needle-sharing
contacts  of  HBsAg-positive  persons;  HIV-positive  persons;  persons  with  elevated  ALT/
AST  of  unknown  etiology;  hemodialysis  patients;  MSM;  and  past  or  current  PWID.
Serologic testing is not recommended before routine vaccination of infants, children, or
adolescents. Testing for immunity following vaccination is not recommended routinely.
However,  testing  is  recommended  for  persons  whose  subsequent  management
depends on knowledge of their immune status, including infants born to HBsAg-positive
mothers  or  mothers  whose  HBsAg  status  remains  unknown  (e.g.,  when  a  parent  or
person with lawful custody safely surrenders an infant confidentially shortly after birth),
HCP  and  public  safety  workers,  hemodialysis  patients  and  others  who  might  require
outpatient  hemodialysis  (e.g.,  predialysis,  peritoneal  dialysis,  and  home  dialysis),
HIV-infected  persons,  other  immunocompromised  persons  (e.g.,  hematopoietic
stem-cell transplant recipients or persons receiving chemotherapy), and sex partners of
HBsAg-positive  persons.  Testing  should  be  performed  1  to  2  months  after
administration  of  the  final  dose  of  the  vaccine  series  using  a  method  that  allows
determination  of  a  protective  concentration  of  anti-HBs  (greater  than  or  equal  to  10
mIU/mL). Persons found to have anti-HBs concentrations of greater than or equal to 10
mIU/mL
 after
 the
 primary
 vaccine
 series
 are
 considered
 to
 be
 immune.
Immunocompetent persons have long-term protection and do not need further periodic
testing  to  assess  anti-HBs  levels.  Immunocompromised  persons  might  need  annual
testing
 to
 assess
 anti-HBs
 concentrations.
 Persons
 found
 to
 have
 anti-HBs

concentrations  less  than  10  mIU/mL  after  the  primary  vaccine  series  should  be
revaccinated.  Administration  of  all  doses  in  the  second  series,  on  an  appropriate
schedule,  followed  by  anti-HBs  testing  1  to  2  months  after  the  final  dose,  is  usually
more  practical  than  serologic  testing  after  one  or  more  doses  of  vaccine  (except  for
when  revaccinating  infants  born  to  HBsAg-positive  mothers).  Infants  born  to
HBsAg-positive  women  or  HBsAg-unknown  women  whose  status  is  not  determined
should  be  tested  for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  1  to  2  months  after  completion  of  the  final
dose  of  the  HepB  vaccine  series,  at  age  9  through  12  months  (generally  at  the  next
well-child visit following completion of the HepB vaccine series). If HBsAg is not present
and  anti-HBs  antibody  is  greater  than  or  equal  to  10  mIU/mL,  children  can  be
considered  to  be  protected.  HCP  who  have  contact  with  blood  and  body  fluids  of
patients who might be infected with HBV, or who are at ongoing risk for injuries with
sharp  instruments  or  needlesticks,  should  be  tested  for  antibody  1  to  2  months  after
completion of the hepatitis B vaccine series. Increasingly, HCP with documentation of
routine  HepB  vaccination  received  the  series  in  infancy  or  as  catch-up  vaccination  in
adolescence without postvaccination testing, but they may be tested as a condition of
employment. Antibody to vaccine antigen wanes over time, although protection persists
in  immunocompetent  vaccine  recipients  who  responded  initially.  A  negative  anti-HBs
serologic  response  in  HCP  who  received  HepB  vaccine  in  the  distant  past  will  not
distinguish  between  failure  to  respond  to  the  initial  vaccination  series  (lack  of
protection)  and  response  to  the  initial  vaccination  series  with  subsequent  waning  of
antibody  (protected).  Health  care  institutions  may  measure  anti-HBs  upon  hire  or
matriculation for HCP who have documentation of a complete HepB vaccine series in
the past (e.g., as part of routine infant or adolescent vaccination). HCP with anti-HBs
less than10 mIU/mL should receive one or more additional doses of HepB vaccine and
retesting. Institutions that decide to not measure anti-HBs upon hire or matriculation for
HCP  who  have  documentation  of  a  complete  HepB  vaccine  series  in  the  past  should

ensure timely assessment and postexposure prophylaxis following an exposure. Several
factors have been associated with nonresponse to HepB vaccine. These include vaccine
factors  (e.g.,  dose,  schedule,  injection  site)  and  host  factors  (e.g.,  older  age,  male
gender). Older age (40 years and older), male gender, obesity, diabetes, smoking, and
chronic illness have been independently associated with nonresponse to HepB vaccine.
Additional vaccine doses for persons who receive postvaccination testing and who fail
to respond to a primary vaccination series administered in the deltoid muscle produce
adequate response in 15% to 25% of these persons after 1 additional dose and in 30%
to 50% after 3 additional doses. Persons who do not respond to the first series of HepB
vaccine should complete a second vaccine series. The second vaccine series should be
given on the usual 0, 1, 6 month schedule. HCP and others for whom postvaccination
serologic testing is recommended should be retested 1 to 2 months after completion of
the second vaccine series. Fewer than 5% of persons receiving 6 doses of HepB vaccine
administered  by  the  appropriate  schedule  in  the  deltoid  muscle  fail  to  develop
detectable anti-HBs antibody. One reason for persistent nonresponse to HepB vaccine is
chronic  infection  with  HBV.  Persons  who  fail  to  develop  detectable  anti-HBs  after  6
doses  should  be  tested  for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBc.  Persons  who  are  found  to  be
HBsAg-positive  should  be  counseled  accordingly  and  linked  to  care  with  providers
experienced in the management of chronic HBV infection. Persons who fail to respond
to  two  appropriately  administered  series  and  who  are  HBsAg-negative  should  be
considered susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled regarding precautions
to prevent HBV infection. They should also be counseled about the need to obtain HBIG
prophylaxis for exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. After a percutaneous (needle stick,
laceration,  bite)  or  permucosal  exposure  that  contains  or  might  contain  HBV,  blood
should  be  obtained  from  the  source  patient  to  determine  their  HBsAg  status.
Management of the exposed HCP depends on the HBsAg status of the source and the
vaccination  and  anti-HBs  response  status  of  the  exposed  HCP.  Recommended

postexposure  prophylaxis  is  described  in  the  following  table.  *HBIG  should  be
administered  intramuscularly  as  soon  as  possible  after  exposure  when  indicated.  The
effectiveness  of  HBIG  when  administered  greater  than  7  days  after  percutaneous,
mucosal,  or  nonintact  skin  exposures  is  unknown.  HBIG  and  HepB  vaccine  should  be
administered in separate anatomic injection sites.
†Should be performed 1 to 2 months after the last dose of the HepB vaccine series (and
4 to 6 months after administration of HBIG to avoid detection of passively administered
anti-HBs)  using  a  quantitative  method  that  allows  detection  of  the  protective
concentration of anti-HBs (greater than or equal to 10 mIU/mL).
§A responder is defined as a person with anti-HBs greater than or equal to 10 mIU/mL
after 3 or more doses of HepB vaccine.
¶A  nonresponder  is  defined  as  a  person  with  anti-HBs  less  than  10  mIU/mL  after  2
complete series of HepB vaccine.
**HCP  who  have  anti-HBs  less  than  10  mIU/mL,  or  who  are  unvaccinated  or
incompletely  vaccinated,  and  sustain  an  exposure  to  a  source  patient  who  is
HBsAg-positive or has unknown HBsAg status, should undergo baseline testing for HBV
infection  as  soon  as  possible  after  exposure  and  follow-up  testing  approximately  6
months later. Initial baseline tests consist of total anti-HBc; testing at approximately 6
months consists of HBsAg and total anti-HBc. Persons who have written documentation
of  a  complete  HepB  vaccine  series  and  who  did  not  receive  postvaccination  testing
should  receive  a  single  vaccine  booster  dose  after  non-occupational  exposure  to  an
HBsAg-positive  source.  Persons  who  are  in  the  process  of  being  vaccinated  but  who
have not completed the vaccine series should complete the vaccine series and receive
the appropriate dose of HBIG as soon as possible. Studies are limited on the maximum
interval  after  exposure  during  which  postexposure  prophylaxis  is  effective,  but  the
interval is unlikely to exceed 7 days for percutaneous exposure and 14 days for sexual
exposures. Unvaccinated persons should receive both HBIG and a dose of HepB vaccine

as soon as possible after exposure (preferably within 24 hours) and complete the HepB
vaccine  series  according  to  the  appropriate  schedule.  HepB  vaccine  may  be
administered simultaneously with HBIG in a separate injection site, i.e., separate limb.
As with other vaccines, a history of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) to a vaccine
component or following a prior dose is a contraindication to further doses. Moderate or
severe acute illness (with or without fever) in a patient is considered a precaution to
vaccination,  although  persons  with  minor  illness  may  be  vaccinated.  In  2011,  the
Institute  of  Medicine  concluded  that  the  evidence  convincingly  supports  a  causal
relationship  between  HepB  vaccine  and  anaphylaxis  in  yeast-sensitive  persons.  HepB
vaccination is contraindicated for persons with a history of hypersensitivity to yeast or
any  other  vaccine  component.  The  estimated  incidence  of  anaphylaxis  among  HepB
vaccine recipients is 1.1 per million vaccine doses administered. Some presentations of
HepB  vaccines  contain  latex,  which  may  cause  allergic  reactions.  Vaccination  is  not
contraindicated in persons with a history of multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barré syndrome,
autoimmune  disease  (e.g.,  systemic  lupus  erythematosis  or  rheumatoid  arthritis)  or
other  chronic  diseases.  Contraindications  to  combination  vaccines  that  contain  HepB
vaccine include the contraindications to the individual component vaccines (e.g., DTaP,
hepatitis A); specific ingredients differ by vaccine. Pregnancy is not a contraindication
to HepB vaccination. Limited data suggest that developing fetuses are not at risk for
adverse  events  when  HepB  vaccine  is  administered  to  pregnant  women.  Available
vaccines contain noninfectious HBsAg and should cause no risk of infection to the fetus.
Pregnant women who are identified as being at risk for HBV infection during pregnancy
(e.g., persons with more than one sex partner during the previous 6 months, persons
who have been evaluated or treated for an STI, recent or current PWID, or persons who
have  had  an  HBsAg-positive  sex  partner)  should  be  vaccinated.  Heplisav-B  is  not
recommended in pregnancy, based on a lack of available safety data. In prelicensure
trials,  adverse  events  following  HepB  vaccination  were  most  commonly  injection  site

reactions  and  mild  systemic  reactions.  Commonly  reported  mild  adverse  events  from
postmarketing data include pain (3% to 29%), erythema (3%), swelling (3%), fever (1%
to 6%), and headache (3%). In rare instances, other illnesses have been reported after
HepB  vaccination,  including  Guillain-Barré  syndrome,  chronic  fatigue  syndrome,
neurologic  disorders  (e.g.,  leukoencephalitis,  optic  neuritis,  and  transverse  myelitis),
rheumatoid  arthritis,  type  1  diabetes,  and  autoimmune  disease.   However,  no  causal
association between those conditions or any other chronic illness and HepB vaccine has
been demonstrated. Reviews by scientific panels have also found no causal association
between HepB vaccination and multiple sclerosis. Reported episodes of alopecia (hair
loss)  after  rechallenge  with  HepB  vaccine  suggest  that  vaccination  might  very  rarely
trigger alopecia. “Rechallenge” in this context means the same adverse event occurs
twice,  each  time  after  sequential  doses  of  vaccine.  Some  cases  were  transient.
However,  a  population-based  study  found  no  statistically  significant  association
between  alopecia  and  Hep  B  vaccination.  HepB  vaccine  should  be  maintained  at
refrigerator temperature between 2°C and 8°C (36°F and 46°F). Manufacturer package
inserts contain additional information. For complete information on best practices and
recommendations, please refer to CDC’s Vaccine Storage and Handling Toolkit [3 MB,
65  pages].  Hepatitis  B  infection  is  nationally  notifiable  in  the  United  States.  For
information on guidance for state and local health department staff who are involved in
surveillance activities for vaccine-preventable diseases, please consult the Manual for
the  Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  The  editors  would  like  to
acknowledge  Maria  Cano  and  Phil  Spradling  for  their  contributions  to  this  chapter.
Ascherio A, Zhang S, Hernán M, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination and the risk of multiple
sclerosis.  N  Engl  J  Med  2001;344(5):327–32.  CDC.  CDC  guidance  for  evaluating
health-care personnel for hepatitis B virus protection and for administering posexposure
management.  MMWR  2013;62(RR-10):1–19.  CDC.  CDC  Yellow  Book  2018:  Health
Information  for  International  Travel.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press;2017.  CDC.

Immunization  of  health-care  personnel.  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee
on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  MMWR  2011;60(RR-7):1–45.  CDC.  Prevention  of
Hepatitis  B  Virus  Infection  in  the  United  States:  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee
 on
 Immunization
 Practices.
 MMWR
 2018;67(1):1–31.
 CDC.
Recommendations  for  identification  and  public  health  management  of  persons  with
chronic hepatitis B virus infection. MMWR 2008;57(RR-8):1–20. CDC. Use of hepatitis B
vaccination
 for
 adults
 with
 diabetes
 mellitus.
 Recommendations
 of
 the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  MMWR  2011;60(50):1709-11  .
Institute of Medicine. Adverse effects of vaccines: Evidence and causality. Washington
D.C.:  The  National  Academies  Press;2011.  Institute  of  Medicine.  Immunization  Safety
Review:  Hepatitis  B  Vaccine  and  Demyelinating  Neurological  Disorders.  Washington
D.C.: The National Academy Press;2002. Lewis E, Shinefield H, Woodruff B, et al. Safety
of
 neonatal
 hepatitis
 B
 vaccine
 administration.
 Pediatr
 Infect
 Dis
 J
2001;20(11):1049–54. Poland G, Jacobson R. Clinical practice: prevention of hepatitis B
with the hepatitis B vaccine. N Engl J Med 2004;351(27):2832–8. Van Damme P, Ward J,
Shouval  D,  et  al.  Hepatitis  B  Vaccines.  In:  Plotkin  S,  Orenstein  W,  Offit  P,  et  al.,  eds.
Plotkin’s Vaccines. 7th ed. Elsevier;2018:342-74.  Top of Page

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/hepb.html
