Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  JoEllen  Wolicki,  BSN,  RN  and  Elaine  Miller,  RN,  BSN,  MPH
Printer  friendly  version  [28  pages]  This  chapter  summarizes  best  practices  related  to
vaccine administration, a key factor in ensuring vaccination is as safe and effective as
possible.  Administration  involves  a  series  of  actions:  assessing  patient  vaccination
status  and  determining  needed  vaccines,  screening  for  contraindications  and
precautions,  educating  patients,  preparing  and  administering  vaccines  properly,  and
documenting  the  vaccines  administered.  Professional  standards  for  medication
administration,  manufacturer  instructions,  and  organizational  policies  and  procedures
should  always  be  followed  when  applicable.  Policies  should  be  in  place  to  validate
health care professional’s knowledge of, and skills in, vaccine administration. All health
care  professionals  should  receive  comprehensive,  competency-based  training  before
administering  vaccines.  Training,  including  an  observation  component,  should  be
integrated into health care professionals’ education programs including orientation for
new staff and annual continuing education requirements for all staff. In addition, health
care professionals should receive educational updates as needed, such as when vaccine
administration recommendations are updated or when new vaccines are added to the
facility’s inventory. Training should also be offered to temporary staff who may be filling
in on days when the facility is short-staffed or helping during peak periods of vaccine
administration  such  as  influenza  season.  Once  initial  training  has  been  completed,
accountability checks should be in place to ensure staff follow all vaccine administration
policies  and  procedures.  Health  care  professionals  should  be  knowledgeable  about
appropriate techniques to prepare and care for patients when administering vaccines.
The patient’s immunization status should be reviewed at every health care visit. Using
the patient’s immunization history, health care providers should assess for all routinely

recommended  vaccines  as  well  as  any  vaccines  that  are  indicated  based  on  existing
medical  condition(s),  occupation,  or  other  risk  factors.  To  obtain  a  patient’s
immunization  history,  information  from  immunization  information  systems  (IISs),
current and historical medical records, and personal shot record cards may be used. In
most  cases,  health  care  providers  should  only  accept  written,  dated  records  as
evidence  of  vaccination;  however,  self-reported  doses  of  influenza  vaccine  or
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) are acceptable. Missed opportunities to
vaccinate  should  be  avoided.  If  a  documented  immunization  history  is  not  available,
administer  the  vaccines  that  are  indicated  based  on  the  patient’s  age,  medical
condition(s),  and  other  risk  factors,  such  as  planned  travel.  Before  administering  any
vaccine, patients should be screened for contraindications and precautions, even if the
patient  has  previously  received  that  vaccine.  The  patient’s  health  condition  or
recommendations  regarding  contraindications  and  precautions  for  vaccination  may
change from one visit to the next. To assess patients correctly and consistently, health
care providers should use a standardized, comprehensive screening tool. To save time,
some facilities ask patients to answer screening questions before seeing the provider,
either  electronically  via  an  online  health  care  portal  or  on  a  paper  form  while  in  the
waiting  or  exam  room.  Vaccines  are  one  of  the  safest  and  most  effective  ways  to
prevent  diseases.  All  health  care  personnel  ,  including  non-clinical  staff,  play  an
important role in promoting vaccination and creating a culture of immunization within a
clinical practice. Inconsistent messages from health care personnel about the need for
and safety of vaccines may cause confusion about the importance of vaccines. Studies
show  health  care  providers  are  the  most  trusted  source  of  vaccine  information.
Research also shows when a strong recommendation is given by a health care provider,
a  patient  is  four  to  five  times  more  likely  to  be  vaccinated.  When  providers  use
presumptive language to initiate vaccine discussions, significantly more parents choose
to vaccinate their children, especially at first-time visits. Instead of saying “What do you

want to do about shots today,” an approach using presumptive language would be to
say,  “Your  child  needs  three  vaccines  today.”  Some  patients  and  parents  may  have
questions or concerns about vaccination. This does not necessarily mean they will not
accept vaccines. Sometimes they simply want to hear their provider’s answers to their
questions.   Health  care  professionals  need  to  be  prepared  to  answer  questions.  In
addition, many state and local immunization programs and professional organizations,
including  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics,  have  resources.  There  are  numerous
strategies for effectively educating and talking to patients and parents about the need
to vaccinate. Vaccine information statements (VISs) are documents that inform vaccine
recipients  or  their  parents  about  the  benefits  and  risks  of  a  vaccine.  Federal  law
requires  VISs  be  provided  when  routinely  recommended  childhood  vaccines  are
administered.  Everyone,  including  adults,  should  be  given  the  appropriate  VIS  when
receiving a vaccine covered under the law. The VIS must be given:  CDC encourages
the use of all VISs, whether the vaccine is covered by the law requiring VIS or not. VISs
can  be  provided  at  the  same  time  as  a  screening  questionnaire,  while  the  patient  is
waiting  to  be  seen.  They  include  information  that  may  help  the  patient  or  parent
respond to the screening questions and can be used by providers during conversations
with patients. VISs are available as paper copies and in electronic formats that can be
read  on  smart  phones  and  other  devices.  Patient  and  parent  education  should  also
include  a  discussion  of  comfort  and  care  strategies  after  vaccination.  After-care
instructions  should  include  information  for  dealing  with  common  side  effects  such  as
injection site pain, fever, and fussiness (especially in infants). Instructions should also
provide information about when to seek medical attention and when to notify the health
care  provider  about  concerns  that  arise  following  vaccination.  After-care  information
can  be  given  to  patients  or  parents  before  vaccines  are  administered,  leaving  the
parent free to comfort the child immediately after the injection. Pain relievers can be
used to treat fever and injection-site pain that might occur after vaccination. In children

and  adolescents,  a  non-aspirin-containing  pain  reliever  should  be  used.  Aspirin  is  not
recommended for children and adolescents. Health care personnel should follow routine
infection  control  procedures  when  administering  vaccines.  Hand  hygiene  is  critical  to
prevent  the  spread  of  illness  and  disease.  Hand  hygiene  should  be  performed  before
vaccine preparation, between patients, and any time hands become soiled (e.g., when
diapering). Hands should be cleansed with a waterless, alcohol-based hand rub or soap
and  water.  When  hands  are  visibly  dirty  or  contaminated  with  blood  or  other  body
fluids, they should be washed thoroughly with soap and water. Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) regulations have not typically required gloves to be worn
when  administering  vaccines  unless  the  person  administering  the  vaccine  is  likely  to
come in contact with potentially infectious body fluids or has open lesions on the hands.
In  the  setting  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  gloves  should  be  worn  when  administering
intranasal  or  oral  vaccines.  If  gloves  are  worn,  they  should  be  changed,  and  hand
hygiene  should  be  performed  between  patients.  Gloves  will  not  prevent  needlestick
injuries. Any needlestick injury should be reported immediately to the site supervisor,
with  appropriate  care  and  follow-up  given  as  directed  by  state  and  local  guidelines.
Preparing vaccine properly is critical to maintaining the integrity of the vaccine during
transfer from the manufacturer’s vial to the syringe and, ultimately, to the patient. CDC
recommends  preparing  and  drawing  up  vaccines  just  before  administration.  During
preparation:  Vaccines  are  available  in  different  presentations,  including  single-dose
vials (SDV), manufacturer-filled syringes (MFS), multidose vials (MDV), oral applicators,
and  a  nasal  sprayer.  Always  check  the  label  on  the  vial  or  box  to  determine:  Most
vaccines  are  available  in  SDVs.  SDVs  do  not  contain  preservatives  to  help  prevent
microorganism  growth.  Therefore,  vaccines  packaged  as  SDVs  are  intended  to  be
punctured once for use in one patient and for one injection. Even if the SDV appears to
contain  more  vaccine  than  is  needed  for  one  patient,  it  should  not  be  used  for  more
than one patient. Once the appropriate dosage has been withdrawn, the vial and any

leftover  contents  should  be  discarded  appropriately.  SDVs  with  any  leftover  vaccine
should never be saved to combine leftover contents for later use. MFSs are prepared
with a single dose of vaccine and sealed under sterile conditions by the manufacturer.
Like  SDVs,  MFSs  do  not  contain  a  preservative  to  help  prevent  the  growth  of
microorganisms. MFSs are intended for one patient for one injection. Once the sterile
seal  has  been  broken,  the  vaccine  should  be  used  or  discarded  by  the  end  of  the
workday.  A  MDV  contains  more  than  one  dose  of  vaccine.  MDVs  are  labeled  by  the
manufacturer  and  typically  contain  an  antimicrobial  preservative  to  help  prevent  the
growth  of  microorganisms.  Because  MDVs  contain  a  preservative,  they  can  be
punctured more than once. MDVs used for more than one patient should only be kept
and accessed in a dedicated, clean medication preparation area, away from any nearby
patient  treatment  areas.  This  is  to  prevent  inadvertent  contamination  of  the  vial
through direct or indirect contact with potentially contaminated surfaces or equipment.
Only  the  number  of  doses  indicated  in  the  manufacturer’s  package  insert  should  be
withdrawn from the vial. Partial doses from two or more vials should never be combined
to obtain a dose of vaccine. An oral applicator is for use with oral vaccines and contains
only  one  dose  of  medication.  Oral  vaccines  do  not  contain  a  preservative.  Rotavirus
vaccine is administered using an oral applicator. An intranasal sprayer is used for the
live,  attenuated  influenza  vaccine.  Each  vaccine  and  diluent  (if  needed)  should  be
carefully  inspected  for  damage,  particulate  matter,  or  contamination  before  using.
Verify  the  vaccine  has  been  stored  at  proper  temperatures.  Determining  when  a
vaccine or diluent expires is an essential step in the vaccine preparation process. The
expiration  date  printed  on  the  vial  or  box  should  be  checked  before  preparing  the
vaccine. In some instances, vaccine must be used by a date earlier than the expiration
date on the label. This time frame is referred to as the “beyond-use date” (BUD). The
BUD supersedes but should never exceed the manufacturer’s expiration date.  Vaccines
should not be used after the BUD. The BUD should be noted on the label, along with the

initials of the person making the calculation. Examples of vaccines with BUDs include:
Reconstitution is the process of adding a diluent to a dry ingredient to make it a liquid.
The lyophilized vaccine (powder or pellet form) and its diluent come together from the
manufacturer. Vaccines should be reconstituted according to manufacturer guidelines
using  only  the  diluent  supplied  for  a  specific  vaccine.  Diluents  vary  in  volume  and
composition,  and  are  specifically  designed  to  meet  volume,  pH  balance,  and  the
chemical requirements of their corresponding vaccines. A different diluent, a stock vial
of sterile water, or normal saline should never be used to reconstitute vaccines. If the
wrong  diluent  is  used,  the  vaccine  dose  is  not  valid  and  must  be  repeated  using  the
correct diluent. Vaccine should be reconstituted just before administering by following
the instructions in the vaccine package insert. Once reconstituted, the vaccine should
be administered within the time frame specified for use in the manufacturer’s package
insert;  otherwise,  the  vaccine  should  be  discarded.  Changing  the  needle  between
preparing  and  administering  the  vaccine  is  not  necessary  unless  the  needle  is
contaminated  or  damaged.  OSHA  requires  that  safety-engineered  injection  devices
(e.g., needle-shielding syringes or needle-free injectors) be used for injectable vaccines
in all clinical settings to reduce the risk of needlestick injury and disease transmission.
General guidance when selecting supplies to administer a vaccine by injection includes:
An injectable vaccine may be administered in either a 1-mL or 3-mL syringe. Vaccines
must reach the desired tissue to provide an optimal immune response and reduce the
likelihood of injection-site reactions. A supply of needles should be available in varying
lengths  appropriate  for  the  facility’s  patient  population.  Clinical  judgment  should  be
used when selecting needle length. Needle selection should be based on the: Needle
Length and Gauge for Subcutaneous Injection Needle Length and Gauge: Children and
Adolescents  (birth  –  18  years)  for  Intramuscular  Injection  Needle  Length  and  Gauge:
Adults  (age  19  years  or  older)  for  Intramuscular  Injection  Standard  medication
preparation guidelines should be followed for drawing a dose of vaccine into a syringe.

The cap on the top of an unopened vaccine vial functions as a dust cover. However, not
all vaccine manufacturers guarantee the tops of unused vials are sterile, and the way
the  cover  over  the  stopper  is  removed  can  potentially  contaminate  the  stopper.
Therefore, using friction and a sterile alcohol swab to wipe the stopper may help assure
aseptic  technique.  Alcohol  evaporates  quickly  and  will  dry  while  the  needle  is  being
prepared  for  insertion  into  the  vial.  Instilling  air  into  a  multidose  vial  prior  to
withdrawing a vaccine dose is not necessary. It could cause a “spritz” of vaccine to be
lost  the  next  time  the  vial  is  entered,  which,  over  time,  can  decrease  the  amount  of
vaccine in the vial and lead to the loss of a dose (e.g., only nine full doses in a 10-dose
vial).  Before  withdrawing  each  dose,  the  vial  should  be  agitated  to  mix  the  vaccine
thoroughly and obtain a uniform suspension. The vaccine should be visually inspected
for  discoloration  and  precipitation  or  to  see  if  it  cannot  be  resuspended  before
administration.  If  problems  are  noted,  the  vaccine  should  not  be  administered.  When
filling a syringe: Once the syringe is filled, label it with the name of the vaccine in the
syringe. Often more than one vaccine is administered at the same visit and, once drawn
into a syringe, vaccines look similar. By labeling the syringe, health care providers will
know the route to use to administer the vaccine correctly. Vaccines should be drawn
just before administration. However, while MFSs are recommended for large vaccination
clinics,  there  may  be  rare  instances  when  the  only  option  is  to  predraw  vaccine  for
off-site clinics. Vaccinations are the most common source of procedural pain for healthy
children  and  can  be  a  stressful  experience  for  persons  of  any  age.  It  has  been
estimated  that  up  to  25%  of  adults  have  a  fear  of  needles,  with  most  needle  fears
developing during childhood. If not addressed, these fears can have long-term effects
such  as  preprocedural  anxiety  and  avoidance  of  needed  health  care  throughout  a
person’s lifetime. Fear of injections and needlestick pain are often cited as reasons why
children  and  adults  refuse  vaccines.  Pain  is  a  subjective  phenomenon  influenced  by
multiple  factors,  including  an  individual’s  age,  anxiety  level,  previous  health  care

experiences,  and  culture.  Although  pain  from  vaccination  is  to  some  extent
unavoidable, there are some things that parents and health care providers can do to
help. Evidence-based pharmacologic, physical, and psychological interventions exist to
ease the pain associated with injections. Combining the interventions described below
has  been  shown  to  improve  pain  relief.  Aspiration  is  not  recommended  before
administering a vaccine. Aspiration prior to injection and injecting medication slowly are
practices  that  have  not  been  evaluated  scientifically.  Aspiration  was  originally
recommended  for  theoretical  safety  reasons  and  injecting  medication  slowly  was
thought  to  decrease  pain  from  sudden  distention  of  muscle  tissue.  Aspiration  can
increase pain because of the combined effects of a longer needle-dwelling time in the
tissues and shearing action (wiggling) of the needle. There are no reports of any person
being  injured  because  of  failure  to  aspirate.  The  veins  and  arteries  within  reach  of  a
needle in the anatomic areas recommended for vaccination are too small to allow an
intravenous push of vaccine without blowing out the vessel. A 2007 study from Canada
compared infants’ pain response using slow injection, aspiration, and slow withdrawal
with another group using rapid injection, no aspiration, and rapid withdrawal. Based on
behavioral and visual pain scales, the group that received the vaccine rapidly without
aspiration  experienced  less  pain.  No  immediate  adverse  events  were  reported  with
either  injection  technique.  Many  persons  receive  two  or  more  injections  at  the  same
clinical visit. Some vaccines cause more pain than others during the injection. Because
pain can increase with each injection, the order in which vaccines are injected matters.
Some vaccines cause a painful or stinging sensation when injected; examples include
measles,  mumps,  and  rubella;  pneumococcal  conjugate;  and  human  papillomavirus
vaccines.  Injecting  the  most  painful  vaccine  last  when  multiple  injections  are  being
administered  can  decrease  the  pain  associated  with  the  injections.  Mothers  who  are
breastfeeding  should  be  encouraged  to  breastfeed  children  age  2  years  or  younger
before, during, and after vaccination. Several aspects of breastfeeding are thought to

decrease pain by multiple mechanisms: being held by the parent, feeling skin-to-skin
contact, suckling, being distracted, and ingesting breast milk. Potential adverse events
such as gagging or spitting up have not been reported. Alternatives to breastfeeding
include bottle-feeding with expressed breast milk or formula throughout the procedure,
which simulates aspects of breastfeeding. Children (age 2 years or younger) who are
not breastfed during vaccination may be given a sweet-tasting solution such as sucrose
or glucose one to two minutes before the injection. The analgesic effect can last for up
to 10 minutes following administration and can mitigate vaccine injection pain. Parents
should be counseled that sweet-tasting liquids should only be used for the management
of pain associated with a procedure such as an injection and not as a comfort measure
at  home.  Topical  anesthetics  block  transmission  of  pain  signals  from  the  skin.  They
decrease the pain as the needle penetrates the skin and reduce the underlying muscle
spasm,  particularly  when  more  than  one  injection  is  administered.  These  products
should be used only for the ages recommended and as directed by the manufacturer.
Because using topical anesthetics may require additional time, some planning by the
healthcare  provider  and  parent  may  be  needed.  Topical  anesthetics  can  be  applied
during the usual clinic waiting times, or before the patient arrives at the clinic provided
parents  and  patients  have  been  shown  how  to  use  them  appropriately.  There  is  no
evidence  that  topical  anesthetics  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  vaccine  immune
response.  The  prophylactic  use  of  antipyretics  (e.g.,  acetaminophen  and  ibuprofen)
before or at the time of vaccination is not recommended. There is no evidence these
will  decrease  the  pain  associated  with  an  injection.  In  addition,  some  studies  have
suggested  these  medications  might  suppress  the  immune  response  to  some  vaccine
antigens.  For  both  children  and  adults,  the  best  position  and  type  of  comforting
technique should be determined by considering the patient’s age, activity level, safety,
comfort, and administration route and site. Parents play an important role when infants
and children receive vaccines. Parent participation has been shown to increase a child’s

comfort  and  reduce  the  child’s  perception  of  pain.  Holding  infants  during  vaccination
reduces  acute  distress.  Skin-to-skin  contact  for  infants  up  to  age  1  month  has  been
demonstrated  to  reduce  acute  distress  during  the  procedure.  A  parent’s  embrace
during  vaccination  offers  several  benefits.  A  comforting  hold:  A  combination  of
interventions,  holding  during  the  injection  along  with  patting  or  rocking  after  the
injection,  is  recommended  for  children  up  to  age  3  years.  Parents  should  understand
proper positioning and holding for infants and young children. Parents should hold the
child in a comfortable position, so that one or more limbs are exposed for injections.
Research shows that children age 3 years or older are less fearful and experience less
pain when receiving an injection if they are sitting up rather than lying down. The exact
mechanism  behind  this  phenomenon  is  unknown.  It  may  be  that  the  child’s  anxiety
level is reduced, which, in turn, reduces the child’s perception of pain. Moderate tactile
stimulation (rubbing or stroking the skin) near the injection site before and during the
injection process may decrease pain in children age 4 years or older and in adults. The
mechanism  for  this  is  thought  to  be  that  the  sensation  of  touch  competes  with  the
feeling of pain from the injection and, thereby, results in less pain. The recommended
route  and  site  for  each  vaccine  are  based  on  clinical  trials,  practical  experience,  and
theoretical considerations. There are five routes used to administer vaccines. Deviation
from  the  recommended  route  may  reduce  vaccine  efficacy  or  increase  local  adverse
reactions. Some vaccine doses are not valid if administered using the wrong route, and
revaccination is recommended. Oral vaccines should generally be administered before
injectable vaccines. Rotavirus vaccines (RV1 [Rotarix], RV5 [RotaTeq]) are administered
orally. Because the two brands of rotavirus vaccine are prepared differently and have
different types of oral applicators, health care professionals should be familiar with how
to prepare and administer the brand stocked in their facility. Rotavirus vaccine should
never  be  injected.  To  administer  rotavirus  vaccine:  An  infant  can  eat  or  drink
immediately before or after administration of either product. The dose does not need to

be  repeated  if  an  infant  regurgitates,  spits  out  the  vaccine,  or  vomits  during  or  after
administration. No data exist on the benefits or risks associated with readministering a
dose of rotavirus vaccine. The infant should receive the remaining recommended doses
of  rotavirus  vaccine  following  the  routine  schedule.  Live,  attenuated  influenza  (LAIV
[FluMist])  vaccine  is  administered  by  the  intranasal  route.  LAIV  is  administered  into
each  nostril  using  a  manufacturer-filled  nasal  sprayer.  A  dose-divider  clip,  located  on
the plunger, separates the total vaccine dose of 0.2 mL into two equal parts of 0.1 mL
each. LAIV should never be injected. The patient should be seated in an upright position
and instructed to breathe normally. The provider should gently place a hand behind the
patient’s head to prevent inadvertent movement. To administer the vaccine:  Source:
Lynne Larson, www.biovisuals.com The dose does not need to be repeated if the patient
coughs,  sneezes,  or  expels  the  dose  in  any  other  way.  Routinely  recommended
vaccines administered by subcutaneous injection include MMR (MMR-II), VAR (Varivax),
IPV (IPOL), MMRV (ProQuad), and PPSV23 (Pneumovax 23). IPOL and Pneumovax 23 can
be  administered  by  intramuscular  (IM)  or  subcutaneous  injection.  Subcutaneous
injections  are  administered  into  the  fatty  tissue  found  below  the  dermis  and  above
muscle  tissue.  For  infants  younger  than  age  12  months,  a  subcutaneous  injection  is
usually administered into the fatty tissue of the thigh, although the upper outer triceps
area  of  the  arm  may  be  used  if  necessary.  For  persons  age  1  year  or  older,
subcutaneous injections are given in the fatty tissue above the upper outer triceps of
the arm.  Source: California Department of Public Health When administering a vaccine
subcutaneously:  No  routinely  recommend  U.S.  vaccines  are  administered  by  the
intradermal route of injection. Source: California Department of Public Health Routinely
recommended  vaccines  administered  by  IM  injection  include:   Source:  Lynne  Larson,
www.biovisuals.com  IPOL  and  Pneumovax  23  can  be  administered  by  IM  or  subcut
injection.  IM  injections  are  administered  into  the  muscle  through  the  skin  and
subcutaneous tissue. There are only two recommended sites for administering vaccines

by  IM  injection:  Injection  at  these  sites  reduces  the  chance  of  involving  neural  or
vascular structures. The preferred site depends on the patient’s age, weight, gender,
and the degree of muscle development. When administering an IM injection:  For both
sites,  an  IM  injection  ideally  should  be  administered  into  the  middle  of  the  muscle
where the muscle tissue is thickest. For most infants, the vastus lateralis muscle in the
anterolateral  thigh  is  the  recommended  site  for  injection  because  it  provides  a  large
muscle mass. The muscles of the buttock are not used for administration of vaccines in
infants  and  children  because  of  concern  about  potential  injury  to  the  sciatic  nerve,
which  has  been  well-documented  after  injection  of  antimicrobial  agents  into  the
buttock.  If  the  gluteal  muscle  must  be  used  (e.g.,  because  of  reduced  anatomic  site
availability), care should be taken to define the anatomic landmarks. A gluteal muscle
injection should be administered laterally and superior to a line between the posterior
superior iliac spine and the greater trochanter or in the ventrogluteal site, the center of
a triangle bound by the anterior superior iliac spine, the tubercle of the iliac crest, and
the upper border of the greater trochanter. For toddlers, the vastus lateralis muscle in
the anterolateral thigh is preferred. The deltoid muscle can be used if the muscle mass
is  adequate.  Source:  California  Department  of  Public  Health  The  deltoid  muscle  is
preferred  for  children  age  3  through  18  years.  The  vastus  lateralis  muscle  in  the
anterolateral thigh is an alternative site if the deltoid sites cannot be used. For adults,
the  deltoid  muscle  is  recommended.  IM  injections  are  administered  at  a  90-degree
angle to the skin and, for most adult patients, the skin is spread and the tissues are not
bunched. It is acceptable in geriatric patients to grasp the tissue and “bunch up” the
muscle.  As  with  children  and  adolescents,  the  vastus  lateralis  muscle  in  the
anterolateral thigh is an alternative site if the deltoid sites cannot be used. Children and
adults  often  need  more  than  one  vaccine  at  the  same  time.  Giving  more  than  one
vaccine at the same clinical visit is preferred because it helps keep patients up-to-date.
Use of combination vaccines can reduce the number of injections. Considerations when

administering  multiple  injections  include:  Immediately  after  use,  all  syringe/needle
devices should be placed in biohazard containers that are closable, puncture-resistant,
leakproof on sides and bottom, and labeled or color-coded. This practice helps prevent
accidental needlestick injury and reuse. Used needles should not be recapped or cut or
detached  from  the  syringes  before  disposal.  Empty  or  expired  vaccine  vials  are
considered  medical  waste  and  should  be  disposed  of  according  to  state  regulations.
Medical waste disposal requirements are set by state environmental agencies. Contact
the state or local immunization program or state environmental agency for guidance.
Health care providers should be knowledgeable about the policies and procedures for
identifying  and  reporting  adverse  events  after  vaccination.  A  vaccine  adverse  event
refers  to  any  medical  event  that  occurs  after  vaccination  which  may  or  may  not  be
related to vaccination. Further assessment is needed to determine if an adverse event
is caused by a vaccine. An adverse vaccine reaction is an untoward effect caused by a
vaccine. Health care providers should be familiar with strategies to prevent and identify
adverse  reactions  after  vaccination.  Potential  life-threatening  adverse  reactions  that
can  occur  immediately  after  vaccination  are  severe  allergic  reactions  and  syncope
(fainting). Severe, life-threatening anaphylactic reactions following vaccination are rare.
Thorough screening for contraindications and precautions prior to vaccination can often
prevent  reactions.  Health  care  providers  should  be  familiar  with  identifying
immediate-type allergic reactions. Symptoms of immediate-type allergic reactions can
include local or generalized urticaria (hives), angioedema, respiratory compromise due
to  wheezing  or  swelling  of  the  throat,  hypotension,  and  shock.  Health  care  providers
should be competent in treating these events at the time of vaccine administration. All
vaccine  providers  should  be  certified  in  cardiopulmonary  resuscitation  (CPR)  and  be
skilled  in  administering  epinephrine.  Equipment  needed  for  maintaining  an  airway
should be available for immediate use and the provider should be skilled in using the
equipment. Providers should also have a plan in place to contact emergency medical

services  immediately  if  there’s  an  anaphylactic  reaction  to  vaccination,  and  staff
members  should  know  their  individual  roles  in  the  event  of  an  emergency.  All  health
care  professionals  who  administer  vaccines  to  older  children,  adolescents,  and  adults
should be aware of the potential for syncope after vaccination and the related risk of
injury  caused  by  falls.  Appropriate  measures  should  be  taken  to  prevent  injuries  if  a
patient becomes weak or dizzy or loses consciousness, including: Health care providers
are required by law to report certain adverse events, and encouraged to report other
events, following vaccination to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS).
Details
 on
 reporting
 adverse
 events
 after
 vaccination
 can
 be
 found
 at
https://vaers.hhs.gov.
 Accurate
 and
 timely
 documentation
 can
 help
 prevent
administration  errors  and  curtail  the  number  and  cost  of  excess  vaccine  doses.  In
addition,  preventing  excess  doses  of  vaccines  may  decrease  the  number  of  adverse
reactions.  All  vaccines  administered  should  be  fully  documented  in  the  patient’s
permanent medical record. Health care providers who administer vaccines covered by
the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (which include all vaccines listed on
the  ACIP  recommended  child  and  adolescent  immunization  schedule)  are  required  by
law  to  ensure  the  permanent  medical  record  of  the  recipient  indicates:  Vaccine
administration  best  practices  also  include  documenting  the  route,  dosage,  and  site.
Providers  should  update  a  patient’s  permanent  medical  record  to  reflect  any
documented episodes of adverse events after vaccination and any serologic test results
related to vaccine-preventable diseases (e.g., those for rubella screening or antibody to
hepatitis B surface antigen). The patient or parent should be provided with a personal
immunization record that includes the vaccination(s) and date administered. Although
there is no national law, it is also important to document when parents or adult patients
refuse  vaccines  despite  the  vaccine  provider’s  recommendation.  Professional
organizations such as the American Academy of Pediatrics and others have developed
forms
 to
 document
 when
 vaccines
 are
 refused

(https://www.aap.org/en-us/documents/immunization_refusaltovaccinate.pdf).  By  age  2
years,  more  than  20%  of  the  children  in  the  United  States  typically  have  seen  more
than  one  health  care  provider,  resulting  in  scattered  paper  medical  records.  IISs  are
confidential,  population-based,  computerized  information  systems  that  collect  and
consolidate vaccination data from multiple health care providers. Vaccine providers are
strongly  encouraged  to  participate  in  an  IIS,  and  some  states  mandate  documenting
vaccinations in an IIS. Laws regarding using an IIS vary by state or region. Some states’
IISs use bar-coding technology. Implementation of a 2D bar code on vaccine vials and
VISs  allows  for  rapid,  accurate,  and  automatic  capture  of  certain  data,  including  the
vaccine  product  identifier,  lot  number,  expiration  date,  and  VIS  edition  date  using  a
handheld imaging device or scanner that could populate these fields in an IIS and/or an
electronic  health  record.  The  National  Coordinating  Council  for  Medication  Error
Reporting  and  Prevention  defines  a  medication  error  as  “any  preventable  event  that
may  cause  or  lead  to  inappropriate  medication  use  or  patient  harm  while  the
medication  is  in  the  control  of  the  health  care  professional,  patient,  or  consumer.”  A
preventable event is one that is due to an error that could be avoided. For example, if a
patient  receives  the  wrong  drug  because  of  look-alike  labels  between  different
products, that is considered a preventable event. Vaccines, like other medications, can
be  involved  in  errors.  Vaccine  administration  errors  can  have  many  consequences,
including  inadequate  immunological  protection,  possible  injury  to  the  patient,  cost,
inconvenience,  and  reduced  confidence  in  the  health  care  delivery  system.  Common
vaccine administration errors include: Traditionally, medication errors are thought to be
caused  by  mistakes.  This  “blame-seeking”  approach  fails  to  address  the  root  cause,
potentially  causing  the  error  to  recur.  An  environment  that  values  the  reporting  and
investigation  of  errors  (and  “near  misses”)  as  part  of  risk  management  and  quality
improvement  should  be  established.  Health  care  personnel  should  be  encouraged  to
report  errors  and  trust  that  the  situation  and  those  involved  will  be  treated  fairly

without  fear  of  punishment  and  ridicule.  Error  reporting  provides  opportunities  to
discover how the errors occur and to share ideas to prevent or reduce those errors in
the  future.  When  a  vaccine  administration  error  occurs,  health  care  providers  should
determine  how  it  happened  and  put  strategies  in  place  to  prevent  it  in  the  future.
Guidance for handling some common vaccine administration errors is included in ACIP’s
General Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization. Some vaccine administration errors
require  revaccination,  but  others  do  not.  Vaccine  administration  errors  requiring
revaccination include: Vaccine administration errors not requiring revaccination include:
The  editors  would  like  to  acknowledge  Beth  Hibbs  and  Andrew  Kroger  for  their
contributions to this chapter.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/vac-admin.html
