Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Sarah  Mbaeyi,  MD;  Jonathan  Duffy,  MD,  MPH;  Lucy  A.
McNamara,  PhD  The  14th  edition  of  the  “Pink  Book”  was  published  August  2021.
Vaccine-specific recommendations may be outdated. Refer to the Advisory Committee
on  Immunization  Practices  Vaccine  Recommendations  and  Guidelines  for  the  most
updated  vaccine-specific  recommendations.  Printer  friendly  version  [18  pages]
Meningococcal  disease  is  an  acute,  severe  illness  caused  by  the  bacterium  Neisseria
meningitidis. A leading cause of bacterial meningitis and sepsis in the United States, N.
meningitidis can also cause pneumonia and focal disease, such as septic arthritis. As of
August  2020,  five  meningococcal  vaccines  are  licensed  and  available  in  the  United
States:  three  quadrivalent  (serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y)  conjugate  meningococcal
vaccines
 and
 two
 recombinant
 serogroup
 B
 vaccines.
 N.
 meningitidis,
 or
meningococcus,  is  an  aerobic,  gram-negative  bacterium,  closely  related  to  N.
gonorrhoeae  and  to  several  typically  nonpathogenic  Neisseria  species,  such  as  N.
lactamica. The outer membrane of N. meningitidis is surrounded by a polysaccharide
capsule  that  is  important  for  pathogenicity  because  it  helps  the  bacterium  resist
phagocytosis  and  complement-mediated  lysis.  The  outer  membrane  proteins  and  the
capsular  polysaccharide  make  up  the  main  surface  antigens  of  the  organism.
Meningococci  are  classified  into  serogroups  based  on  the  structure  of  the
polysaccharide  capsule.  Twelve  antigenically  and  chemically  distinct  polysaccharide
capsules  have  been  described  and  the  polysaccharide  capsule  determines  the
serogroup labeling. Almost all reported cases of invasive disease worldwide are caused
by  one  of  six  serogroups:  A,  B,  C,  W,  X,  and  Y.  The  relative  importance  of  each
serogroup  depends  on  factors  such  as  geographic  location  and  patient  age.  Some
strains are nongroupable and do not express capsule; these strains are most commonly

associated  with  asymptomatic  nasopharyngeal  carriage  rather  than  invasive  disease.
Meningococci  are  transmitted  person-to-person  by  respiratory  droplets  or  secretions
from persons with asymptomatic colonization or meningococcal disease. The bacteria
attach to and multiply in the mucosal cells of the nasopharynx and oropharynx and, in a
small proportion (much less than 1%) of persons, penetrate the mucosal cells and enter
the  bloodstream.  The  bacteria  can  then  spread  through  the  blood  to  cause  systemic
disease  and  cross  the  blood-brain  barrier  into  the  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF)  to  cause
meningitis. The incubation period of meningococcal disease is typically 3 to 4 days, with
a  range  of  1  to  10  days.  Meningitis  is  the  most  common  presentation  of  invasive
meningococcal  disease  and  is  found  in  about  50%  of  cases  in  the  United  States.
Symptoms are similar to those seen in other forms of bacterial meningitis, and typically
include sudden onset of fever, headache, and stiff neck, often accompanied by other
symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, photophobia (eye sensitivity to light), and altered
mental  status.  Meningococci  can  be  isolated  from  the  blood  in  up  to  75%  of  persons
with meningitis. Meningococcal septicemia (bloodstream infection or meningococcemia)
occurs  without  meningitis  in  about  30%  of  invasive  meningococcal  infections.  This
condition is characterized by abrupt onset of fever; chills; cold hands and feet; severe
aches  or  pain  in  the  muscles,  joints,  chest,  or  abdomen;  vomiting;  diarrhea;  and  a
petechial  or  purpuric  rash,  often  associated  with  hypotension,  shock,  acute  adrenal
hemorrhage,  and  multiorgan  failure.  An  additional  15%  of  U.S.  cases  present  with
bacteremic pneumonia; this is the most common presentation in adults over 65 years of
age.  Other  syndromes  involving  isolation  of  meningococci  from  normally  sterile  body
sites,  such  as  septic  arthritis,  can  also  occur.  Meningococci  also  occasionally  cause
noninvasive  infections  such  as  conjunctivitis  or  urethritis.  Noninvasive  illness  due  to
meningococci is not nationally notifiable and the incidence is unclear. Throughout this
chapter,  risk  factors  and  demographics  described  apply  only  to  invasive,  reportable
meningococcal  disease  cases  and  the  term  meningococcal  disease  refers  to  invasive

meningococcal disease. The overall case-fatality ratio of meningococcal disease is 10%
to  15%,  even  with  appropriate  antibiotic  therapy,  and  can  be  higher  in  persons  with
meningococcemia.  As  many  as  20%  of  survivors  have  permanent  sequelae,  such  as
hearing  loss,  neurologic  damage,  or  loss  of  a  limb.  In  the  United  States,  incidence  of
meningococcal disease is highest among infants younger than age 1 year, followed by
children age 1 through 4 years. A second peak of disease incidence is found in young
adults 17 through 21 years of age. Incidence increases again in adults older than 85
years  of  age.  Risk  factors  for  the  development  of  meningococcal  disease  include
persistent  complement  component  deficiencies  (including  use  of  a  complement
component inhibitor, eculizumab [Soliris®] or ravulizumab-cwvz [Ultomiris]), functional
or  anatomic  asplenia,  HIV  infection,  travel  to  or  residence  in  a  country  where
meningococcal disease is hyperendemic or epidemic, and exposure during an outbreak
of  meningococcal  disease.  Microbiologists  who  routinely  work  with  isolates  of  N.
meningitidis  are  also  at  risk.  In  addition,  household  crowding,  active  and  passive
smoking,  and  antecedent  viral  upper  respiratory  infection  have  been  associated  with
meningococcal disease transmission. Meningococcal disease is diagnosed by culture of
N.  meningitidis  from  a  normally  sterile  site  (e.g.,  blood,  CSF)  or  purpuric  lesions.
Meningococcal
 disease
 may
 also
 be
 diagnosed
 through
 detection
 of
 N.
meningitidis-specific  nucleic  acid  in  a  specimen  obtained  from  a  normally  sterile  site
using a validated polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Although culture remains the
gold standard for diagnosis of meningococcal disease, PCR is useful for detection of N.
meningitidis  from  clinical  samples,  particularly  when  a  patient  was  treated  with
antibiotics  prior  to  specimen  collection.  Identification  of  gram-negative  diplococci
identified  in  a  sterile  site  specimen  strongly  suggests  N.  meningitidis  but  is  not
confirmatory.  Once  the  diagnosis  of  meningococcal  disease  has  been  confirmed,  the
serogroup  should  be  identified  through  slide  agglutination  or  real-time  PCR.
Laboratories that cannot perform serogrouping should transfer the isolate or specimen

to  a  reference  laboratory,  such  as  their  state  public  health  laboratory.  Several  new
commercial multiplex PCR assays capable of simultaneously testing a single specimen
for  an  array  of  pathogens  have  become  available  (e.g.,  FilmArray®  Blood  Culture
Identification  Panel  and  FilmArray®  Meningitis/Encephalitis  Panel  by  PCR  from  ARUP
Laboratories). While these assays can rapidly identify N. meningitidis species, most do
not determine serogroup. Thus, laboratories should continue to perform simultaneous
culture  and  use  validated,  specific,  real-time  PCR  assays  capable  of  detecting  and
differentiating meningococcal serogroups. Otherwise, additional steps need to be taken,
including performing a reflex culture or, at a minimum, retaining a clinical specimen for
further  testing  at  a  public  health  laboratory.  Molecular  typing  using  whole  genome
sequencing  (WGS)  can  provide  useful  epidemiologic  information,  particularly  if  an
outbreak  of  meningococcal  disease  is  suspected.  Serologic  testing  (e.g.,  enzyme
immunoassay) for antibodies to meningococcal antigens is not validated for clinical use
in the United States. Serologic testing should not be used to establish the diagnosis of
meningococcal  disease  or  to  determine  whether  a  patient  should  receive  a
meningococcal vaccination. Empiric therapy with broad-spectrum antibiotics (including
a  third-generation  cephalosporin)  should  be  started  promptly  when  meningococcal
disease  is  suspected,  ideally  after  appropriate  cultures  are  obtained.  Once  N.
meningitidis infection has been confirmed, treatment may be continued with penicillin,
ampicillin,  cefotaxime,  or  ceftriaxone.  However,  because  there  have  been  recent
reports of penicillin-resistant, β-lactamase-producing N. meningitidis serogroup Y cases
in  the  United  States,  healthcare  providers  should  ascertain  susceptibility  of
meningococcal isolates to penicillin before using penicillin or ampicillin for treatment. In
the United States, the primary means for prevention of sporadic meningococcal disease
is antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis of close contacts of infected persons. Close contacts
include household members, childcare center contacts, and anyone directly exposed to
the  patient’s  oral  secretions  (e.g.,  through  kissing,  mouth-to-mouth  resuscitation,

endotracheal intubation, or endotracheal tube management) during the 7 days before
symptom  onset.  Healthcare  personnel  should  receive  chemoprophylaxis  if  they  were
managing  an  airway  or  were  exposed  to  respiratory  secretions  of  a  patient  with
meningococcal  disease.  For  travelers,  antimicrobial  chemoprophylaxis  should  be
considered for any passenger who had direct contact with respiratory secretions from
an index patient or for anyone seated directly next to an index patient on a prolonged
flight (i.e., one lasting more than 8 hours), or within one seat in any direction on a flight
of any duration if the index patient was coughing or vomiting on the flight. Any case of
meningococcal disease in a person who has recently traveled should be reported to the
local  quarantine  station  to  determine  whether  an  air  travel  contact  investigation  is
indicated.  Chemoprophylaxis  is  not  recommended  for  close  contacts  of  patients  with
evidence of N. meningitidis only in nonsterile sites (e.g., oropharyngeal, endotracheal,
conjunctival).   Reports  of  secondary  cases  after  close  contact  with  persons  with
noninvasive pneumonia or conjunctivitis are rare; there is no evidence of substantive
excess risk. Furthermore, there is no indication to treat persons who are asymptomatic
nasopharyngeal  carriers.  Because  the  rate  of  secondary  disease  for  close  contacts  is
highest  immediately  after  onset  of  disease  in  the  index  patient,  antimicrobial
chemoprophylaxis  should  be  administered  as  soon  as  possible,  ideally  less  than  24
hours  after  identification  of  the  index  patient.  Conversely,  chemoprophylaxis
administered more than 14 days after onset of illness in the index patient is probably of
limited  or  no  value.  Oropharyngeal  or  nasopharyngeal  cultures  are  not  helpful  in
determining the need for chemoprophylaxis and might unnecessarily delay institution
of  this  preventive  measure.  Rifampin,  ciprofloxacin,  and  ceftriaxone  are  90%  to  95%
effective in reducing nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis and are all acceptable
antimicrobial agents for chemoprophylaxis. Because there have been recent reports of
ciprofloxacin-resistant, β-lactamase-producing N. meningitidis serogroup Y cases in the
United States, clinicians and public health staff should consider obtaining antimicrobial

susceptibility testing of meningococcal isolates to inform prophylaxis decisions if their
state has reported a case of meningococcal disease caused by ciprofloxacin-resistant
strains  within  the  past  2  years.  Clinicians  should  report  suspected  chemoprophylaxis
failures  to  their  public  health  departments.   Systemic  antimicrobial  therapy  for
meningococcal  disease  with  agents  other  than  ceftriaxone  or  other  third-generation
cephalosporins might not reliably eradicate nasopharyngeal carriage of N. meningitidis.
If  other  agents  have  been  used  for  treatment,  the  patient  should  receive
chemoprophylactic antibiotics for eradication of nasopharyngeal carriage before being
discharged from the hospital. Meningococcal disease occurs worldwide. Incidence rates
vary  by  serogroup  and  geography.  Humans  are  the  only  natural  reservoir  of
meningococcus.  At  any  given  time,  about  10%  of  adolescents  and  adults  are
asymptomatic nasopharyngeal carriers of N. meningitidis. Many of these carried strains
are  nongroupable  (not  encapsulated)  and  unlikely  to  cause  disease  in  most  people.
Primary  mode  is  by  respiratory  droplet  spread  or  by  direct  contact  with  respiratory
secretions. Meningococcal disease occurs throughout the year; however, the incidence
is highest in the late winter and early spring. The communicability of N. meningitidis is
generally  limited.  In  studies  of  households  in  which  a  case  of  meningococcal  disease
has occurred, only 3% to 4% of households had secondary cases. Most households had
only one secondary case. Estimates of the risk of secondary transmission are generally
2–4 cases per 1,000 household members at risk. However, this risk is 500 to 800 times
greater  than  in  the  general  population.  Incidence  of  meningococcal  disease  in  the
United  States  has  declined  annually  following  a  peak  in  the  late  1990s.  In  2018,  329
total cases were reported in the United States, representing an incidence of 0.10 per
100,000  population.  Serogroups  B  and  C  are  the  major  causes  of  meningococcal
disease in the United States, each being responsible for approximately 25% to 40% of
cases;  serogroups  W  and  Y,  along  with  nongroupable  meningococci,  are  each
responsible for another 5% to 15%. The proportion of cases caused by each serogroup

varies by age group. Approximately 60% of disease among children and young adults
under 24 years of age is caused by serogroup B. In particular, among individuals 18 to
24 years of age, college students have more than three times the risk of serogroup B
meningococcal  disease  as  similarly  aged  people  not  attending  college.  Meanwhile,
serogroups C, W, or Y cause about 60% of all cases of meningococcal disease among
persons  24  years  of  age  and  older.  In  the  United  States,  meningococcal  outbreaks
account for about 5% of reported cases (i.e., 95% of cases are sporadic). An outbreak is
defined  as  2–3  outbreak-associated  cases  (e.g.,  cases  of  the  same  serogroup  unless
found to be genetically unrelated by molecular typing methods) in an organization (e.g.,
school,  college,  correctional  facility)  during  a  three-month  period,  or  multiple
outbreak-associated  cases  with  an  incidence  of  meningococcal  disease  that  is  above
the  expected  incidence  in  a  community  during  a  three-month  period.  During  2010
through  2018,  multiple  serogroup  B  outbreaks  among  university  students  and
serogroup  C  outbreaks  among  men  who  have  sex  with  men  were  reported.  Other
communities and organizations, including populations experiencing homelessness and
correctional  facilities,  also  experienced  outbreaks  during  this  time.  As  of  2017,
meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine (Menomune) is no longer available in the United
States.  Three  quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccines  are  licensed  for  use  in
the United States: MenACWY-D (Menactra), MenACWY-CRM (Menveo), and MenACWY-TT
(MenQuadfi).  The  combination  Hib  and  bivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine,
Hib-MenCY  (MenHibrix),  is  no  longer  available  in  the  United  States.  Menactra  is
approved for use in persons age 9 months through 55 years, Menveo is approved for
use in persons age 2 months through 55 years, and MenQuadfi is approved for use in
persons  age  2  years  or  older.  Menveo  is  prepared  using  media  containing  yeast
extracts.  Quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccines  are  administered  by
intramuscular  injection  and  do  not  contain  an  adjuvant,  antibiotic,  or  preservative,
although  formaldehyde  is  added  during  the  manufacturing  process.  Two  recombinant

serogroup B meningococcal (MenB) vaccines are licensed for use in the United States:
MenB-FHbp (Trumenba) and MenB-4C (Bexsero). Trumenba and Bexsero are approved
for  use  in  persons  age  10  through  25  years  and  are  administered  by  intramuscular
injection.  Each  dose  of  Trumenba  and  Bexsero  contain  aluminum  as  an  adjuvant.
Bexsero contains kanamycin as an antibiotic.  Neither Trumenba nor Bexsero contain a
preservative. The tip caps of prefilled syringes of Bexsero contain latex. The Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  recommends  routine  vaccination  with
MenACWY vaccine for all adolescents at age 11 through 18 years, with the first dose at
age 11 or 12 years and a booster dose at age 16 years. For adolescents who receive
the  first  dose  at  age  13  through  15  years,  a  one-time  booster  dose  should  be
administered, preferably at age 16 through 18 years. Healthy persons who receive their
first routine dose of MenACWY vaccine at or after age 16 years do not need a booster
dose  unless  they  become  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease.  Routine
vaccination of healthy persons who are not at increased risk for meningococcal disease
is not recommended after age 21 years. ACIP also recommends vaccination for persons
age 2 months or older at increased risk for meningococcal disease due to serogroups A,
C, W, or Y. This recommendation includes: Infants and children who received Hib-MenCY
and are traveling to areas with high endemic rates of meningococcal disease are not
protected against serogroups A and W and should receive age-appropriate MenACWY
vaccine. MenQuadfi, but not Menactra or Menveo, is licensed for use in adults age 56
years or older. However, any of these vaccines can be used to vaccinate people in this
age  group  who  are  recommended  to  receive  quadrivalent  meningococcal  vaccine
because of increased risk for meningococcal disease. In children at increased risk for
meningococcal disease, Menactra should be given either before or at the same time as
DTaP  to  avoid  interference  with  the  immune  response  to  meningococcal  vaccine.  In
addition,  because  of  the  high  risk  for  invasive  pneumococcal  disease,  children  with
functional or anatomic asplenia or HIV infection should not be vaccinated with Menactra

before age 2 years to avoid interference with the immune response to pneumococcal
conjugate vaccine (PCV13). If Menactra is used in persons of any age with asplenia or
HIV, it should not be administered until at least 4 weeks after completion of all PCV13
doses.
 There
 are
 no
 similar
 constraints
 on
 Menveo
 or
 MenQuadfi
administration.  Booster  vaccination  is  recommended  for  persons  who  remain  at
increased  risk  of  meningococcal  disease.  If  the  most  recent  dose  was  received  at
younger than 7 years, a booster dose should be given after 3 years. If the most recent
dose was received at age 7 years or older, a booster dose should be administered after
5 years and every 5 years thereafter as long as the person remains at increased risk for
meningococcal  disease.  Menactra,  Menveo,  or  MenQuadfi  can  be  administered  at  the
same visit as other indicated vaccines with one exception. In persons with anatomic or
functional asplenia and/or HIV infection, Menactra and pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
(PCV13) should not be administered simultaneously. If the liquid C-W-Y component of
Menveo  is  administered  alone  (without  using  it  to  reconstitute  the  lyophilized  A
component),  revaccination  may  not  be  needed.  Serogroup  A  disease  is  rare  in  the
United States, so revaccination is not necessary if the person does not plan to travel
outside the United States. However, the person should be revaccinated with a properly
reconstituted dose of Menveo, or a dose of Menactra or MenQuadfi if they are traveling
internationally, especially if traveling to Africa. There is no minimum interval between
the  incomplete  dose  given  in  error  and  the  repeat  dose.  ACIP  recommends  MenB
vaccine for persons 10 years of age or older who are at increased risk of serogroup B
meningococcal  disease.  This  recommendation  includes  persons  with  persistent
complement
 component
 deficiencies,
 including
 persons
 taking
 eculizumab
 or
ravulizumab;  persons  who  have  anatomic  or  functional  asplenia,  including  sickle  cell
disease;  microbiologists  who  are  routinely  exposed  to  isolates  of  N.  meningitidis;  or
anyone  identified  by  public  health  officials  to  be  at  increased  risk  because  of  a
serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease  outbreak.  In  persons  at  increased  risk  for

serogroup  B  meningococcal  disease,  ACIP  recommends  either  a  2-dose  series  of
Bexsero at 0 and 1 month (or longer), or a 3-dose series of Trumenba at 0, 1 to 2, and 6
months. See the table for details on ACIP MenB vaccine recommendations for persons
at increased risk for meningococcal disease. If the second dose of Bexsero or Trumenba
dose is given earlier than the recommended interval, then the dose should be repeated
at  least  4  weeks  after  the  last  dose.  However,  if  the  second  dose  of  Trumenba  is
administered  at  an  interval  of  6  months  or  more,  a  third  dose  does  not  need  to  be
administered. If the third dose of Trumenba is administered earlier than 4 months after
the  second  dose,  the  dose  should  be  repeated  at  least  4  months  after  the  last  dose.
ACIP also recommends adolescents age 16 through 23 years receive MenB vaccine for
short-term protection against most strains of serogroup B meningococcal disease based
on shared clinical decision-making. The preferred age for vaccination is 16 through 18
years. In healthy adolescents, either a 2-dose series of Bexsero at 0 and 1 month (or
longer) or a 2-dose series of Trumenba at 0 and 6 months may be used. If the second
dose  of  Bexsero  is  given  earlier  than  the  recommended  interval,  the  dose  should  be
repeated  at  least  4  weeks  after  the  last  dose.  If  the  second  dose  of  Trumenba  is
administered  earlier  than  6  months  after  the  first  dose,  a  third  dose  should  be
administered at least 4 months after the second dose. Persons who have completed a
MenB  primary  series  and  who  become  or  remain  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal
disease are recommended to receive booster vaccination. For persons 10 years of age
or  older  with  complement  deficiency,  complement  inhibitor  use,  asplenia,  or  who  are
microbiologists  routinely  exposed  to  isolates,  ACIP  recommends  a  booster  dose  one
year following completion of a MenB primary series followed by booster doses every 2
to 3 years thereafter, for as long as increased risk remains. For persons 10 years of age
or older determined by public health officials to be at increased risk during a serogroup
B outbreak, ACIP recommends a one-time booster dose if it has been at least one year
since completion of the primary series. (A booster interval of at least six months may be

considered  by  public  health  officials  depending  on  the  specific  outbreak,  vaccination
strategy, and projected duration of elevated risk). Serogroup B meningococcal vaccine
may  be  administered  simultaneously  or  at  any  interval  with  other  live  or  inactivated
vaccines, including meningococcal conjugate vaccines. Trumenba and Bexsero are not
interchangeable. The same serogroup B meningococcal vaccine brand must be used for
all  doses  of  the  series.  If  doses  of  both  brands  have  been  administered  to  the  same
patient, the provider should ensure that the patient receives a complete series of either
brand and ignore any doses of the other brand. The next dose of the selected brand
should be given no sooner than the recommended interval after the previous dose of
the same brand AND at least 4 weeks after the last (or only) dose of the other brand.
ACIP  meningococcal  vaccine  recommendations  for  persons  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal disease (age 2 through 23 months) Age  Risk group MenACWY primary
series MenACWY booster dose MenB vaccine recommendation* MenB booster dose*   or
Menveo:  *Note  that  MenB-FHbp  and  MenB-4C  are  not  interchangeable;  the  same
vaccine  should  be  used  for  all  doses,  including  booster  doses.  †Revaccination  with
meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  is  recommended  after  3  years  for  children  who
received  their  last  dose  at  <7  years  of  age.  Revaccination  is  recommended  after  5
years  for  people  who  received  their  last  dose  at  ≥7  years  of  age,  and  every  5  years
thereafter for people at continued risk. ACIP meningococcal vaccine recommendations
for persons at increased risk for meningococcal disease (age 2 through 9 years) Age 
Risk  group  MenACWY  primary  series  MenACWY  booster  dose  MenB  vaccine
recommendation* MenB booster dose*   *Note that MenB-FHbp and MenB-4C are not
interchangeable;  the  same  vaccine  should  be  used  for  all  doses,  including  booster
doses.  †Menactra  must  be  administered  at  least  4  weeks  after  completion  of  PCV13
series. §Revaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine is recommended after 3
years  for  children  who  received  their  last  dose  at  <7  years  of  age.  Revaccination  is
recommended after 5 years for people who received their last dose at ≥7 years of age,

and every 5 years thereafter for people at continued risk. ACIP meningococcal vaccine
recommendations  for  persons  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  (age  10
years or older) Age  Risk group MenACWY primary series MenACWY booster dose MenB
vaccine recommendation* MenB booster dose* *Note that MenB-FHbp and MenB-4C are
not interchangeable; the same vaccine should be used for all doses, including booster
doses.  †Menactra  must  be  administered  at  least  4  weeks  after  completion  of  PCV13
series. §Revaccination with meningococcal conjugate vaccine is recommended after 3
years  for  children  who  received  their  last  dose  at  <7  years  of  age.  Revaccination  is
recommended after 5 years for people who received their last dose at ≥7 years of age,
and  every  5  years  thereafter  for  people  at  continued  risk.  In  clinical  trials,  the
immunogenicity of MenACWY vaccines was assessed as seroconversion rates, defined
as achieving a seroresponse at a predefined serum bactericidal antibody level for each
serogroup,  or  the  proportion  of  participants  with  a  fourfold  or  greater  increase  in
bactericidal  antibody  to  each  serogroup.  An  evaluation  of  MenACWY-D  effectiveness
(VE)  in  U.S.  adolescents  demonstrated  that  the  overall  effectiveness  is  69%  (51  to
80%).  Effectiveness  was  77%  (57  to  88%)  for  serogroup  C  and  51%  (1  to  76%)  for
serogroup Y. Effectiveness waned over time; VE was 79% (49 to 91%) within 1 year of
vaccination, 69% (44 to 83%) 1 to 2 years after vaccination, and 61% (25 to 79%) 3 to
8 years after vaccination. These results, along with antibody persistence data showing
waning  immunity  3  to  5  years  following  a  single  dose,  informed  the  ACIP
recommendation for a booster dose in adolescents at age 16 years following a primary
dose at age 11 or 12 years. For both Trumenba and Bexsero, antibody responses were
measured  by  serum  bactericidal  activity  using  human  complement  against  selected
meningococcal serogroup B strains. Immunogenicity was assessed as the proportion of
subjects who achieved a fourfold or greater increase in serum bactericidal activity using
human  complement  (hSBA)  titer  for  each  of  the  serogroup  B  strains  tested,  and  the
proportion of subjects who achieved a titer greater than or equal to the lower limit of

quantification of the assay for all strains (composite response). In a multicenter study
conducted among adolescents age 11 to 17 years in the United States, 81% of subjects
who  received  Trumenba  and  concomitant  quadrivalent  HPV  vaccine  (4vHPV)  had  a
composite  response,  and  84%  of  subjects  who  received  Trumenba  with  saline  had  a
composite  response.  In  a  randomized,  controlled  trial  in  the  United  Kingdom  among
college students age 18 to 24 years, 88% of recipients of both doses of Bexsero had a
composite response at one month following the second dose. At 11 months after the
second dose, 66% of recipients had a composite response. In a randomized, controlled
trial in Australia and Canada among adolescents age 11 to 17 years, 63% of recipients
had  a  composite  response  one  month  after  the  second  dose.  *Contraindication  for
MenACWY  vaccines  As  with  other  vaccines,  a  history  of  a  severe  allergic  reaction
(anaphylaxis) to a vaccine component or following a prior dose is a contraindication to
further doses.  Moderate or severe acute illness (with or without fever) in a patient is
considered  a  precaution  to  vaccination,  although  persons  with  minor  illness  may  be
vaccinated. Vaccination with MenACWY vaccine is contraindicated for persons who have
had  a  severe  allergic  reaction  (e.g.,  anaphylaxis)  after  any  the  following:  After
reviewing  safety  studies,  ACIP  voted  in  2010  to  remove  a  history  of  Guillain-Barré
syndrome (GBS) as a precaution for vaccination with any MenACWY vaccine including
Menactra.  However,  a  history  of  GBS  continues  to  be  listed  as  a  precaution  in  the
package insert for Menactra. For both Bexsero and Trumenba, severe allergic reaction
(e.g.,  anaphylaxis)  after  a  previous  dose  or  to  any  vaccine  component  is  a
contraindication for vaccination. Latex sensitivity is listed as a precaution for Bexsero
because the tip caps of the prefilled syringes contain natural rubber latex. Menveo is
prepared using media containing yeast extracts. To date, no randomized clinical trials
have  been  conducted  to  evaluate  use  of  MenACWY  or  MenB  vaccines  in  pregnant  or
lactating  women.  MenACWY  vaccines  are  recommended  for  lactating  women  if
otherwise  indicated.  ACIP  recommends  that  Bexsero  or  Trumenba  vaccination  of

pregnant women should be deferred unless the woman is at increased risk and, after
consultation with her health care provider, the benefits of vaccination are considered to
outweigh  the  potential  risks.  In  clinical  trials  of  Menactra,  the  most  common
injection-site reactions were pain (31% to 69%) and erythema (3% to 43%). The most
common systemic reactions in infants and children were irritability and drowsiness; in
adolescents and adults the most common were myalgia, headache, and fatigue. Most
symptoms were mild-to-moderate and resolved within three days. The Vaccine Adverse
Event  Reporting  System  (VAERS)  received  13,075  reports  for  Menactra  from  2005
through June 2016, during which time over 70 million Menactra doses were distributed.
The most commonly reported adverse events were injection site erythema, fever, and
headache.  Reported  adverse  events  were  consistent  with  the  findings  from
pre-licensure  studies,  and  no  new  safety  concerns  were  identified.  A  cohort  study  in
which 1.4 million doses of Menactra were administered found that Menactra vaccination
was associated with a small risk of syncope and medically-attended fever but identified
no  new  safety  concerns.  In  clinical  trials  of  Menveo,  the  most  common  injection-site
reactions  were  pain  (8%  to  54%)  and  erythema  (12%  to  39%).  The  most  common
systemic  reactions  in  infants  and  toddlers  were  irritability  and  sleepiness.  The  most
common in children were irritability, myalgia, headache, and sleepiness. In adolescents
and  adults,  myalgia,  headache,  and  fatigue  were  the  most  common.  Most  symptoms
were mild-to-moderate and resolved within three days. VAERS received 2,614 reports
for Menveo from 2010 through 2015, during which time 8.2 million Menveo doses were
distributed.  The  most  commonly  reported  adverse  events  were  consistent  with  the
findings  from  pre-licensure  studies,  and  no  new  safety  concerns  were  identified.  In  a
postlicensure  cohort  study  in  which  approximately  49,000  individuals  aged  11  to  21
years received Menveo, an increased risk of Bell’s palsy during the 84 days following
vaccination  was  observed  when  Menveo  was  administered  simultaneously  with  other
vaccines  but  not  when  Menveo  was  administered  alone.  However,  this  finding  was

based on only eight patients, several of whom had other conditions or infections that
might precede Bell’s palsy. The importance of this finding is uncertain. In clinical trials
of MenQuadfi, the most common injection-site reaction after the primary dose in all age
groups  was  pain  (26%  to  45%).  The  most  common  systemic  reactions  were  myalgia,
headache,  and  malaise.   Solicited  adverse  reactions  following  a  booster  dose  in
adolescents  and  adults  were  comparable  to  those  observed  following  primary
vaccination.  MenQuadfi  was  not  yet  in  use  at  the  time  of  this  publication  and
postlicensure  vaccine  safety  evaluations  will  be  performed.  In  clinical  trials  of
Trumenba,  the  most  common  local  reactions  were  injection  site  pain  (72%  to  93%),
induration  (21%  to  37%),  and  erythema  (10%  to  24%).  The  most  common  systemic
reactions were headache (27% to 67%), fatigue (30% to 66%), myalgia (21% to 40%),
and  arthralgia  (11%  to  33%).  Most  symptoms  were  mild-to-moderate  and  resolved
within five days. VAERS received 1,719 reports for Trumenba from 2014 through June
2018. The most commonly reported adverse events were fever, headache, and injection
site pain. Reported adverse events were consistent with the findings from pre-licensure
studies,  and  no  new  safety  concerns  were  identified.  Adverse  events  following
Trumenba  were  also  evaluated  during  a  mass  vaccination  campaign  on  a  university
campus  in  which  over  10,000  doses  were  administered;  rates  of  injection  site  pain,
fatigue, myalgia, fevers, and chills were similar to those reported during clinical trials.
In clinical trials of Bexsero, the most common local reactions were injection site pain
(82% to 98%), erythema (35% to 68%), swelling (26% to 47%), and induration (10% to
48%).  The  most  common  systemic  reactions  were  headache  (21%  to  65%),  fatigue
(18%  to  73%),  myalgia  (17%  to  75%),  and  arthralgia  (8%  to  42%).  VAERS  received
1,470 reports for Bexsero from 2015 through June 2018. The most commonly reported
adverse  events  were  injection  site  pain,  fever,  and  headache;  transient  decreased
mobility of the arm where Bexsero was injected was also disproportionately reported.
Otherwise,  reported  adverse  events  were  consistent  with  the  findings  from

pre-licensure  studies,  and  no  new  safety  concerns  were  identified.  Adverse  events
following  Bexsero  were  also  evaluated  during  several  mass  vaccination  campaigns  in
the  United  States  and  Canada.  The  most  commonly  reported  adverse  events  were
consistent with findings based on clinical trial data (e.g., fever, injection site pain, arm
pain),  and  0.88  syncopal  events  per  1,000  persons  were  observed  in  the  U.S.
evaluation.  MenACWY  (Menactra,  Menveo  and  MenQuadfi)  and  MenB  (Bexsero  and
Trumenba)  should  be  maintained  at  refrigerator  temperature  between  2°C  and  8°C
(36°F and 46°F).  Whenever possible, the lyophilized and liquid components of Menveo
should be stored together. The MenA (lyophilized) component of Menveo should only be
reconstituted using the liquid C-W-Y component of Menveo. No other vaccine or diluent
can  be  used  for  this  purpose.  The  reconstituted  vaccine  should  be  used  immediately
but  may  be  held  at  or  below  25°C  (77°F)  for  up  to  8  hours.  Manufacturer  package
inserts  contain  additional  information.  For  complete  information  on  storage  and
handling best practices and recommendations, please refer to CDC’s Vaccine Storage
and Handling Toolkit [65 pages]. Meningococcal disease is a reportable condition in all
states.  Healthcare  personnel  should  immediately  report  any  case  of  invasive
meningococcal disease to local and state health departments. This is essential so that
antimicrobial  chemoprophylaxis  can  be  rapidly  administered  to  close  contacts  of  the
case.  For  guidance  for  state  and  local  health  department  staff  who  are  involved  in
surveillance activities for vaccine-preventable diseases, please consult the Manual for
the  Surveillance  of  Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  The  editors  wish  to  acknowledge
Jennifer  Hamborsky,  Susan  Hariri,  and  Andrew  Kroger  for  their  contributions  to  this
chapter. CDC. Guidance for the Evaluation and Public Health Management of Suspected
Outbreaks  of  Meningococcal  Disease  [16  pages].  Version  2.0.  2019.   Accessed
September 1, 2020. CDC.  Meningococcal Disease – Surveillance. Accessed September
13,  2020.  CDC.  Meningococcal  Vaccination:  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices,  United  States,  2020.  MMWR  2020;69(9):1–41.

CDC.  Recommendations  for  Use  of  Meningococcal  Conjugtae  Vaccines  in  HIV-Infected
Persons—Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices,  2016.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal
Wkly Rep 2016;65(43):1189-94. CDC. Updated Recommendations for Use of MenB-FHbp
Serogroup  B  Meningococcal  Vaccine—Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices,
2016.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  2017;66(19):509-13.  CDC.  Use  of  Serogroup  B
Meningococcal  Vaccines  in  Adolescents  and  Young  Adults:  Recommendations  of  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices,  2015.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep
2015;64:1171–6.  CDC.  Use  of  Serogroup  B  Meningococcal  Vaccines  in  Persons  Aged
≥10 Years at Increased Risk for Serogroup B Meningococcal Disease: Recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep  2015;64(22):608–12.  Harrison  L,  Granoff  D,  Pollard  A.  Meningococcal  Capsular
Group  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  Conjugate  Vaccines.   In:  Plotkin  S,  Orenstein  W,  Offit  P,  eds.
Plotkin’s  Vaccines.  7th  ed.  Elsevier;  2018:619–43.  Granoff  D,  Pollard  A,  Harrison  L.
Meningococcal Capsular Group B Vaccines. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, Offit PA, eds.
Plotkin’s  Vaccines.  7th  ed.  Elsevier;  2018:644–62.  McNamara  L,  Blain.  Meningococcal
Disease.  In:  Roush  S,  Baldy  L,  Kirkconnell  Hall  M,  eds.  Manual  for  the  Surveillance  of
Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  Page  last  reviewed  December  2019.  Accessed
September
 1,
 2020.
 McNamara
 L,
 Potts
 C,
 Blain
 A,
 et
 al.
 Detection
 of
Ciprofloxacin-Resistant,  β-Lactamase–Producing  Neisseria  meningitidis  Serogroup  Y
Isolates — United States, 2019–2020. MMWR 2020;69(24):735–9.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/mening.html
