Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites.  The number of reported cases of congenital syphilis (CS) has
increased every year since 2012 in the United States. From 2017 to 2021, the CS rate
increased 219% from 24.4 to 77.9 cases per 100,000 live births.1 CS prevention relies
on  screening  and  treatment  of  pregnant  women  found  to  have  syphilis.  Many  states’
laws  require  syphilis  testing  of  pregnant  women.  State  policies  regarding  prenatal
syphilis  screening  may  be  one  way  to  address  rising  CS  rates  through  increased
screening. This webpage includes the text of state laws requiring screening of pregnant
women for syphilis in the United States. The method for performing the legal analysis
underlying  the  information  on  this  page  is  based  on  a  2018  peer  reviewed
article published in the Maternal and Child Health Journal.2 This webpage expands on
that  article  through  regularly  updated  legal  assessments.  The  most  recent  legal
assessment was in November 2023. To better understand these policies, you can also
review the text of the laws underlying the analysis, which are included on this page. 
Disclaimer:  The  information  on  this  web  page  does  not  represent  the  official  legal
positions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention/HHS, or state and local governments, and is not meant
to provide specific legal advice. Users of this web page should consult with their official
state and local legal counsel for specific legal advice and guidance. X = Screening
Required O = Screening Required only if at increased risk  Each licensed physician and
in  the  absence  of  a  licensed  physician  each  licensed  graduate  nurse  who  attends  a
pregnant woman for conditions relating to the pregnancy during the period of gestation
or at delivery shall take, or have taken, a sample of the blood of the woman at the time
of  the  woman’s  first  professional  visit  or  within  10  days  after  the  visit,  unless  the
serological test is contrary to the tenets or practice of the religious creed of which the

woman  is  an  adherent.  The  blood  specimen  shall  be  submitted  to  an  approved
laboratory  or  clinic  for  a  standard  serological  test  of  syphilis.  Any  other  person
permitted  by  law  to  attend  pregnant  women  but  not  permitted  by  law  to  take  blood
samples shall have a sample of blood taken by a licensed physician, or on order of a
licensed physician, and shall submit the sample to an approved laboratory or clinic for a
standard serological test for syphilis. A licensed physician or licensed nurse attending a
pregnant woman during the period of gestation or at delivery, or a representative of a
laboratory or clinic who violates AS 18.15.150 – 18.15.180 is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine of not more than $500. However, a person
attending a pregnant woman during the period of gestation or at delivery, who requests
the  specimen  in  accordance  with  AS  18.15.150,  and  whose  request  is  refused,  is  not
guilty  of  a  misdemeanor.  For  the  purposes  of  AS  18.15.150  –  18.15.180  a  standard
serological  test  is  a  test  for  syphilis  approved  by  the  department  and  shall  be
performed  in  a  laboratory  or  clinic  approved  by  the  department.  On  request  the
laboratory  test  required  by  AS  18.15.150  –  18.15.180  shall  be  performed  without
charge at the laboratories of the department. The blood specimen thus obtained shall
be submitted to an approved laboratory for a standard laboratory test for syphilis. Any
licensed  physician  and  surgeon,  or  other  person  engaged  in  attendance  upon  a
pregnant woman or a recently delivered woman, or any representative of a laboratory
who  violates  any  provision  of  this  chapter,  is  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor.  However,  a
licensed  physician  and  surgeon,  or  other  person  engaged  in  attendance  upon  a
pregnant or recently delivered woman, whose request for a specimen is refused, is not
guilty of a misdemeanor for failure to obtain it. The Maternal and Child Health Program
Act (Section 27) shall not apply if the pregnant woman objects to the test required by
that act on the ground that the test conflicts with her religious beliefs or practices. Any
licensed  physician  and  surgeon  or  other  person  engaged  in  attendance  upon  a
pregnant woman during the period of gestation or at delivery or any representative of a

laboratory  who  violates  the  provisions  of  this  part  2  is  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  and,
upon  conviction  thereof,  shall  be  punished  by  a  fine  of  not  more  than  three  hundred
dollars. Every licensed physician and surgeon or other person engaged in attendance
upon a pregnant woman during the period of gestation or at delivery who requests such
specimen in accordance with the provisions of section 25-4-201 and whose request is
refused is not guilty of a misdemeanor. 6.1 During prenatal care, the midwife or other
licensed  health  care  provider  shall  follow  a  regular  schedule  of  prenatal  care  with
increasing frequency towards term. The responsibilities of the midwife during this time
include:  6.1.1  Initial  Prenatal  Visit:  6.1.1.1  History  and  assessment  of  general  health;
6.1.1.2 History and assessment of obstetric and psychosocial status; 6.1.1.3 Discussion
of current CDC recommendations for immunization during pregnancy; 6.1.1.4 Physical
Exam, including: 6.1.1.4.1 Height; 6.1.1.4.2 Weight; 6.1.1.4.3 Blood pressure; 6.1.1.4.4
Pulse; 6.1.1.4.5 Breast exam; 6.1.1.4.6 Abdomen, to include fundal height, fetal heart
tones,  fetal  lie,  and  presentation;  6.1.1.4.7  Estimation  of  gestational  age;  6.1.1.4.8
Assessment  of  varicosities,  edema,  and  reflexes.  6.1.1.5  The  midwife  must  complete
the  following  laboratory  tests  at  the  initial  prenatal  visit:  6.1.1.5.1  Hemoglobin  or
hematocrit  or  CBC;  6.1.1.5.2  Urinalysis  for  protein  and  glucose;  6.1.1.5.3  Syphilis
serology;  6.1.1.5.4  Blood  group,  Rh  type,  and  antibody  screen;  6.1.1.5.5  Hepatitis  B
surface antigen; 6.1.1.5.6 Rubella screen; 6.1.1.5.7 Gonorrhea test; 6.1.1.5.8 Chlamydia
test;  6.1.1.5.9  HIV  test;  6.1.1.5.10  Urine  culture.  6.1.1.6  The  midwife  must  provide
appropriate  prophylactic  antibiotic  therapy  for  GBS  positive  clients  pursuant  to  CDC
guidelines. 6.1.1.7 The midwife should consider genetic testing, urine drug screen, and
Hepatitis  C  testing  as  indicated.  6.1.2  On-going  Prenatal  Care:  6.1.2.1  Assessment  of
general  health;  6.1.2.2  Assessment  of  psychosocial  health;  6.1.2.3  Nutritional
counseling;  6.1.2.4  Physical  Exam  to  include,  but  not  limited  to:  6.1.2.4.1  Blood
pressure;  6.1.2.4.2  Weight;  6.1.2.4.3  Abdomen,  to  include  fundal  height,  fetal  heart
tones,  fetal  lie,  and  presentation;  6.1.2.4.4  Estimation  of  gestational  age  by  physical

findings; 6.1.2.4.5 Assessment of varicosities, edema and reflexes. 6.1.2.5 The midwife
must  offer  the  following  laboratory  tests:  6.1.2.5.1  Hemoglobin,  hematocrit,  or  CBC
between 28 and 32 weeks; 6.1.2.5.2 Gross urinalysis for protein and glucose at each
visit;  6.1.2.5.3  Glucose  Tolerance  Test;  6.1.2.5.4  Group  Beta  Strep  (GBS)  cultures,
according  to  CDC  guidelines.  If  penicillin  allergic,  determine  antibiotics  to  which  the
strain  of  GBS  carried  by  the  client  is  sensitive  and  treat  appropriately  during  labor;
6.1.2.5.5  Herpes  (HSV  1  or  HSV  2)  cultures,  if  indicated;  6.1.2.5.6  Prophylactic
Rh-immune  globulin  information  for  Rh  negative  clients;  6.1.2.5.7  Urine  Drug  Screen.
205.1 Unless the person in charge of a case of pregnancy includes in the patient’s case
history  a  written  statement  giving  the  medical  reasons  why  a  serological  test  for
syphilis  and  a  laboratory  test  for  gonorrhea  performed  at  the  times  specified  in  this
section would be harmful to the patient, that person shall include both of these tests in
the management of the case at the first visit of that patient’s pregnancy is established
as a certainty. 205.2 When it is determined that tests for syphilis and gonorrhea have
been  performed  within  thirty  (30)  days  before  the  visit  at  which  pregnancy  is
established, the serological test need not be performed at that time. 205.3 Any person
in  charge  of  a  case  of  pregnancy  during  the  last  trimester  shall  include  in  the
management  of  the  case  a  serological  test  for  syphilis  and  a  laboratory  test  for
gonorrhea,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  either  or  both  tests  have  already  been
performed during the pregnancy. 205.4 Any person required by the provisions of this
section to make a written report of a case of venereal disease shall submit the report to
the Director in a sealed envelope, marked “Confidential.” 205.5 The name of the person
reported  as  having  a  case  of  venereal  disease  may  be  referred  to  by  number.  205.6
Whenever the person reporting a case of venereal disease elects to report by number
instead  of  by  name,  a  record  shall  be  kept  of  the  case  in  the  files  of  the  person
reporting under the same number for a period of not less than three (3) years from the
date of diagnosis. 205.7 The record required in § 205.6 shall be made available to the

Director  upon  request.  205.8  The  reports  and  records  incident  to  a  case  of  venereal
disease shall be used for statistical and public health purposes only, and the Director
shall not disclose the identity of the person so reported except under order of a court or
with  the  written  permission  of  the  person.  Every  person,  including  every  physician
licensed under chapter 458 or chapter 459 or midwife licensed under part I of chapter
464 or chapter 467, attending a pregnant woman for conditions relating to pregnancy
during  the  period  of  gestation  and  delivery  shall  cause  the  woman  to  be  tested  for
sexually transmissible diseases, including HIV, as specified by department rule. Testing
shall be performed by a laboratory appropriately certified by the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services under the federal Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments
and  the  federal  rules  adopted  thereunder  for  such  purposes.  The  woman  shall  be
informed  of  the  tests  that  will  be  conducted  and  of  her  right  to  refuse  testing.  If  a
woman objects to testing, a written statement of objection, signed by the woman, shall
be placed in the woman’s medical record and no testing shall occur. The department
may require every pregnant woman to submit to a standard serologic test, as defined
by  the  department,  and  may  require  any  person  attending  or  giving  prenatal  care  to
such woman to take or cause to be taken a blood specimen for use in such test. Such
specimens  shall  be  submitted  for  laboratory  testing  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the
department;  and  all  laboratories  conducting  such  tests  shall  comply  with  the  rules,
regulations,  and  reporting  requirements  prescribed  therefor[sic]  by  the  department.
Every physician attending a pregnant woman in the State for conditions relating to the
woman’s pregnancy during the period of gestation or at delivery, shall, in the case of
every woman so attended, take or cause to be taken one or more samples of the blood
of  the  woman,  except  when  the  attending  physician  shall  have  evidence  that  a
pregnant  woman  has  met  this  requirement  through  a  previous  test  for  syphilis,  and
shall submit such samples to an approved laboratory for a standard serologic test for
syphilis. Every other person permitted by law to attend pregnant women in the State,

but not permitted by law to take blood samples, shall cause one or more samples of the
blood of every pregnant woman attended by the person to be taken by a duly licensed
physician  or  state  certified  laboratory,  or  any  other  person  permitted  by  law  to
withdraw blood and shall have the samples submitted to an approved laboratory for a
standard serologic test for syphilis. The samples of blood shall be taken at such times
during the period of gestation as are designated by rules adopted by the department of
health.  Every  pregnant  woman  shall  permit  the  sample  of  the  woman’s  blood  to  be
taken as hereinabove provided. Every licensed physician attending a pregnant woman
for a condition relating to her pregnancy, or at delivery, or after delivery for a condition
relating to her pregnancy, shall in the case of every woman so attended, take or cause
to be taken a sample of blood of such woman at the time of first examination or within
fifteen  (15)  days  thereafter,  and  shall  submit  such  sample  to  the  laboratory  of  the
department  of  health  and  welfare  or  to  a  laboratory  approved  by  the  director  of  the
department,  for  a  standard  serological  test  for  syphilis.  In  submitting  such  sample  to
the  laboratory,  the  physician  shall  specify  whether  it  is  for  a  prenatal  test  or  a  test
following recent delivery. The laboratory of the department of health and welfare shall
analyze such sample upon the request of any licensed physician and may collect a fee
for  the  performance  of  such  analyses.  Every  other  person  attending  a  pregnant  or
recently delivered woman in the state, but not permitted by law to take blood samples,
shall within fifteen (15) days of the first examination cause a sample of blood of such
woman  to  be  taken  by  a  licensed  physician  and  have  the  sample  submitted  to  the
laboratory of the state department of health and welfare for a standard serological test
for  syphilis,  or  to  a  laboratory  approved  by  said  board.  Any  person  who  violates  the
provisions  of  sections  39-1001–39-1006  shall  be  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor;  provided,
however, that every licensed physician or other person attending a pregnant or recently
delivered  woman,  who  requests  such  sample  in  accordance  with  the  provisions
of  sections  39-1001–39-1006,  and  whose  request  is  refused,  shall  not  be  guilty  of  a

misdemeanor.  The  Division  of  Family  Health,  Department  of  Public  Health,  State  of
Illinois, through its Maternal and Child Health Program may allocate funds for programs
providing  health  services  for  women  of  reproductive  age.  All  such  services  must  be
delivered  based  upon  the  standards  of  the  American  College  of  Obstetrics  and
Gynecology  set  forth  in  Section  630.80(a)(5),  Family  Planning  Services  Code  (77  Ill.
Adm. Code 635.90), Regionalized Perinatal Health Care Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 640),
and  Hospital  Licensing  Requirements  (77  Ill.  Adm.  Code  250.1810-1860)  (See  Section
630.80(a)(5)).  One  or  more  of  the  following  MCH  services  may  be  included  in
application proposals for Title V and State MCH Project grant funds: Sec. 10. A physician
who diagnoses a pregnancy of a woman shall take or cause to be taken a sample of
blood:  and  shall  submit  each  sample  to  an  approved  laboratory  for  a  standard
serological test for syphilis. Sec. 11. A person other than a physician who is permitted
by  law  to  attend  a  pregnant  woman,  but  who  is  not  permitted  by  law  to  take  blood
specimens, shall cause a sample of the blood of the pregnant woman to be taken by a
licensed  physician,  who  shall  submit  the  sample  to  an  approved  laboratory  for  a
standard serological test for syphilis. Sec. 12. If at the time of delivery positive evidence
is not available to show that standard serological tests for syphilis have been made in
accordance  with  section  10  of  this  chapter,  the  person  in  attendance  at  the  delivery
shall take or cause to be taken a sample of the blood of the woman at the time of the
delivery  and  shall  submit  the  sample  to  an  approved  laboratory  for  a  standard
serological  test  for  syphilis.  The  department  shall  adopt  rules  which  incorporate  the
prenatal guidelines established by the centers for disease control and prevention of the
United  States  department  of  health  and  human  services  as  the  state  guidelines  for
prenatal testing and care relative to infectious disease. A provision of this chapter shall
not be construed to require or compel any person to take or follow a course of medical
treatment prescribed by law or a health care provider if the person is an adherent or
member  of  a  church  or  religious  denomination  and  in  accordance  with  the  tenets  or

principles  of  the  person’s  church  or  religious  denomination  the  person  opposes  the
specific course of medical treatment. However, such person while in an infectious stage
of  disease  shall  be  subject  to  isolation  and  such  other  measures  appropriate  for  the
prevention of the spread of the disease to other persons.  1.18(1) Purpose. Iowa Code
section 263.8 and 681—subrule 5.3(1) provide that the state hygienic laboratory shall
perform
 without
 charge
 all
 bacteriological,
 serological,
 and
 epidemiological
examinations and investigations which are required by the department and established
in rule, including specimens relating to diseases communicable from human to human
and  from  animals  to  human  and  any  specimen  when  there  is  probable  cause  that  a
direct  threat  to  public  health  exists.  The  purpose  of  this  rule  is  to  designate  those
examinations which shall be performed by the state hygienic laboratory without charge
pursuant to these legal authorities. 1.18(2) Acute infectious diseases. Regardless of the
entity that submits the specimen, the following examinations shall be performed by the
state  hygienic  laboratory  without  charge:  1.18(3)  Sexually  transmitted  disease  and
infections  and  HIV/AIDS.  The  following  examinations  shall  be  performed  by  the  state
hygienic laboratory without charge if the following defined criteria have been met and if
the  specimen  was  sent  to  the  state  hygienic  laboratory  from  sites  approved  by  and
submitted  to  the  laboratory  by  the  department:  Each  physician  or  other  person
attending  a  pregnant  woman  in  this  state  during  gestation,  with  the  consent  of  such
woman,  shall  take  or  cause  to  be  taken  a  sample  of  blood  of  such  woman  within  14
days  after  diagnosis  of  pregnancy  is  made.  Such  sample  shall  be  submitted  for
serological  tests  which  meet  the  standards  recognized  by  the  United  States  public
health service for the detection of syphilis and hepatitis b to a laboratory approved by
the  secretary  of  health  and  environment  for  such  serological  tests.  Any  state,  United
States public health service, or United States army, navy or air force laboratory or any
laboratory approved by the state health agency of the state in which the laboratory is
operated shall be considered approved for the purposes of this act. Any laboratory in

this  state,  performing  the  tests  required  by  this  section  shall  make  a  report  to  the
secretary of health and environment of all positive or reactive tests on forms provided
by  the  secretary  of  health  and  environment  and  also  shall  make  a  report  of  the  test
results  to  the  submitting  physician  or  person  attending  the  woman.  Laboratory
statements,  reports,  files  and  records  prepared  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be
confidential and shall not be divulged to or open to inspection by any person other than
state or local health officers or their duly authorized representatives, except by written
consent of the woman. Every physician attending a woman in the State by reason of
her being pregnant during gestation shall in the case of every woman so attended take
or cause to be taken, with her consent, a sample of blood of such woman, and submit
such sample for a standard serological test for syphilis and Rh factors to a laboratory of
the  department  or  to  a  laboratory  approved  for  these  tests  by  the  department.  Such
laboratory  tests  as  are  required  by  sections  1231  to  1234  must  be  made  on  request
without  charge  by  the  department.  (a)  This  section  does  not  apply  to  a  woman  who
objects to a standard serological syphilis test because the test is against the religious
beliefs  and  practices  of  the  woman.  (b)(1)  The  individual  attending  a  woman  for
pregnancy shall submit to a medical laboratory: (2) The medical laboratory to which a
blood sample is submitted shall do a standard serological syphilis test that is approved
by  the  Department.  A  physician  attending  a  pregnant  woman  in  this  commonwealth
during gestation shall take or cause to be taken a sample of blood of such woman at
the time of first examination, and shall submit such sample for a standard serological
test for syphilis to a laboratory of the department or to a laboratory approved for such
test  by  the  department;  provided,  that  not  more  than  one  physician  attending  a
pregnant woman during gestation shall be required to comply with the provisions of this
section. Sec. 5123. (1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3), a physician or an
individual  otherwise  authorized  by  law  to  provide  medical  treatment  to  a  pregnant
woman shall take or cause to be taken at the time of the woman’s initial examination

test specimens of the woman for the purpose of performing tests for HIV, syphilis, and
hepatitis B, and take or cause to be taken during the third trimester of the woman’s
pregnancy  test  specimens  of  the  woman  for  the  purpose  of  performing  tests  for  HIV,
hepatitis  B,  and  syphilis  in  accordance  with  guidelines  established  by  the  federal
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and shall submit the specimens to a clinical
laboratory approved by the department for the purpose of performing tests approved
by  the  department  for  the  infections  described  in  this  subsection.  (2)  Except  as
otherwise provided in subsection (3), if, when a woman appears at a health care facility
to  deliver  an  infant  or  for  care  in  the  immediate  postpartum  period  having  recently
delivered  an  infant  outside  a  health  care  facility,  no  record  of  results  from  the  tests
required  under  subsection  (1)  is  readily  available  to  the  physician  or  individual
otherwise authorized to provide care in such a setting, then the physician or individual
otherwise authorized to provide care shall take or cause to be taken test specimens of
the  woman  and  shall  submit  the  specimens  to  a  clinical  laboratory  approved  by  the
department  for  the  purpose  of  performing  tests  approved  by  the  department  for
syphilis,  HIV,  and  hepatitis  B.  (3)  Subsections  (1)  and  (2)  do  not  apply  if,  in  the
professional opinion of a physician, the tests are medically inadvisable or the woman
does  not  consent  to  be  tested.  The  woman  may  orally  communicate  her  decision  to
decline  the  testing.  (4)  The  physician  or  other  individual  described  in  subsections  (1)
and  (2)  shall  make  and  retain  a  record  showing  the  date  the  tests  required  under
subsections (1) and (2) were ordered and the results of the tests. If the tests were not
ordered  by  the  physician  or  other  person,  the  record  must  contain  an  explanation  of
why  the  tests  were  not  ordered.  (5)  The  test  results  and  the  records  required  under
subsection (4) are not public records, but are available to a local health department and
to  a  physician  who  provides  medical  treatment  to  the  woman  or  her  offspring.
Subdivision 1. Practice standards. Subd. 2. Written plan. A licensed traditional midwife
must  prepare  a  written  plan  with  each  client  to  ensure  continuity  of  care  throughout

pregnancy, labor, and delivery. The written plan must incorporate the conditions under
which the medical consultation plan, including the transfer of care or transport of the
client, may be implemented. Subd. 3. Health regulations. A licensed traditional midwife
must  comply  with  all  applicable  state  and  municipal  requirements  regarding  public
health.  Subd.  4.  Client  records.  A  licensed  traditional  midwife  must  maintain  a  client
record on each client, including: Subd. 5. Data. All records maintained on each client by
a licensed traditional midwife are subject to sections 144.291 to 144.298. Any licensed
physician,  midwife,  registered  nurse  and  all  persons  who  may  undertake,  in  a
professional way, the obstetrical and gynecological care of pregnant women in the state
of Missouri, who shall publish in any manner not required by law the result of said blood
tests,  or  who,  if  a  blood  test  is  made,  fails  to  follow  the  provisions  of  sections
210.030  to  210.060  or  who  misrepresents  the  facts  required  to  be  reported  in  said
sections, shall, on conviction, be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor, and be punished by
imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year, or by a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to meeting the
eligibility criteria for client screening established by the board pursuant to 37-27-105, a
direct-entry midwife shall recommend that patients secure the following services by an
appropriate  health  care  provider:  The  district  court  within  the  county  wherein  any
person affected by this part resides may waive the requirements of this part as to the
person if the judge is satisfied, by affidavit or other proof, that the tests required by the
part are contrary to the tenets or practices of the religious creed of which the applicant
is  an  adherent  and  that  the  public  health  and  welfare  will  not  be  injuriously  affected
thereby. Every physician attending pregnant women in the State for conditions relating
to their pregnancy during the period of gestation and/or at delivery shall, in the case of
every woman so attended, take or cause to be taken a sample of blood of such woman
at the time of first examination and take or cause to be taken a sample of blood of the
woman or from the umbilical cord of the infant at the time of delivery of a live infant,

and shall submit such sample to an approved laboratory for a standard serological test
for  syphilis.  Every  other  person  permitted  by  law  to  attend  pregnant  women  in  the
State, but not permitted by law to take blood samples, shall cause a sample of blood of
such pregnant women or postpartum woman or infant, as the case may be, to be taken
by a physician duly licensed to practice medicine and surgery and have such sample
submitted to an approved laboratory for a standard serological test for syphilis. For the
purpose of this act a standard serological test shall be a test for syphilis approved by
the State Department of Health, and shall be made at a laboratory licensed in syphilis
serology  by  the  department,  or  by  a  laboratory  in  this  State  approved  to  make  such
tests  by  said  department,  or  at  a  laboratory  outside  this  State  approved  by  said
department, or the health department of the state or territory of the United States or
District of Columbia wherein it is located, or at a laboratory of the Armed Forces of the
United States or the United States Public Health Services. Such laboratory tests as are
required  by  this  act  may,  at  the  option  of  the  department,  be  performed  in  the
laboratories  of  the  State  Department  of  Health  without  charge.  Every  responsible
physician or birth attendant shall acquire from all infants born, whether alive or dead
after 22 weeks gestation, a sample of blood from the umbilical cord and submit it to an
approved laboratory for standard serological tests for syphilis. If body blood from the
mother is tested for syphilis at the time of birth, the cord blood test requirement shall
be  waived  if  the  infant’s  body  blood  is  tested  after  any  positive  test  result  of  the
mother’s  blood.  *10  NYCRR  69-2.2  requires  testing  of  the  infant’s  cord  blood  at
delivery.  While this law did not meet our coding criteria of being a test of the woman, it
may  nevertheless  be  relevant  for  purposes  of  congenital  syphilis  prevention.   If  any
pregnant woman is attended during the period of gestation by any person authorized to
attend pregnant women, other than a licensed physician, but who is not permitted to
take test specimens, then such authorized person shall notify immediately the health
commissioner  of  the  city  or  general  health  district  of  the  residence  of  such  pregnant

woman. The health commissioner shall cause the test specimens to be taken of such
pregnant  woman  for  the  purpose  of  the  standard  syphilis  and  gonorrhea  tests.  Such
taking of specimens is subject to section 3701.50 of the Revised Code relating to the
condition of the pregnant woman. Every physician who attends any pregnant woman
for conditions relating to pregnancy during the period of gestation shall take specimens
of  such  woman  at  the  time  of  first  examination  or  within  ten  days  thereof,  and  shall
submit such specimens to an approved laboratory for standard syphilis and gonorrhea
tests. If, in the opinion of the physician attending such woman, her condition does not
permit  the  taking  of  specimens  for  submission  to  an  approved  laboratory,  then  no
specimens shall be taken prior to delivery. If no specimens are taken prior to delivery
because of the woman’s condition, then such specimens shall be taken as soon after
delivery  as  the  physician  deems  it  advisable.  The  health  commissioner  of  the  city  or
general  health  district,  wherein  any  person  required  to  be  tested  for  syphilis  and
gonorrhea  under  this  section  or  section  3701.49  of  the  Revised  Code  resides,  may
waive  the  requirements  of  such  sections  if  the  commissioner  is  satisfied  by  written
affidavit  or  other  written  proof  that  the  tests  required  are  contrary  to  the  tenets  or
practices of the religious creed of which the person is an adherent, and that the public
health  and  welfare  would  not  be  injuriously  affected  by  such  waiver.  None  of  the
provisions of this act shall apply to any person who, as an exercise of religious freedom,
administers to or treats the sick or suffering by spiritual means or prayer, nor to any
person who, because of religious belief, in good faith selects and depends upon such
spiritual means or prayer for the treatment or cure of disease. It shall be the duty of
every physician engaged in prenatal attendance upon a pregnant woman to obtain a
blood  specimen  of  that  pregnant  woman  within  thirty  (30)  days  after  the  first
professional visit. That blood specimen shall be submitted to the laboratory of the state
department  of  health,  or  to  a  laboratory  approved  by  the  department,  for  the
performance of a Wassermann or other standard laboratory blood test for syphilis. Any

violation  of  the  provisions  of  this  section  shall  constitute  a  misdemeanor  and  that
physician shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars  ($100)  for  each  offense.  Every  physician  attending  a  pregnant  woman  in  the
State  for  conditions  relating  to  her  pregnancy  during  the  period  of  gestation  or  at
delivery  shall,  in  the  case  of  every  woman  so  attended,  take  or  cause  to  be  taken  a
sample of blood of such woman at the time of his first examination or within three days
thereafter  and  shall  submit  such  sample  to  an  approved  laboratory  for  a  standard
serological test for syphilis, rubella, Rh factor and a hemoglobin determination, if the
latter test is not performed by the physician’s staff. Such an approved laboratory must
participate in an appropriate proficiency testing program approved by the Department
of Health and Environmental Control. Every person, other than a physician, permitted
by law to attend pregnant women in the State, but not permitted by law to take blood
samples, shall cause a sample of blood of each such pregnant woman to be taken by a
physician duly licensed to practice medicine and surgery, registered nurse, laboratory
technician  or  other  person  authorized  to  take  blood  for  blood  tests  and  have  such
sample submitted to an approved laboratory for a standard serological test for syphilis,
rubella, Rh factor and a hemoglobin determination, if the latter test is not performed by
the physician’s staff. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall
be  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  and,  upon  conviction,  shall  be  punished  by  a  fine  of  not
more  than  one  hundred  dollars  or  imprisonment  for  not  more  than  thirty  days.  The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who submits a sworn affidavit
stating that she objects to the tests herein required on grounds such tests conflict with
her religious tenets or beliefs. Each physician attending a pregnant woman in this state
during  gestation  shall,  in  the  case  of  each  woman  so  attended,  take  or  cause  to  be
taken a sample of blood of such woman at the time of the first examination, and submit
such  sample  for  standard  serological  tests  for  syphilis  to  the  Office  of  Laboratory
Services or such other laboratories cooperating with, and approved by, the Department

of  Health.  Every  person  other  than  a  physician  permitted  by  law  to  attend  upon
pregnant women in the state but not permitted by law to take blood tests, shall cause a
sample of the blood of such pregnant woman to be taken by a duly licensed physician
and  submitted  for  standard  serological  tests  for  syphilis  to  the  Office  of  Laboratory
Services or such other laboratories cooperating with, and approved by, the Department
of Health. (a) A physician or other person permitted by law to attend a pregnant woman
during  gestation  or  at  delivery  of  an  infant  shall:  (a-1)  A  physician  or  other  person
permitted  by  law  to  attend  a  pregnant  woman  during  gestation  or  at  delivery  of  an
infant  shall:  (b)  A  successor  is  presumed  to  have  complied  with  this  section  if  the
successor in good faith obtains a record that indicates compliance with Subsections (a)
and (a-1), if applicable. (c) A physician or other person in attendance at a delivery shall:
(c-1) If the physician or other person in attendance at the delivery does not find in the
woman’s medical records results from the diagnostic test for syphilis and HIV infection
performed under Subsection (a-1), the physician or person shall: (c-2) If the physician or
other person responsible for the newborn child does not find in the woman’s medical
records  results  from  a  diagnostic  test  for  syphilis  and  HIV  infection  performed  under
Subsection  (a-1),  and  the  diagnostic  test  for  syphilis  and  HIV  infection  was  not
performed  before  delivery  under  Subsection  (c-1),  the  physician  or  other  person
responsible for the newborn child shall: (d) Repealed by Acts 2009, 81st Leg., ch. 1124,
§ 7. (e) Repealed by Acts 2009, 81st Leg., ch. 1124, § 7. (f) Repealed by Acts 2009, 81st
Leg., ch. 1124, § 7. (g) Repealed by Acts 1993, 73rd Leg., ch. 30, § 3, eff. Sept. 1, 1993.
(h) Repealed by Acts 2009, 81st Leg., ch. 1124, § 7. (i) Before conducting or causing to
be  conducted  a  diagnostic  test  for  HIV  infection  under  this  section,  the  physician  or
other person shall advise the woman that the result of a test taken under this section is
confidential  as  provided  by  Subchapter  F,1  but  that  the  test  is  not  anonymous.  The
physician  or  other  person  shall  explain  the  difference  between  a  confidential  and  an
anonymous  test  to  the  woman  and  that  an  anonymous  test  may  be  available  from

another entity. The physician or other person shall make the information available in
another language, if needed, and if resources permit. The information shall be provided
by  the  physician  or  another  person,  as  needed,  in  a  manner  and  in  terms
understandable to a person who may be illiterate if resources permit. (j) The result of a
test for HIV infection under Subsection (a)(2)(B), (a-1), (c-1), or (c-2) is a test result for
purposes of Subchapter F. (k) Before the sample is taken, the health care provider shall
distribute to the patient printed materials about AIDS, HIV, hepatitis B, and syphilis. A
health care provider shall verbally notify the patient that an HIV test shall be performed
if the patient does not object. If the patient objects, the patient shall be referred to an
anonymous testing facility or instructed about anonymous testing methods. The health
care provider shall note on the medical records that the distribution of printed materials
was made and that verbal notification was given. The materials shall be provided to the
health care provider by the department and shall be prepared and designed to inform
the patients about: (l) A physician or other person may not conduct a diagnostic test for
HIV  infection  under  Subsection  (a)(2)(B),  (a-1),  or  (c-1)  if  the  woman  objects.  A
physician  or  other  person  may  not  conduct  a  diagnostic  test  for  HIV  infection  under
Subsection  (c-2)  if  a  parent,  managing  conservator,  or  guardian  objects.  (m)  If  a
screening  test  and  a  confirmatory  test  conducted  under  this  section  show  that  the
woman is or may be infected with HIV, hepatitis B, or syphilis, the physician or other
person  who  submitted  the  sample  for  the  test  shall  provide  or  make  available  to  the
woman  disease-specific  information  on  the  disease  diagnosed,  including:  (n)  A
physician or other person may comply with the requirements of Subsection (m)(1) by
referring the woman to an entity that provides treatment for individuals infected with
the disease diagnosed. (o) In this section, “HIV” has the meaning assigned by Section
81.101. (p) Not later than January 1 of each odd-numbered year, the department shall
report  to  the  legislature  the  number  of  cases  of  early  congenital  syphilis  and  of  late
congenital  syphilis  that  were  diagnosed  in  this  state  in  the  preceding  biennium.  A

practitioner of medicine and surgery or osteopathy attending a pregnant individual shall
take  samples  of  blood  of  such  individual,  if  possible  prior  to  the  third  month  of
gestation,  and  submit  the  same  to  a  laboratory  approved  by  the  Commissioner  for  a
standard serological test for syphilis. Every other person permitted by law to take blood
tests shall similarly cause a sample of blood of a pregnant individual attended by the
person  to  be  taken  by  a  duly  licensed  practitioner  of  medicine  and  surgery  or
osteopathy and submit it to a laboratory approved by the Commissioner for a standard
serological  test  for  syphilis.  The  failure  of  any  physician,  nurse  or  midwife  to  comply
with the provisions of § 32.1-60, § 32.1-62 or § 32.1-65 shall, in addition to any other
penalty prescribed by law, constitute grounds for revocation of the license or permit of
such  physician,  nurse  or  midwife  by  the  board  issuing  such  license  or  permit.  Every
physician,  physician  assistant,  or  advanced  practice  registered  nurse  attending  a
pregnant  woman  during  gestation  shall  examine  and  test  such  woman  for  such
venereal  diseases  as  the  Board  may  designate  within  15  days  after  beginning  such
attendance. Every other person permitted by law to attend upon pregnant women but
not  permitted  by  law  to  make  such  examinations  and  tests  shall  cause  such
examinations and tests to be made by a licensed physician, licensed advanced practice
registered nurse, or clinic. Serological tests required by this section may be performed
by  the  Department  of  General  Services,  Division  of  Consolidated  Laboratory  Services
(DCLS). Every physician attending a pregnant woman in the state of Washington during
gestation shall, in the case of each woman so attended, take or cause to be taken a
sample  of  blood  of  such  woman  at  the  time  of  first  examination,  and  submit  such
sample  to  an  approved  laboratory  for  a  standard  serological  test  for  syphilis.  If  the
pregnant woman first presents herself for examination after the fifth month of gestation
the  physician  or  other  attendant  shall  in  addition  to  the  above,  advise  and  urge  the
patient to secure a medical examination and blood test before the fifth month of any
subsequent  pregnancies.  Except  as  provided  in  RCW  70.24.025  and  70.24.027,  any

person  who  violates  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  chapter  or  any  rule  adopted  by  the
board under this chapter, or who fails or refuses to obey any lawful order issued by any
state, county or municipal health officer under this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
gross  misdemeanor  punishable  as  provided  under  RCW  9A.20.021.  Every  physician
engaging in attendance upon a pregnant woman in West Virginia shall, as soon as he or
she  is  engaged  to  attend  a  woman  and  has  reasonable  grounds  for  suspecting  that
pregnancy exists, acquaint such woman with the provisions of this article and take or
cause  to  be  taken  a  specimen  of  blood  from  such  woman.  This  specimen  shall  be
submitted  to  the  state  hygienic  laboratory  or  other  laboratory  approved  by  the  state
department of health as required by the preceding section. If the woman is in a stage of
gestation  or  labor  at  the  time  that  the  diagnosis  of  pregnancy  is  made,  which  may
make  it  inadvisable  to  obtain  the  specimen,  the  specimen  of  blood  shall  be  obtained
within  ten  days  following  delivery.  The  state  hygienic  laboratory  of  the  state  health
department shall perform the serological tests required by law on all blood specimens
taken  from  pregnant  women  by  physicians  for  examination.  These  tests  shall  be
performed  without  charge.  Upon  request  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  county  and  district
health officers to draw blood specimens from pregnant women for performing thereon a
serologic  test  for  syphilis.  This  service  shall  be  performed  without  charge.  In  those
areas  where  the  services  of  a  district  or  county  health  officer  are  not  available,  the
state health department shall assume the responsibility of obtaining the required blood
specimens without any charge to the pregnant women. Any physician or representative
of a laboratory, making such examinations or tests as are required by this article, or
filing  such  birth  or  stillbirth  certificates,  who  shall  knowingly  misrepresent  any  of  the
facts called for in the laboratory reports or birth or stillbirth certificate, or who otherwise
knowingly and wilfully[sic] shall violate any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten
dollars  nor  more  than  fifty  dollars.  For  the  purposes  of  this  act  [§§  35-4-501  through

35-4-505], a standard serological test shall be a test for syphilis approved by the state
department  of  health,  and  shall  be  performed  in  a  laboratory  approved  by  the  state
department  of  health.  Such  laboratory  tests  as  are  required  by  this  act  shall  be
performed  on  request  without  charge  at  the  state  department  of  health  laboratory.
Every physician licensed to practice medicine attending a pregnant woman in the state
for  conditions  relating  to  her  pregnancy  during  the  period  of  gestation  or  at  delivery
shall take, or cause to be taken, a sample of blood of such woman at the time of her
first  professional  visit  or  within  ten  (10)  days  thereafter.  The  blood  specimen  thus
obtained shall be submitted to an approved laboratory for a standard serological test
for syphilis. Every other person permitted by law to attend pregnant women in the state
but not permitted by law to take blood samples, shall cause a sample of blood of such
pregnant  women  to  be  taken  by  a  physician  duly  licensed  to  practice  medicine  and
have such sample submitted to an approved laboratory for a standard serological test
for  syphilis.  Any  licensed  physician  and  surgeon,  or  other  person,  engaged  in
attendance upon a pregnant woman during the period of gestation and/or at delivery,
or  any  representative  of  a  laboratory  who  violates  the  provisions  of  this  act  [§§
35-4-501  through  35-4-505]  shall  be  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor,  and  upon  conviction
thereof shall be fined not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided, however,
every licensed physician and surgeon or other person engaged in attendance upon a
pregnant  woman  during  the  period  of  gestation  or  at  delivery,  who  requests  such
specimen  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  W.S.  35-4-502,  and  whose  request  is
refused, shall not be guilty of a misdemeanor.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/syphilis-screenings.htm
