  Prepared by Elizabeth C. Briere, MD1 Lorry Rubin, MD2 Pedro L. Moro, MD3 Amanda
Cohn, MD1 Thomas Clark, MD1 Nancy Messonnier, MD1 1Division of Bacterial Diseases,
National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC  2  Steven  and
Alexandra  Cohen  Children's  Medical  Center  of  New  York,  New  Hyde  Park,  New  York
3Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic
Infectious  Diseases,  CDC  Corresponding  preparer:  Elizabeth  C.  Briere,  MD,  National
Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC,  1600  Clifton  Road  NE,  MS
C-09,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  E-mail:  ebriere@cdc.gov.  This  report  compiles  and
summarizes  all  recommendations  from  CDC's  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices  (ACIP)  regarding  prevention  and  control  of  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b
(Hib)  disease  in  the  United  States.  As  a  comprehensive  summary  of  previously
published recommendations, this report does not contain any new recommendations; it
is  intended  for  use  by  clinicians,  public  health  officials,  vaccination  providers,  and
immunization program personnel as a resource. ACIP recommends routine vaccination
with  a  licensed  conjugate  Hib  vaccine  for  infants  aged  2  through  6  months  (2  or  3
doses,  depending  on  vaccine  product)  with  a  booster  dose  at  age  12  through  15
months. ACIP also recommends vaccination for certain persons at increased risk for Hib
disease
 (i.e.,
 persons
 who
 have
 early
 component
 complement
 deficiencies,
immunoglobulin deficiency, anatomic or functional asplenia, or HIV infection; recipients
of  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplant;  and  recipients  of  chemotherapy  or  radiation
therapy for malignant neoplasms). This report summarizes current information on Hib
epidemiology  in  the  United  States  and  describes  Hib  vaccines  licensed  for  use  in  the
United  States.  Guidelines  for  antimicrobial  chemoprophylaxis  of  contacts  of  persons
with Hib disease also are provided. Before 1985, Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
was the leading cause of bacterial meningitis and a common cause of other invasive
diseases  (e.g.,  epiglottitis,  pneumonia,  septic  arthritis,  cellulitis,  purulent  pericarditis,
and  bacteremia)  among  U.S.  children  aged  <5  years  (1).  Meningitis  occurred  in

approximately two thirds of children with invasive Hib disease; 15%–30% of survivors
had hearing impairment or severe permanent neurologic sequelae. Approximately 4%
of all cases were fatal (2). The first polysaccharide Hib vaccine was introduced in the
United  States  in  1985,  followed  by  conjugate  Hib  vaccines  in  1987  and  1989.  During
1989–2000,  the  annual  incidence  of  invasive  Hib  disease  in  children  aged  <5  years
decreased  by  99%,  to  less  than  one  case  per  100,000  children  (3–7).  During
2000–2012, the average annual incidence rate of invasive Hib disease in children aged
<5  years  in  the  United  States  remained  below  the  Healthy  People  2020  goal  of
0.27/100,000
 (8)
 (data
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/abcs/reports-findings/surv-reports.html)  (Figures  1  and  2).  Studies
have demonstrated that vaccination with Hib conjugate vaccine leads to decreases in
oropharyngeal colonization among both vaccinated and unvaccinated children (9–11);
the  prevalence  of  Hib  carriage  has  decreased  among  preschool-aged  children  from
2%–7% in the prevaccine era to <1% in the vaccine era (9,12). Several Hib-containing
vaccines  have  been  licensed  since  the  initial  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices (ACIP) recommendations on prevention and control of Hib disease published in
1993  (13);  subsequent  publications  have  provided  additional  data  and  updated
recommendations  for  these  vaccines  (14–17).  This  report  summarizes  previously
published  ACIP  recommendations  on  prevention  and  control  of  Hib  disease  in
immunocompetent  and  high-risk  populations  (14–18);  it  does  not  contain  new
recommendations  and  is  intended  as  a  resource  for  clinicians,  public  health  officials,
vaccination  providers,  and  immunization  program  personnel.  In  addition,  this  report
summarizes current information on Hib epidemiology in the United States and describes
Hib  vaccines  licensed  for  use  in  the  United  States.  Guidelines  for  antimicrobial
chemoprophylaxis  of  contacts  of  persons  with  Hib  disease  also  are  provided.   ACIP's
Meningococcal  and  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  Work  Group*  comprises  a  diverse
group  of  health-care  providers  and  public  health  officials.  The  Work  Group  includes

professionals from academic medicine (pediatrics, family medicine, internal medicine,
and  infectious  disease  specialists),  federal  and  state  public  health  professionals,  and
representatives
 of
 professional
 medical
 organizations.
 Published
 Hib
 vaccine
recommendations  were  the  primary  sources  of  data  used  by  the  Work  Group  in
summarizing recommendations for the prevention and control of Hib disease, including
the  evidence-based  2013  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America  clinical  practice
guideline  for  vaccination  of  the  immunocompromised  host  (17–23).  Surveillance  data
came  from  the  Active  Bacterial  Core  surveillance  (ABCs)  system  and  the  National
Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) (24). Data on the immunogenicity and
safety of current licensed and available Hib vaccines were summarized on the basis of
findings  from  a  literature  search  of  PubMed  and  Web  of  Science  databases  that  was
completed  on  April  2,  2012.  A  nonsystematic  review  was  conducted  for  studies  on
safety, effectiveness, and immunogenicity of the current Hib vaccines published from
the time of vaccine licensure through March 2012. Because MenHibRix was licensed in
June 2012, studies published before licensure also were reviewed. The literature search
included clinical trials, randomized controlled trials, controlled clinical trials, evaluation
studies,  and  comparative  studies  conducted  worldwide  and  published  in  English.  The
Vaccine
 Adverse
 Events
 Reporting
 System
 (VAERS)
 (available
 at
http://www.vaers.hhs.gov)  also  was  searched  for  postlicensure  safety  data  for  the
currently licensed and available Hib vaccines. During December 2012–February 2013,
the Work Group held one teleconference meeting and the members communicated with
each  other  via  e-mail  messages  to  review  current  recommendations  and  to  consider
potential  revisions  to  the  statement.  A  summary  of  data  reviewed,  Work  Group
discussions,  and  the  current  description  of  Hib  epidemiology  was  presented  at  the
ACIP's February 2013 meeting. On February 20, 2013, ACIP members approved the Hib
Vaccine Recommendations Statement. Modifications were made to the ACIP statement
during  the  subsequent  review  process  at  CDC  to  update  and  clarify  wording  in  the

report.  H.  influenzae  is  a  species  of  bacteria  that  has  encapsulated  (typeable)  or
unencapsulated  (nontypeable)  strains.  Encapsulated  strains  express  one  of  six
antigenically distinct capsular polysaccharides (types a, b, c, d, e, or f). Encapsulated H.
influenzae nontype b strains, particularly type a, can cause invasive disease similar to
Hib  disease  (25,26).  Nontypeable  strains  also  can  cause  invasive  disease  but  more
commonly cause mucosal infections such as otitis media, conjunctivitis, and sinusitis.
Hib  vaccines  only  protect  against  H.  influenzae  type  b  strains;  no  vaccines  against
nontype  b  or  nontypeable  strains  currently  are  available.  H.  influenzae  colonizes  the
upper respiratory tract of humans and is transmitted person-to-person by inhalation of
respiratory droplets or by direct contact with respiratory tract secretions. The majority
of Hib disease in the United States occurs among unimmunized and underimmunized
infants  and  children  (those  who  have  an  incomplete  primary  series  or  are  lacking  a
booster  dose)  and  among  infants  too  young  to  have  completed  the  primary
immunization  series  (27)  (Figure  3).  Although  rare,  Hib  disease  after  full  vaccination
with the primary series and booster dose does occur; among Hib case-patients aged <5
years  with  age-appropriate  vaccine  status  reported  during  2002–2012  in  the  United
States, 16% had completed the primary Hib series, and 43% had completed the full Hib
series  (Figure  3).  Hib  disease  is  uncommon  in  adults  and  in  children  aged  >5  years.
Additional
 information
 about
 H.
 influenzae
 disease
 is
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/hi-disease.  Persons  with  certain  immunocompromising  conditions
are  considered  at  increased  risk  for  invasive  Hib  disease;  these  conditions  might
include:  Children  who  develop  Hib  disease  despite  appropriate  vaccination  should  be
evaluated for an immunological deficiency that predisposes them to Hib disease (28).
Historically, American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations have had higher rates of
Hib disease and colonization than the general U.S. population, with a peak in disease at
a  younger  age  (4–6  months)  than  among  other  U.S.  infant  populations  (6–7  months)
(29–31).  Before  introduction  of  vaccine  in  1985,  rates  among  AN  children  were  five

times  higher  than  rates  among  non-AN  children  in  Alaska  (4).  Although  rates  of  Hib
disease  among  AI/AN  children  have  decreased  in  the  postvaccine  era,  they  remain
higher  than  among  non-AI/AN  children.  During  1998–2009,  the  average  annual
incidence of Hib disease in children aged <5 years in the United States was 8–10 times
higher among AI/AN children (1.3/100,000) than it was among white (0.16/100,000) and
black (0.12/100,000) children, respectively (27). The first Hib vaccine licensed for use in
the  United  States  in  1985  was  a  monovalent  vaccine  consisting  of  purified
polyribosylribitol phosphate (PRP) capsular material from type b strains. Although the
vaccine  was  highly  effective  in  trials  in  Finland  among  children  aged  ≥18  months,
postmarketing  effectiveness  studies  in  the  United  States  demonstrated  variable
effectiveness  (-69%–88%)  (32).  PRP  vaccines  were  ineffective  in  children  aged  <18
months because of the T lymphocyte-independent nature of the immune response to
PRP  polysaccharide  (13).  Conjugation  of  the  PRP  polysaccharide  with  protein  carriers
that contain T-lymphocyte epitopes confers T-lymphocyte-dependent characteristics to
the vaccine. This conjugation enhances the immunologic response to the PRP antigen,
particularly  in  young  infants,  and  results  in  immunologic  memory  (e.g.,  anamnestic
response)  (33).  Studies  have  suggested  that  long-term  protection  from  invasive  Hib
disease is correlated with the presence of anti-PRP levels ≥0.15 µg/ml in unvaccinated
children and anti-PRP levels ≥1.0 µg/ml in vaccinated children (34,35). By 1989, three
monovalent  Hib  conjugate  vaccines  were  licensed  for  use  among  children  aged  ≥15
months (29). In late 1990, two of these conjugate vaccines were licensed for use among
infants (36,37). Since 1990, additional Hib vaccines from numerous manufacturers have
been  licensed  and  are  currently  used  in  the  United  States,  including  monovalent  Hib
conjugate vaccines and combination vaccines that contain a Hib conjugate vaccine. No
polysaccharide Hib vaccines are used currently in the United States. As of January 1,
2014,  three  monovalent  PRP  polysaccharide-protein  conjugate  vaccines  had  been
licensed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and were available in the United

States:  PRP-OMP  (PedvaxHIB,  Merck  and  Co.,  Inc.,  Whitehouse  Station,  New  Jersey),
PRP-T  (ActHIB,  Sanofi  Pasteur,  Inc.,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania),  and  PRP-T  (Hiberix,
GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina) (38) (Table 1). In December
1990, PRP-OMP (PedvaxHIB) was licensed by FDA as a 2-dose primary series for infants
at ages 2 and 4 months, with a booster dose (dose 3) at age 12 months (39). PRP-OMP
contains purified PRP conjugated with an outer membrane protein complex (OMPC) of
the B11 strain of Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B. Further information is available in
the
 package
 insert
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
253652.pdf.  In  March  1993,  PRP-T  (ActHIB)  was  licensed  by  FDA  as  a  3-dose primary
series for infants at ages 2, 4, and 6 months, with a booster dose (dose 4) at age 15
months (40). This vaccine contains purified PRP conjugated with tetanus toxoid. Further
information
 is
 available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
109841.pdf. In August 2009, PRP-T (Hiberix) was licensed by FDA for use as the booster
dose (which will be dose 3 or 4, depending on vaccine type used for primary series) of
the Hib vaccine series for children aged 15 months through 4 years who have received
a Hib primary series (16). This vaccine contains purified PRP conjugated with tetanus
toxoid.
 Further
 information
 is
 available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
179530.pdf.  As  of  January  1,  2014,  three  combination  vaccines  that  contain  an  H.
influenzae type b conjugate vaccine had been licensed by FDA and were available in
the  United  States:  PRP-OMP/HepB  (Comvax,  Merck  and  Co.,  Inc.,  Whitehouse  Station,
New Jersey), DTaP-IPV/PRP-T (Pentacel, Sanofi Pasteur, Inc., Swiftwater, Pennsylvania),
and MenCY/PRP-T (MenHibRix, GlaxoSmithKline, Inc., Rixensart, Belgium) (38) (Table 1).
In October 1996, PRP-OMP/HepB (Comvax) was licensed by FDA for vaccination against
invasive Hib disease and hepatitis B infection in infants at ages 2, 4, and 12 through 15

months  (14).  This  vaccine  includes  the  antigenic  components  used  in  PedvaxHIB
(PRP-OMP)  and  Recombivax  HB  (hepatitis  B  surface  antigen).  Further  information  is
available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
109869.pdf.  In  June  2008,  DTaP/IPV/PRP-T  (Pentacel)  was  licensed  by  FDA  for
vaccination  against  invasive  Hib  disease,  diphtheria,  tetanus,  pertussis,  and
poliomyelitis  in  infants  at  ages  2,  4,  6,  and  15  through  18  months  (15).  It  is  not
indicated for the DTaP/IPV booster dose at age 4 through 6 years. The vaccine includes
the antigenic components used in ActHIB (PRP-T) and Poliovax. Further information is
available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
109810.pdf.  In  June  2012,  MenCY/PRP-T  (MenHibRix)  was  licensed  by  FDA  for
vaccination  against  invasive  Hib  disease  and  N.  meningitidis  serogroups  C  and  Y
disease in infants at ages 2, 4, 6, and 12 through 15 months (17). Infants at increased
risk  for  meningococcal  disease†  should  be  vaccinated  with  a  4-dose  series  of
MenCY/PRP-T. Routine meningococcal vaccination is recommended only for infants who
are at increased risk for meningococcal disease. However, MenCY/PRP-T may be used in
any infant for routine vaccination against Hib. Further recommendations for use of the
MenCY  component  of  MenCY/PRP-T  have  been  published  previously  (17).  Further
vaccine
 information
 is
 available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
308577.pdf.  Protective  antibody  levels  are  detected  for  both  PedvaxHib  and  ActHib
after a primary series (41–43). However, the vaccines differ in the timing of antibody
response. PedvaxHib produces a substantial antibody response after the first dose with
an additional boost in geometric mean antibody concentration after the second or third
dose  (41,42,44–46).  Therefore,  PedvaxHib  is  licensed  as  a  2-dose  primary  series.
PedvaxHib  effectiveness  was  93%–100%  in  Navajo  infants  vaccinated  with  a  2-dose

series  (13,41,47).  Geometric  mean  antibody  concentrations  remain  at  or  below  1.0
µg/ml after the first and second dose of ActHIB, but a protective antibody response is
seen  after  the  third  dose  (41,42,45,48,49).  Effectiveness  studies  for  ActHIB  were
terminated early in the United States with licensure of the first Hib conjugate vaccine;
no cases of invasive Hib disease were reported among vaccinees at the time of study
termination  (13,47).  A  prospective  controlled  trial  of  PRP-T  among  56,000  subjects  in
the  United  Kingdom  found  an  effectiveness  of  95%  (95%  confidence  interval  [CI]  =
74%–100%)  (47).  Antibody  levels  decline  after  completion  of  the  primary  series  with
PRP-T and PRP-OMP vaccines and a booster dose at age 12–15 months is necessary to
maintain protective antibody levels. Booster doses of PedvaxHib, ActHib, and Hiberix at
age 12–15 months provide levels of antibody that are protective against invasive Hib
disease  (16,44,46,48,50,51).  Protective  antibody  responses  comparable  to  those
detected  after  receipt  of  separately  administered  PedVaxHIB  and  Recombivax  HB
vaccines are seen after the second primary dose and booster dose of Comvax vaccine
(14,52).  Pentacel  and  MenHibRix  induce  protective  antibody  responses  that  are
noninferior to separately administered PRP-T vaccines after the third primary dose and
booster dose (53–59). No clinically significant immune interference has been observed
with  any  of  the  available  monovalent  or  combination  Hib  vaccines  and  concomitant
administration  of  other  routine  childhood  vaccines  (51,52,60–67;  ACIP,  unpublished
data, 2009). In prelicensure trials, adverse reactions to PedvaxHib, ActHib, and Hiberix
were
 uncommon,
 usually
 mild,
 and
 generally
 resolved
 within
 12–24
 hours
(16,41,43,46,49,50).  Rates  of  adverse  reactions  to  Comvax,  Pentacel,  and  MenHibRix
were  similar  to  those  seen  with  separately  administered  vaccines  (14,52–54,68).
Postmarketing  surveillance  for  adverse  events  following  receipt  of  Hib  vaccines  has
been conducted primarily by two systems in the United States: VAERS and the Vaccine
Safety Datalink (VSD). VAERS is a national passive surveillance system operated jointly
by  CDC  and  FDA  that  receives  reports  of  adverse  events  following  vaccination  from

health-care personnel, manufacturers, vaccine recipients, and others (69). VAERS can
generate, but not test, vaccine safety hypotheses and is subject to several limitations,
including  reporting  biases  and  inconsistent  data  quality  (69).  VSD  is  a  collaboration
between
 CDC
 and
 nine
 integrated
 health-care
 organizations
 that
 conducts
population-based  vaccination  safety  studies  to  assess  hypotheses  that  arise  from
review of medical literature, reports to VAERS, changes in immunization schedules, or
introduction  of  new  vaccines  (70).  During  January  1,  1990–May  31,  2013,  VAERS
received 29,047 reports involving receipt of Hib vaccines (PedvaxHIB, ActHIB, Hiberix,
Comvax,  and  Pentacel)  in  the  United  States;  26,375  (91%)  reports  involved  children
aged  <2  years.  Hib  vaccines  were  administered  concurrently  with  one  or  more  other
vaccines  in  95%  of  case  reports.  The  median  time  from  vaccination  to  onset  of  an
adverse  event  was  1  day.  The  most  frequently  reported  adverse  events  were  fever
(31%),  crying  (11%),  injection  site  erythema  (11%),  irritability  (10%),  and  rash  (9%).
Among all Hib vaccines reports, approximately 17% were coded as serious as defined in
the Code of Federal Regulations (71) (i.e., report contained information that the event
led to death, life-threatening illness, hospitalization, prolongation of hospitalization, or
permanent  disability).  Among  the  5,062  reports  coded  as  serious,  the  most  frequent
adverse events were fever (37%), vomiting (21%), convulsion (20%), irritability (17%),
and intussusception (11%). In 97% of the intussusception reports, rotavirus vaccine was
administered concomitantly and might have prompted reporting of this adverse event.
VAERS received reports of 878 deaths following Hib containing vaccines that occurred
during January 1, 1990–May 31, 2013. An autopsy report or other medical records was
available for 620 (71%) of these deaths, among which the most frequent cause of death
was sudden infant death syndrome (52%). Other causes of death included respiratory
(9%), cardiovascular (5%), infectious (5%), neurologic (3%), and gastrointestinal (2%)
conditions.  In  14%  of  reports,  the  cause  was  undetermined,  and  in  11%  of  reports,
various  other  causes  were  reported  (e.g.,  asphyxia  and  blunt  force  trauma).  The

reporting frequencies for Hib containing vaccines are similar to what has been observed
with other recommended childhood vaccines. No unusual or unexpected safety patterns
were observed in VAERS data for any Hib vaccines. No postlicensure safety studies of
monovalent  Hib  vaccines  were  identified  by  the  literature  review.  However,  the  VSD
conducted  an  observational  study  of  the  combination  Hib  vaccine,  DTaP-IPV-Hib
(Pentacel), for the period September 2008–January 2011 (55). Compared with children
who  received  DTaP-containing  control  vaccine  (i.e.,  without  Hib),  children  aged  1–2
years  who  received  DTaP-IPV-Hib  vaccine  had  an  elevated  risk  for  fever  (RR  =  1.83;
95% CI = 1.34–2.50). DTaP-IPV-Hib vaccine was not associated with any other medically
attended  adverse  health  event.  An  independent  postmarketing  safety  evaluation  of
Hib-HepB  (Comvax)  was  conducted  by  a  managed  care  organization  in  Seattle,
Washington,  for  the  period  July  1997–December  2000  (72).  Using  ICD-9  codes,  the
retrospective  cohort  study  evaluated  adverse  events  reported  1–30  days  following
administration of Hib-HepB, compared with rates of adverse events among two control
groups (historical control group and self-comparison group). A total of 27,802 vaccine
doses  were  administered  during  the  study  period  with  111,129  diagnoses  recorded
within 0–30 days following administration of Comvax in any health-care setting. There
were 127 separate adverse event codes with significant elevated relative risks and 66
codes  with  significantly  decreased  relative  risks  (p<0.5).  On  medical  record  review,
there  was  no  consistent  pattern  to  respiratory  or  gastrointestinal  illnesses;  fever
findings  appeared  to  be  explained  by  changes  in  data  collection  or  by  concomitant
vaccination  with  measles,  mumps,  and  rubella  virus  vaccine.  Two  deaths  occurred
within  the  study  period,  both  of  which  were  considered  unrelated  to  vaccination.  No
consistent association was identified between serious adverse events and vaccination
with  Hib-HepB,  and  the  vaccine  had  a  favorable  safety  profile.  ACIP  recommends
routine  administration  of  a  conjugate  Hib  vaccine  series  (monovalent  vaccine
[PedvaxHib  (PRP-OMP)  or  ActHib  (PRP-T)]  or  Hib  vaccine  in  combination  with  HepB

[Comvax],  DTaP/IPV  [Pentacel],  or  MenCY  [MenHibRix])  beginning  at  age  2  months.
Infants  aged  2–6  months  should  receive  a  3-dose  series  of  Hib  PRP-T  as  ActHib,
Pentacel,  or  MenHibRix  or  a  2-dose  series  of  Hib  PRP-OMP  as  PedvaxHib  or  Comvax
(Table 1). The first dose can be administered as early as age 6 weeks. A booster dose
(which  will  be  dose  3  or  4  depending  on  vaccine  type  used  in  primary  series)  of  any
licensed  conjugate  Hib  vaccine  (monovalent  vaccine  [PedvaxHib  (PRP-OMP),  ActHib
(PRP-T),  or  Hiberix  (PRP-T)]  or  Hib  vaccine  in  combination  with  HepB  [Comvax]  or
DTaP/IPV  [Pentacel]  or  MenCY  [MenHibRix])  is  recommended  at  age  12  through  15
months  and  at  least  8  weeks  after  the  most  recent  Hib  vaccination  (Table  1).  Hib
vaccine  has  been  found  to  be  immunogenic  in  patients  with  immunocompromising
conditions  although  immunogenicity  varies  with  the  degree  of  immunocompetence
(13,73–84). Patients at increased risk for invasive Hib disease who are vaccinated (have
received  a  Hib  primary  series  and  a  booster  dose  at  age  ≥12  months)  do  not  need
further  routine  immunization,  except  in  certain  situations  (Table  2).  Doses  for  either
primary  series  (2-dose  or  3-dose)  should  be  administered  8  weeks  apart;  however,  if
necessary, an interval of 4 weeks between doses is acceptable. If a PRP-OMP vaccine
(PedvaxHIB  or  Comvax)  is  administered  for  both  doses  in  the  primary  series,  a  third
primary  dose  is  not  indicated.  If  a  PRP-OMP  vaccine  (PedvaxHib  or  Comvax)  is  not
administered for both doses in the primary series or there is uncertainty about which
products were administered previously, a third primary series dose of a Hib conjugate
vaccine is needed to complete the primary series. Any monovalent or combination Hib
conjugate vaccine is acceptable for the booster dose (dose 3 or 4 depending on vaccine
type  used  in  primary  series),  regardless  of  the  product  used  for  the  primary  series.
Hiberix should be used only for the booster dose (dose 3 or 4, depending on the vaccine
type  used  for  primary  series)  in  children  aged  12  months  through  4  years  who  have
received at least 1 dose of Hib vaccine previously. If the first vaccination is delayed by
>1
 month,
 the
 recommended
 catch-up
 schedule
 (available
 at

http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html)  should  be  followed.
The recommended catch-up schedule should be followed for children aged <12 months
who  are  at  increased  risk  for  Hib  disease  and  have  delayed  or  no  Hib  vaccination.
Catch-up guidance for children aged 12 through 59 months who are at increased risk
for  Hib  disease  and  who  have  delayed  or  no  Hib  vaccination  is  described  below  (see
"High-risk  groups";  Table  2).  Hib  meningitis  incidence  peaks  at  a  younger  age  (4–6
months) among AI/AN infants than among other U.S. infant populations (6–7 months)
(29–31).  Vaccination  with  a  2  dose  primary  series  of  a  Hib  vaccine  that  contains
PRP-OMP  (PedvaxHIB  or  Comvax)  is  preferred  for  AI/AN  infants  to  provide  early
protection  because  these  vaccines  produce  a  protective  antibody  response  after  the
first  dose  (41–43,51,52,85).  If  the  first  vaccination  dose  is  delayed  by  >1  month,  the
recommended
 catch-up
 schedule
 (available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html)  should  be  followed.
A booster dose (dose 3) of Hib vaccine is recommended at age 12 through 15 months;
for the booster dose, there is no preferred vaccine formulation (i.e., any licensed Hib
conjugate  vaccine  is  acceptable).  The  importance  of  this  early  protection  was
demonstrated  in  Alaska  (30,86).  During  July  1991–January  1996,  a  PRP-OMP  vaccine
was  used  statewide  in  Alaska  and  a  >90%  decrease  in  Hib  disease  rates  occurred
among  AN  and  nonnative  children  (30,86).  During  1996–1997,  after  the  statewide
vaccine  was  changed  to  a  combination  vaccine  that  included  a  non-OMP  Hib
component, Hib incidence increased significantly (19.8 to 91.1 cases/100,000 children
aged  <5  years,  p<0.001)  among  AN  children  while  remaining  unchanged  among
nonnative children (30,86). Disease reappearance seemed to be attributable to the use
of  a  Hib  vaccine  that  did  not  achieve  early  protective  antibody  concentrations  in
children who had ongoing exposure to Hib via oropharyngeal colonization among close
contacts.  After  returning  to  the  use  of  PRP-OMP  containing  vaccines  in  Alaska,  the
incidence of Hib disease in AN children decreased to rates of fewer than six cases per

100,00  children  aged  <5  years  (30,86).  Children  aged  <24  months  who  develop
invasive  Hib  disease  can  remain  at  risk  for  developing  a  second  episode  because
natural infection in this age group does not reliably result in development of protective
antibody  levels.  These  children  should  be  considered  unvaccinated  regardless  of
previous  Hib  vaccination  and  should  receive  Hib  vaccine  doses  according  to  the
age-appropriate  schedule  for  unimmunized  children  (28,87–89).  Children  aged  <24
months  who  develop  invasive  Hib  disease  should  receive  primary  vaccination  or
re-vaccination with a second primary series beginning 4 weeks after onset of disease.
Medically  stable  preterm  infants§  should  be  vaccinated  beginning  at  age  2  months
according to the schedule recommended for other infants, on the basis of chronological
age.  Persons  considered  at  increased  risk  for  invasive  Hib  disease  include  those  with
functional  or  anatomic  asplenia,  HIV  infection,  immunoglobulin  deficiency  (including
immunoglobulin  G2  subclass  deficiency),  or  early  component  complement  deficiency,
recipients of a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, and those receiving chemotherapy
or  radiation  therapy  for  malignant  neoplasms.  A  single  dose  of  any  licensed  Hib
conjugate vaccine should be administered to unimmunized older children, adolescents,
and adults who are asplenic or who are scheduled for an elective splenectomy. Some
experts suggest administering a dose prior to elective splenectomy regardless of prior
vaccination history (22). On the basis of limited data on the timing of Hib vaccination
before splenectomy, experts suggest vaccination at least 14 days before the procedure
(18,19,23) (Table 2). Unimmunized children aged ≥60 months who have HIV infection
should receive 1 dose of Hib vaccine. Whether HIV-infected children who have received
a full 3 or 4 dose vaccine series (depending on the vaccine type used for the primary
series) will benefit from additional Hib doses is unknown. Because the incidence of Hib
infections among HIV-infected adults is low, Hib vaccine is not recommended for adults
with HIV infection (21,23) (Table 2). Children aged 12–59 months who are at increased
risk  for  Hib  disease  (persons  with  asplenia,  HIV  infection,  immunoglobulin  deficiency,

early  component  complement  deficiency,  or  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy
recipients) and who received no doses or only 1 dose of Hib conjugate vaccine before
age  12  months  should  receive  2  additional  doses  of  vaccine  8  weeks  apart;  children
who received 2 or more doses of Hib conjugate vaccine before age 12 months should
receive 1 additional dose, at least 8 weeks after the last dose (Table 2). Hib vaccination
during  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy  should  be  avoided  because  of  possible
suboptimal  antibody  response.  Patients  vaccinated  within  14  days  of  starting
immunosuppressive therapy or while receiving immunosuppressive therapy should be
considered unimmunized, and doses should be repeated beginning at least 3 months
following  completion  of  chemotherapy.  Patients  who  were  vaccinated  more  than  14
days  before  chemotherapy  do  not  require  revaccination,  with  the  exception  of
recipients of a hematopoietic stem cell transplant who should be revaccinated with a
3-dose  regimen  6–12  months  after  successful  transplant,  regardless  of  vaccination
history  (80);  at  least  4  weeks  should  separate  doses  (Table  2).  Hib  vaccines  are
administered  intramuscularly  in  individual  doses  of  0.5  mL.  Adverse  events  occurring
after  administration  of  any  vaccine  should  be  reported  to  VAERS.  Reports  can  be
submitted to VAERS online, by facsimile, or by mail. More information about VAERS is
available by calling 1-800-822-7967 (toll-free) or online at http://vaers.hhs.gov. Studies
have  demonstrated  that  any  combination  of  licensed  monovalent  Hib  conjugate
vaccines  for  the  primary  and  booster  doses  provide  comparable  or  higher  antibody
levels than with the same monovalent product (33,44–46,51,91–93). Therefore, licensed
monovalent Hib conjugate vaccines are considered interchangeable for the primary as
well  as  the  booster  doses  (dose  3  or  4,  depending  on  vaccine  type  used  for  primary
series)  (18,94).  Data  on  the  interchangeability  of  combination  vaccines  with  other
combination  vaccines  or  with  monovalent  vaccines  are  limited  (52,63).  Whenever
feasible,  the  same  combination  vaccine  should  be  used  for  the  subsequent  doses;
however, if a different brand is administered, the dose should be considered valid and

need  not  be  repeated.  Adverse  reactions  to  Hib-containing  monovalent  vaccines  are
uncommon, usually mild, and generally resolve within 12–24 hours (41–43,49). Rates of
adverse  reactions  to  Hib  combination  vaccines  are  similar  to  those  observed  with
separately  administered  vaccines  (14,33,52–54).  More  complete  information  about
adverse  reactions  to  a  specific  vaccine  is  available  in  the  package  insert  for  each
vaccine
 and
 from
 CDC
 at
 http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vac-gen/side-effects.htm.
Vaccination with a Hib-containing vaccine is contraindicated in infants aged <6 weeks.
Vaccination with a Hib-containing vaccine is contraindicated among persons known to
have a severe allergic reaction to any component of the vaccine. The tip caps of the
Hiberix prefilled syringes might contain natural rubber latex, and the vial stoppers for
Comvax,  ActHib,  and  PedvaxHIB  contain  natural  rubber  latex,  which  might  cause
allergic reactions in persons who are latex-sensitive. Therefore, vaccination with these
vaccines is contraindicated for persons known to have a severe allergic reaction to dry
natural rubber latex (48,50–52). The vial stoppers for Pentacel and MenHibRix do not
contain  latex  (63,95).  Vaccination  with  Comvax  is  contraindicated  in  patients  with  a
hypersensitivity  to  yeast  (52).  As  with  all  pertussis-containing  vaccines,  benefits  and
risk  should  be  considered  before  administering  Pentacel  to  persons  with  a  history  of
fever  ≥40.5oC,  hypotonic-hyporesponsive  episode,  persistent  inconsolable  crying
lasting  ≥3  hours  within  48  hours  after  receipt  of  a  pertussis-containing  vaccine,  or
seizures  within  3  days  after  receiving  a  pertussis-containing  vaccine  (63).  Hib
monovalent and combination conjugate vaccines are inactivated vaccines and may be
administered to persons with immunocompromising conditions. However, immunologic
response  to  the  vaccine  might  be  suboptimal  (18).  Secondary  cases  of  Hib  disease
(illness  occurring  within  60  days  of  contact  with  a  patient)  occur  but  are  rare.
Secondary attack rates are higher among household contacts aged <48 months (2.1%),
especially those aged <12 months (6%) and <24 months (3%) (29). Data are conflicting
on the risk for secondary illness among child care contacts, but it is thought to be lower

than among household contacts (29). Rifampin is recommended for chemoprophylaxis
because  it  achieves  high  concentrations  in  respiratory  secretions  and  eradicates
nasopharyngeal  carriage  in  >95%  of  carriers  (96–99).  There  are  no  guidelines  for
control  measures  around  cases  of  invasive  nontype  b  H.  influenzae  disease.
Chemoprophylaxis  is  not  recommended  for  contacts  of  persons  with  invasive  disease
caused by nontype b H. influenzae because cases of secondary transmission of disease
have not been documented (100,101). Index patients who are treated with an antibiotic
other  than  cefotaxime  or  ceftriaxone  and  are  aged  <2  years  should  receive  rifampin
prior  to  hospital  discharge  (22).  Because  cefotaxime  and  ceftriaxone  eradicate  Hib
colonization,  prophylaxis  is  not  needed  for  patients  treated  with  either  of  these
antimicrobials. Rifampin chemoprophylaxis is recommended for index patients (unless
treated with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone) and all household contacts in households with
members aged <4 years who are not fully vaccinated or members aged <18 years who
are  immunocompromised,  regardless  of  their  vaccination  status  (22).  Rifampin
chemoprophylaxis  is  recommended  in  child  care  settings  when  two  or  more  cases  of
invasive
 Hib
 disease
 have
 occurred
 within
 60
 days
 and
 unimmunized
 or
underimmunized  children  attend  the  facility  (22).  When  prophylaxis  is  indicated,  it
should be prescribed for all attendees, regardless of age or vaccine status, and for child
care  providers.  Hib  disease  was  once  a  leading  cause  of  bacterial  meningitis  among
U.S. children aged <5 years. As a result of the introduction of Hib vaccines in the United
States and sustained high vaccine coverage, Hib disease is now rare, with rates below
the Healthy People 2020 objective. However, the risk for invasive Hib disease continues
among unimmunized and underimmunized children, highlighting the importance of full
vaccination  with  the  primary  series  and  booster  doses.  Although  Hib  disease  is
uncommon,  continued  H.  influenzae  surveillance  with  complete  serotyping  data  is
necessary  so  that  all  Hib  cases  are  identified  and  appropriate  chemoprophylaxis
measures can be taken. *A list of the members of the Work Group appears on page

14. †Infants with persistent complement component deficiencies, those with functional
or anatomic asplenia (including sickle cell disease), healthy infants in communities with
a meningococcal disease outbreak for whom vaccination is recommended, and infants
traveling to or residing in areas with hyperendemic or epidemic meningococcal disease.
§Infants  who  do  not  require  ongoing  management  for  serious  infection,  metabolic
disease, or acute renal, cardiovascular, neurologic, or respiratory tract illness and who
demonstrate a clinical course of sustained recovery and pattern of steady growth (90).
FIGURE 1. Estimated annual incidence* of invasive Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
disease in children aged <5 years — United States, 1980–2012 Sources: 1980–1997: 
National  Bacterial  Meningitis  Reporting  System  and  National  Notifiable  Diseases
Surveillance (NNDSS) data; Adams WG, Deaver KA, Cochi SL, et al. Decline of childhood
Haemophilus  influenzae  Type  b  (Hib)  disease  in  the  Hib  vaccine  era.  JAMA
1993;269:221–6;  CDC.  Progress  toward  elimination  of  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b
disease among infants and children—United States, 1987–1995. MMWR 1996;45:901–6;
CDC.  Progress  toward  elimination  of  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  disease  among
infants  and  children—United  States,  1987–1997.  MMWR  1998;47:993–8.  1998–2009:
NNDSS  and  Active  Bacterial  Core  Surveillance  (ABCs)  data.  2010–2012:  ABCs  cases
estimated to the U.S. population. *Per 100,000 population. Alternate Text: The figure
shows  the  estimated  incidence  per  100,000  population  of  invasive  Haemophilus
influenzae Type b (Hib) disease in children aged <5 years in the United States during
1980-2012.  Incidence  declined  precipitously  following  licensure  of  vaccines  for  use  in
children aged ≥18 months and infants aged ≥2 months. FIGURE 2. Estimated annual
incidence*  of  invasive  Haemophilus  influenzae  Type  b   infection  in  children  aged  <5
years  —  United  States,  2000–2012  Sources:  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance
and  Active  Bacterial  Core  Surveillance  (ABCs)  data.   *Per  100,000  population.
Alternate  Text:  The  figure  shows  the  estimated  incidence  per  100,000  population  of
invasive Haemophilus influenzae Type b disease in children aged <5 years in the United

States  during  2000-2012.  Incidence  fell  below  the  Healthy  People  2020  goal  of  0.27
cases per 100,000 population for all years shown since 2000 (it was slightly over the
goal in 2000). FIGURE 3. Percentage of children aged <5 years with cases of invasive
Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  (Hib)  disease,*  by  vaccine  status  —  United  States
2002–2012  Sources: Active Bacterial Core surveillance system and National Notifiable
Diseases Surveillance System. *N = 265. An additional 57 children aged <5 years with
Hib  had  unknown  vaccine  status  and  were  excluded.  †Among  those  with
age-appropriate  vaccine  status,  41%  were  too  young  to  complete  the  primary  series,
16% completed the primary series, and 43% completed the full series. Alternate Text:
The  figure  shows  the  percentage  of  children  aged  <5  years  with  cases  of  invasive
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) disease in the United States during 2002-2012, by
vaccine status. Among those with age-appropriate vaccine status, 41% were too young
to complete the primary series, 16% completed the primary series, and 43% completed
the  full  series.  TABLE  1.  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  (Hib)  conjugate  vaccines
licensed  and  available  in  the  United  States  as  of  January  2014  Vaccine  product
Manufacturer  Trade  Name  Components  Primary  series  Booster  dose  Monovalent
vaccine PRP-OMP*,† Merck & Co, Inc PedvaxHIB PRP conjugated to OMP 2, 4 mos 12–15
mos PRP-T sanofi pasteur ActHIB PRP conjugated to tetanus toxoid 2, 4, 6 mos 12–15
mos PRP-T GlaxoSmithKline Hiberix PRP conjugated to tetanus toxoid Not licensed for
primary  series  12–15  mos§  Combination  vaccine  PRP-OMP-HepB*,†  Merck  &  Co,  Inc
Comvax  PRP-OMP  +  hepatitis  B  vaccine  2,  4  mos  12–15  mos  DTaP-IPV/PRP-T  sanofi
pasteur  Pentacel  DTaP-IPV  +  PRP-T  2,  4,  6  mos  15–18  mos¶  MenCY/PRP-T**
GlaxoSmithKline  MenHibRix  MenCY  +  PRP-T  2,  4,  6  mos  12–15  mos  Source:  Adapted
from American Academy of Pediatrics. Haemophilus influenzae infections. Pickering L,
Baker  C,  Kimberlin  D,  Long  S,  eds.  Red  book:  2012  report  of  the  Committee  on
Infectious  Diseases.  Elk  Grove  Village,  IL:  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics;
2012:345–52. *If a PRP-OMP vaccine is not administered as both doses in the primary

series, or if there is uncertainty about which products were administered previously, a
third  dose  of  Hib  conjugate  vaccine  is  needed  to  complete  the  primary  series.  
†Preferred vaccine for American Indian/Alaska Native children.  §To facilitate timely
booster  vaccination,  Hiberix  can  be  administered  as  early  as  age  12  months,  in
accordance with Hib vaccination schedules for routine and catch-up immunization (CDC.
Licensure  of  a  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  [Hib]  vaccine  [Hiberix]  and  updated
recommendations for use of Hib vaccine. MMWR 2009;58:1008–9)  ¶The booster dose
may be administered as early as age 12 months, provided that at least 6 months have
elapsed  since  the  third  dose.  **Recommendations  for  the  MenCY  component  of
MenCY/PRP-T have been published previously (CDC. Infant meningococcal vaccination:
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommendations and rationale.
MMWR  2013;62:52–4).  TABLE  2.  Guidance  for  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  (Hib)
vaccination  in  high-risk  groups  High-risk  group*  Hib  vaccine  guidance  Patients  aged
<12 mos Follow routine Hib vaccination recommendations Patients aged 12–59 mos If
unimmunized  or  received  0  or  1  dose  before  age  12  mos:  2  doses,  8  wks  apart  If
received  ≥2  doses  before  age  12  mos:  1  dose  8  wks  after  last  dose  If  completed  a
primary  series  and  received  a  booster  dose  at  age  ≥12  mos:  no  additional  doses
Patients  aged  <60  months  undergoing  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy†  If  routine
Hib doses administered ≥14 days before starting therapy: revaccination not required If
dose administered within 14 days of starting therapy or given during therapy: repeat
doses  starting  at  least  3  mos  following  therapy  completion  Patients  aged  ≥15  mos
undergoing elective splenectomy If unimmunized:§ 1 dose prior to procedure¶ Asplenic
patients aged >59 mos and adults If unimmunized:§ 1 dose HIV-infected children aged
≥60  mos  If  unimmunized:§  1  dose  HIV-infected  adults  Hib  vaccination  is  not
recommended Recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplant, all ages Regardless of
Hib  vaccination  history:  3  doses  (at  least  4  wks  apart)  beginning  6–12  mos  after
transplant
 *Persons
 with
 functional
 or
 anatomic
 asplenia,
 HIV
 infection,

immunoglobulin  deficiency  including  immunoglobulin  G2  subclass  deficiency,  or  early
component complement deficiency, recipients of a hematopoietic stem cell transplant,
and  those  receiving  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy  for  malignant  neoplasms.
†Some experts suggest conducting serologic testing for these patients (Source: Rubin
LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P, et al. 2013 IDSA clinical practice guideline for vaccination of
the  immunocompromised  host.  Clin  Infect  Dis  2013;[Epub  ahead  of  print]  doi:
10.1093/cid/cit684).  §Patients  who  have  not  received  a  primary  series  and  booster
dose or at least 1 dose of Hib vaccine after 14 months are considered unimmunized.
¶Some experts suggest vaccination at least 14 days before the procedure (Sources:
CDC.  General  recommendations  on  immunization:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  [ACIP].  MMWR  2011;60[No.  RR-2];  CDC.
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP): use of
vaccines  and  immune  globulins  in  persons  with  altered  immunocompetence.  MMWR
1993;42[No. RR-4]; Rubin LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P, et al. 2013 IDSA clinical practice
guideline for vaccination of the immunocompromised host. Clin Infect Dis 2013;[Epub
ahead  of  print]  doi:  10.1093/cid/cit684.)  Some  experts  suggest  administering  a  dose
prior to elective splenectomy regardless of prior vaccination history (Source: American
Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Haemophilus  influenzae  infections.  In:  Pickering  L,  Baker  C,
Kimberlin  D,  Long  S,  eds.  Red  book:  2012  report  of  the  Committee  on  Infectious
Diseases.  Elk  Grove  Village,  IL:  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics;  2012:345–52).
Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  Membership  as  of  February  21,  2013
Chair: Jonathan Temte, MD, PhD, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health,  Madison,  Wisconsin  Executive  Secretary:  Larry  Pickering,  MD,  National  Center
for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Members:  Nancy
Bennett, MD, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New
York;  Joseph  Bocchini  Jr,  MD,  Louisiana  State  University  Health  Sciences  Center,
Shreveport,  Louisiana;  Douglas  Campos-Outcalt,  MD,  University  of  Arizona  College  of

Medicine,  Phoenix,  Arizona;  Tamera  Coyne-Beasley,  MD,  University  of  North  Carolina,
Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina;  Jeffrey  Duchin,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,
Washington;  Kathleen  Harriman,  PhD,  California  Department  of  Public  Health,
Richmond,  California;  Lee  Harrison,  MD,  University  of  Pittsburgh,  Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania;  Renée  Jenkins,  MD,  Howard  University  School  of  Medicine,  District  of
Columbia;  Ruth  Karron,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  Bloomberg  School  of  Public  Health,
Baltimore,  Maryland;  Wendy  Keitel,  MD,  Baylor  College  of  Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;
Sara  Rosenbaum,  JD,  Georgetown  University,  District  of  Columbia;  Lorry  Rubin,  MD,
Steven  and  Alexandra  Cohen  Children's  Medical  Center  of  New  York,  New  Hyde  Park,
New York; Mark Sawyer, MD, University of California at San Diego, California; Marietta
Vázquez,  MD,  Yale  University  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut.  Ex  Officio
Members:  Vito  Caserta,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration,  Rockville,
Maryland;  Jesse  Geibe,  MD,  Department  of  Defense,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Bruce
Gellin, MD, National Vaccine Program Office, District of Columba; Richard Gorman, MD,
National  Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Amy  Groom,  MPH,  Indian  Health
Service,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico;  Mary  Beth  Hance,  Centers  for  Medicare  and
Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Linda Kinsinger, MD, Department of Veterans
Affairs,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  Wellington  Sun,  MD,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,
Bethesda, Maryland. Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians,
Jamie  Loehr,  MD,  Ithaca,  New  York;  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics,  Michael  Brady,
MD,  Ohio  State  University,  Columbus,  Ohio,  David  Kimberlin,  MD,  Birmingham,
Alabama;  American  Academy  of  Physician  Assistants,  Marie-Michèle  Léger,  MPH,
Alexandria,  Virginia;  American  College  Health  Association,  James  C.  Turner,  MD,
Charlottesville,  Virginia;  American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,  Laura
Riley, MD, Boston, Massachusetts; American College of Physicians, Gregory Poland, MD,
Rochester,  Minnesota;  American  Geriatrics  Society,  Kenneth  Schmader,  MD,  Durham,
North Carolina; America's Health Insurance Plans, Mark Netoskie, MD, Houston, Texas;

American  Medical  Association,  Litjen  Tan,  PhD,  Chicago,  Illinois;  American  Nurses
Association,  Katie  Brewer,  MSN,  Silver  Springs,  Maryland;  American  Osteopathic
Association,  Stanley  Grogg,  DO,  Tulsa,  Oklahoma;  American  Pharmacists  Association,
Stephan  L.  Foster,  PharmD,  Memphis,  Tennessee;  Association  of  Immunization
Managers, Kelly Moore, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; Association for Prevention Teaching
and  Research,  W.  Paul  McKinney,  MD,  Louisville,  Kentucky;  Association  of  State  and
Territorial Health Officials, José Montero, MD, Concord, New Hampshire; Biotechnology
Industry  Organization,  Clement  Lewin,  PhD,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Canadian
National  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization,  Bryna  Warshawsky,  MDCM,  London,
Ontario, Canada; Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, Christine Hahn, MD,
Boise, Idaho; Department of Health, United Kingdom, David M. Salisbury, MD, London,
United  Kingdom;  Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee,  Alexis
Elward, MD, St Louis, Missouri; Infectious Diseases Society of America, Kathleen Neuzil,
MD,  Seattle,  Washington;  National  Association  of  County  and  City  Health  Officials,
Matthew  Zahn,  MD,  Santa  Ana,  California;  National  Association  of  Pediatric  Nurse
Practitioners,  Patricia  Stinchfield,  MPH,  St  Paul,  Minnesota;  National  Foundation  for
Infectious  Diseases,  William  Schaffner,  MD,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  National  Medical
Association,  Patricia  Whitley-Williams,  MD,  New  Brunswick,  New  Jersey;  National
Vaccine  Advisory  Committee,  Walter  Orenstein,  MD,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Pharmaceutical
Research  and  Manufacturers  of  America,  Damian  A.  Braga,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania;
Society  for  Adolescent  Health  and  Medicine,  Amy  Middleman,  MD,  Houston,  Texas;
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Harry Keyserling, MD, Atlanta, Georgia.
The ACIP Meningococcal and Haemophilus influenzae b Work Group Membership as of
February  21,  2013  Chair:  Lorry  Rubin,  MD,  Steven  and  Alexandra  Cohen  Children's
Medical Center of New York, New Hyde Park, New York Members: William Atkinson, MD;
Carol Baker, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Michael Brady, MD, Ohio
State  University,  Columbus,  Ohio;  Douglas  Campos-Outcalt,  MD,  University  of  Arizona

College  of  Medicine,  Phoenix,  Arizona;  Richard  Clover,  MD,  University  of  Louisville
School  of  Public  Health,  Louisville,  Kentucky;  Kristen  Ehresmann,  MPH,  Minnesota
Department  of  Health,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota;  Rachel  Herlihy,  MD,  Association  of
Immunization
 Managers,
 Denver,
 Colorado;
 Lucia
 Lee,
 MD,
 Food
 and
 Drug
Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Martin  Luta,  MD,  Delaware  Division  of  Public
Health, Dover, Delaware; Michael Marcy, MD, University of Southern California School of
Medicine,  Los  Angeles,  California;  W.  Paul  McKinney,  MD,  Association  for  Prevention
Teaching  and  Research,  Louisville,  Kentucky;  Cody  Meissner,  MD,  Tufts  University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; Amy Middleman, MD, Society for Adolescent
Health  and  Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;  Karen  O'Brien,  US  Army  Training  and  Doctrine
Command,  Fort  Monroe,  Virginia;  Paul  Offit,  MD,  Children's  Hospital  of  Philadelphia,
Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  Georges  Peter,  MD,  Rhode  Island  Hospital,  Providence,
Rhode Island; David M. Salisbury, MD, Department of Health, London, United Kingdom;
William  Schaffner,  MD,  National  Foundation  for  Infectious  Diseases,  Nashville,
Tennessee; David Stephens, MD, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia;
James  C.  Turner,  MD,  American  College  Health  Association,  Charlottesville,  Virginia;
Marietta  Vázquez,  MD,  Yale  University  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut.
Contributors  (CDC):  Yabo  Akinsanya-Beysolow,  MD,  Elizabeth  C.  Briere,  MD,  Thomas
Clark,  MD,  Amanda  C.  Cohn,  MD,  Jonathan  Duffy,  MD,  Jessica  MacNeil,  MPH,  Nancy
Messonnier,  MD,  Ismael  Ortega-Sanchez,  PhD,  Shannon  Stokley,  MPH.   Use  of  trade
names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 

the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6301a1.htm
