Volume 10 — November 27, 2013 Suggested citation for this article: Ma Z, Fisher MA. 
The Effect of Philadelphia and Pennsylvania Clean Indoor Air Act on Food Services and
Drinking Places Sales and Numbers, 1998-2011. Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:130143. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd10.130143. PEER REVIEWED Introduction
Philadelphia enacted its Clean Indoor Air Act (CIAA) nearly 2 years before the statewide
CIAA.  In  this  study,  we  assessed  the  economic  impact  of  CIAAs  on  4  types  of  food
services  and  drinking  places  and  addressed  the  predominant  limitation  of  previous
pre–post ban studies, namely the lack of control for confounders and changes in secular
trends over time. Methods
We  analyzed  data  from  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Revenue  Quarterly  1998–2011
taxable  county-level  revenue  sales  and  number  of  food  services  and  drinking  places.
Region-specific  and  type-specific  adjusted  sales  and  number  of  food  services  and
drinking  places  accounted  for  consumer  spending  as  a  general  economic  indicator.
Segmented  regression  analysis  of  interrupted  time-series  methodology  assessed
changes in trend and level. Results
Pennsylvania CIAA had no significant effect on adjusted sales or numbers except for an
increase in sales in Philadelphia for limited-service eating places and in the surrounding
4 counties for special food services. Philadelphia CIAA was associated with an increase
in adjusted numbers of full-service restaurants in Philadelphia and the rest of the state,
special food services in Philadelphia, and drinking places in the rest of the state, and a
decrease  in  the  number  of  special  food  services  in  the  surrounding  counties.
Philadelphia CIAA had no significant effect on adjusted sales except for an increase in
special food services in the rest of the state. Conclusion
Overall, CIAAs had no negative business-related impact and, for the most part, suggest
a positive impact on restaurant sales and numbers. Our results provide further support

for comprehensive CIAA ordinance for restaurants. Top of Page Pennsylvania has joined
an ever growing number of places around the world that protect workers and the public
from  the  health  consequences  of  indoor  secondhand  smoke.  The  Pennsylvania  Clear
Indoor Air Act (CIAA) became effective in September 2008, 90 days after being signed
into law in June 2008 (1). The Pennsylvania CIAA prohibits smoking in enclosed public
places,  including  restaurants  and  drinking  establishments  that  do  not  have  legally
approved  exemptions.  On  January  8,  2007,  before  the  enactment  of  Pennsylvania’s
CIAA, Philadelphia County banned smoking in all indoor public places and workplaces,
including  restaurants  and  drinking  establishments  with  similar  exemptions  (2).  There
are 2 types of drinking establishments (with or without a separate eating area) that can
apply for exemptions from the CIAA if food accounts for 20% or less of overall sales and
no one under the age of 18 is permitted to enter (1,2). The Philadelphia CIAA is the only
local  smoking  ban  in  Pennsylvania;  other  local  governments  are  preempted  from
regulating  smoking  more  stringently  than  the  state’s  CIAA.  Even  though  numerous
peer‐reviewed studies on the impact of smoke‐free policies on restaurant and drinking
establishment revenues have found these policies to have no negative effect on sales
(3–7),  opponents  of  comprehensive  CIAAs  that  do  not  permit  exemptions  continue  to
create  concern  regarding  potential  loss  of  revenue  for  these  businesses  due  to  a
smoking ban. Opponents of the ban also disregard or question the evidence reported in
many studies that smoke‐free policies may actually have a small but significant positive
impact on sales (3,4,7–9). Reviews of studies assessing sales tax or business revenues,
employment,  and  number  of  licensed  establishments  concluded  that  smoke‐free  air
legislation  does  not  have  an  adverse  economic  impact  on  the  hospitality  industry
(including  restaurants,  drinking  establishments/bars)  (7,8,10).  In  addition,  a  2010
Cochrane  qualitative  narrative  review  (11)  reported  that  smoking  bans  had  no
significant economic impact when measured as bar and restaurant attendance (12–15).
Our study was designed to address the predominant limitation of pre–post ban studies

identified  in  the  Cochrane  review,  namely  the  lack  of  control  for  confounders  and
changes in secular trends over time (11). The objective of this study was to assess the
economic impact of CIAAs on food services and drinking places in Pennsylvania using a
naturally occurring study designed to compare trends and level changes in the adjusted
quarterly  revenue  sales  and  number  of  establishments.  Because  Philadelphia  County
enacted  its  CIAA  almost  2  years  before  the  rest  of  the  state,  we  will  compare  food
services and drinking places revenue sales in Philadelphia County versus the rest of the
state,  and  in  Philadelphia  County  versus  the  4  large  suburban  Pennsylvania  counties
surrounding Philadelphia (Bucks, Chester, Delaware, and Montgomery). This approach
addresses  the  proximity  effect  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Pennsylvania  CIAAs  and  the
predominant limitation of previous pre–post ban studies. Top of Page Quarterly adjusted
revenue  sales  and  adjusted  number  of  food  services  and  drinking  places  were
developed to take into account the general economic indicator of consumer spending.
Food services and drinking places were defined as 4 distinct categories based on North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes: Full-Service Restaurants (NAICS
code  7221),  Limited-Service  Eating  Places  (NAICS  code  7222),  Special  Food  Services
(NAICS code 7223), and Drinking Places (alcoholic beverages) (NAICS code 7224). The
overall  quarterly  taxable  revenue  sales  and  overall  number  of  general  merchandise
stores  (GMSs)  (NAICS  code  452)  were  used  as  a  general  economic  indicator  of
consumer spending, similar to previous definitions using total retail sales (16). Adjusted
revenue  sales  were  defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  sales  for  each  type  of  establishment
divided by the GMS sales: Adjusted Number of Food Services and Drinking Places were
defined as the ratio of the number of type of establishment divided by the number of
GMSs:  Regions  in  the  state  were  categorized  into  3  nonoverlapping  regions:
Philadelphia  County,  the  4  Pennsylvania  counties  surrounding  Philadelphia  (Bucks,
Chester, Delaware, and Montgomery), and the rest of the state (61 counties, excluding
1 county because of an aberration of 99.9% loss in GMS). The time variable was defined

as quarter (first through fourth) and year (1998–2011). Segmented regression analyses
of  interrupted  time-series  methods  (17)  were  used  to  assess  the  impact  of  both  the
Philadelphia and Pennsylvania CIAA on food services and drinking places. The analytic
approach  compared  regions  and  changes  in  levels  and  trends  of  food  services  and
drinking  places’  adjusted  revenue  sales  and  adjusted  numbers,  following  the  2  time
points of the Philadelphia CIAA and Pennsylvania CIAA. These adjusted outcomes take
into  account  the  general  economic  indicator  of  consumer  spending.  This  method
controls  for  baseline  level  and  trend  when  estimating  expected  changes  due  to  the
Philadelphia CIAA and the Pennsylvania CIAA. The following is the time-series regression
equation  for  this  analysis:  ŷt  =  β0  +  (β1  ×  Time)  +  (β2i  ×  CIAAi)  +  (β3i  ×
Time_post_CIAAi)  +  Qrt  +  et  ŷt  is  the  dependent  outcome  variable,  with  a  separate
model  for  each  of  the  8  dependent  variables  (adjusted  full-service  restaurant  sales,
adjusted  limited-service  eating  places  sales,  adjusted  special  food  services  sales,
adjusted  drinking  places  sales,  adjusted  number  of  full-service  restaurants,  adjusted
number  of  limited-service  eating  places,  adjusted  number  of  special  food  services,
adjusted  number  of  drinking  places)  for  each  of  the  3  regions  (Philadelphia,  counties
surrounding  Philadelphia,  and  the  rest  of  the  state).  Time  is  the  number  of  quarters
from the start of the observational period, starting from the first quarter of 1998 as 1,
and then increasing by 1 for every quarter thereafter. CIAA is a dummy variable with a
value of 0 for the segment before the CIAA and 1 for the segment at the beginning and
post CIAA. Time_post_CIAA is the number of quarters at the beginning post CIAA with a
value of 0 for the segment before the CIAA and 1 for the segment at the beginning of
the CIAA that increases by 1 for every quarter thereafter. Subscript i equals 1 for the
date of enactment of the Philadelphia CIAA and equals 2 for the date of enactment of
the  Pennsylvania  CIAA.  Qrt  is  the  quarter  of  the  year  for  the  sales  and  number  of
establishments and quarter 4 was the reference; et is the random variation at time t
not explained by the model. The intercept β0 coefficient estimates the baseline level of

the  adjusted  sales/adjusted  number  of  establishments  at  the  beginning  of  the
observation period. β1 estimates the trend for the adjusted sales/adjusted number of
establishments  before  the  enactment  time  of  the  CIAA.  β2  estimates  the  change  in
adjusted sales/adjusted number of establishments level after the enactment of the CIAA
measured as the change from the last time point before enactment of the CIAA to the
first  time  point  after  the  enactment  of  the  CIAA.  β2  can  be  considered  to  be  an
immediate change in the level of the adjusted sales/adjusted number of establishments
due  to  the  enactment  of  the  CIAA.  β3  estimates  the  change  in  the  trend  for  the
adjusted  sales/adjusted  number  of  establishments  after  enactment  of  the  CIAA
compared  with  the  trend  for  the  adjusted  sales/adjusted  number  of  establishments
before the CIAA. SAS Proc Autoreg (SAS Institute, Inc, Cary, North Carolina) was used
for  the  analyses.  The  Durbin-Watson  statistic  was  calculated  to  test  for  the  serial
autocorrelation  of  the  error  terms  in  the  regression  models.  The  Yule-Walker  method
with  backstep  option  was  used  to  correct  autocorrelation  (18).  Initial  auto-regressive
parameters were set to 5 to account for quarterly changes. A quadratic term in time
was  incorporated  in  some  models  to  reduce  the  autocorrelations  in  the  model.  Both
positive and negative autocorrelations were nonsignificant in all final models. All final
models  had  a  Durbin-Watson  statistic  value  close  to  the  preferred  value  of  2.  The
statistical package SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute, 
Inc, Cary, North Carolina) was used for all analyses. A P value of <.05 was considered
significant. Top of Page Neither the Philadelphia CIAA nor the Pennsylvania CIAA had a
significant impact on the trend or level of the largest component of the food services
and drinking places market, namely, adjusted sales for full-service restaurant in any of
the 3 regions (Philadelphia, surrounding counties, and the rest of the state) (Table 1,
Figure  1).  The  trend  for  the  adjusted  number  of  full-service  restaurants  increased  in
Philadelphia (β31 = 0.079, P = .02) and the rest of the state (β31 = 0.191, P = .02)
associated  with  Philadelphia’s  CIAA.  However,  the  Pennsylvania  CIAA  was  not

associated  with  any  significant  change  in  the  trend  or  level  of  adjusted  number  of
full-service restaurants (Table 2, Figure 2). 
 Figure  1.  Effect  of  Philadelphia  and  Pennsylvania  Clean  Indoor  Air  Act  (CIAA)  on
adjusted sales for each region and type of food service or drinking place, 1998–2011.
Philadelphia  County  enacted  a  CIAA  in  January  2007,  and  the  Pennsylvania  CIAA
became effective in September 2008; both dates are indicated by vertical lines. [A 
tabular version of this figure is also available.] 
 Figure 2. Effect of Philadelphia and Pennsylvania CIAA on adjusted number of types of
food service or drinking place for each region, 1998–2011. Philadelphia County enacted
a  CIAA  in  January  2007,  and  the  Pennsylvania  CIAA  became  effective  in  September
2008; both dates are indicated by vertical lines. [A tabular version of this figure is also
available.]  The  only  significant  effect  of  the  CIAAs  was  the  association  of  the
Pennsylvania CIAA with a positive immediate increase in Philadelphia’s adjusted sales
for limited-service eating places (β22 = 0.805, P = .03) but not the trend (β32) (Table 1,
Figure  1).  Neither  the  Philadelphia  CIAA  nor  the  Pennsylvania  CIAA  had  a  significant
impact on the trend or level of the adjusted revenue sales for special food services in
Philadelphia or the 4 surrounding counties. The Philadelphia CIAA was associated with
an increase in the trend (β31 = 0.006, P = .04) for the adjusted special food services
sales in the rest of the state but had no immediate impact (β21). The Pennsylvania CIAA
was associated with an immediate decrease in adjusted special food services sales (β22
= −0.030, P = .02) in the rest of the state (Table 1, Figure 1), along with an increasing
trend for the number of special food services restaurants in the 4 surrounding counties
(β32 = 0.030, P < .001)( Table 2, Figure 2). The Philadelphia CIAA was associated with a
decreasing trend for the adjusted number of special food services in the 4 surrounding
counties  (β31  =  −0.018,  P  =  .008)  that  was  coupled  with  an  increasing  trend  in

Philadelphia  (β31  =  0.017,  P  =  .002).  Neither  the  Philadelphia  nor  the  Pennsylvania
CIAA had a significant impact on the trend or level of the adjusted revenue sales for
drinking places in any of the 3 regions (Table 1, Figure 1). The Philadelphia CIAA was
associated  with  an  increasing  trend  in  the  adjusted  number  of  drinking  places  in  the
surrounding counties (β31 = 0.059, P = .02) and the rest of the state (β31 = 0.094, P =
.009) but had no immediate impact (β21). The Pennsylvania CIAA was not associated
with either the trend or the level of the adjusted number of drinking places in any of the
3  regions  (Table  2)  (Figure  2).  We  noticed  seasonal  (quarterly)  differences  in  the
adjusted sales and adjusted number of food services and drinking places in all 3 regions
(Table 1, Table 2, Figure 1, Figure 2). These seasonal differences were found in all 4
types  of  food  services  and  drinking  places:  full-service  restaurants,  limited  service
eating places, special food services, and drinking places. Top of Page Our analysis of
the  economic  impact  of  indoor  smoking  bans  on  Pennsylvania’s  eating  and  drinking
establishments did not suggest that businesses in general were harmed. There were 2
instances  of  immediate  impact  on  food  services  adjusted  taxable  revenues,  but  they
were not consistent in their general direction (positive or negative). For the most part,
the  effect  on  adjusted  taxable  sales  was  small,  and  the  effect  on  the  number  of
establishments was favorable in comparison to the period before the smoking ban. Our
study  was  designed  to  address  the  predominant  limitation  of  pre-ban  and  post-ban
studies (3,8,12–16), namely the lack of control for confounders and changes in secular
trends over time (9,11). Our analytic approach has several unique features compared
with  other  interrupted  time-series  analyses  of  economic  outcomes  in  the  hospitality
industry (19–23). For one, the phased implementation of CIAA statutes in Pennsylvania
provided a naturally occurring quasi-experimental study design. The Philadelphia CIAA
was implemented approximately 2 years earlier than the Pennsylvania CIAA, and only
Philadelphia restaurants and drinking establishments were initially affected. This timing
provided an opportunity to evaluate the consistency of the effect of the CIAAs on the

food services and drinking places for both CIAAs using the other as a control. Second, in
addition to assessing the tax-revenue sales, we also investigated the immediate impact
and  long-term  trend  on  the  number  of  food  services  and  drinking  places.  Third,  by
investigating 4 distinct categories of food service establishments separately, we were
able  to  examine  the  consistency  of  findings  for  different  types  of  food  services  and
drinking  places.  Few  economic  studies  evaluated  food  services  and  drinking  places
separately. Hence, this assessment adds to the scientific evidence on whether eating
and  drinking  establishments  are  differentially  affected.  Fourth,  to  address  the
neighborhood effect of the CIAAs on the trend and level of food services and drinking
places  sales  and  numbers,  analyses  were  performed  for  3  separate  regions:
Philadelphia,  the  4  surrounding  counties,  and  the  remainder  of  the  state.  Segmented
regression  analysis  of  interrupted  time-series  was  used  to  account  for  the  trend  and
autocorrelation. As reported by Glantz and Smith, serial autocorrelation usually exists in
time-series data (16). Autocorrelation was also observed in most of our analyses, thus
raising  concerns  that  the  assumptions  of  ordinary  regression  analysis  were  not  met.
One key assumption for ordinary regression analysis is that the errors are independent
(24).  However,  with  time-series  data,  the  ordinary  regression  analysis  residuals  are
usually correlated over time; thus, it is appropriate to consider an alternative analytic
approach  for  time-series  data.  Violation  of  the  independent-errors  assumption  for
ordinary  regression  analysis  could  result  in  erroneous  statistical  significance  of  the
parameters, and the confidence limits for the predicted value and the estimate of the
regression coefficients are not as efficient as they would be if the autocorrelation were
taken  into  account.  Our  quasi-experimental  design,  which  controls  for  baseline  level
and trend when estimating the changes due to CIAAs, addresses the weakness of the
simpler pre- and post-proportion comparison methods of ordinary regression that do not
consider pre-intervention trends. An evaluation of the rate level and trend before and
after  the  CIAAs  is  a  stronger  analytic  approach  so  that  an  existing  trend  is  not

incorrectly interpreted to be related to an intervention, as can occur when performing
the ordinary regression analysis. In addition to the individual models, a combined model
with interaction terms was also performed to determine whether the Philadelphia and
Pennsylvania  CIAA  had  different  effects  in  the  3  regions.  The  assumption  of  this
approach was that the trends for the adjusted food services and drinking places sales
and  numbers  among  the  3  regions  in  the  state  were  parallel  before  the  CIAAs.  No
statistically significant interaction terms were found, indicating that the CIAAs did not
have  a  different  effect  on  the  3  comparison  regions.  Our  major  finding,  namely,  that
indoor  smoking  bans  did  not  significantly  affect  quarterly  revenue  in  eating  and
drinking  establishments,  is  similar  to  findings  in  other  geographic  locations  in  the
United States (3,6,12,25–27) and worldwide (5,7,14,15). Contrary to the lack of relation
between Ohio’s ban and economic activity in Kentucky’s border counties (26), the data
in Pennsylvania suggest a possible migration of businesses across counties as depicted
by the reduction in the number of special food services in the 4 surrounding counties
that  was  coupled  with  the  increase  in  Philadelphia  following  the  Philadelphia  CIAA.  A
limitation  of  our  study  is  that  it  was  not  possible  to  determine  which  drinking
establishments in our analyses were exempt from the CIAA. Thus, the lack of impact of
CIAAs  may  be  due  to  the  number  of  drinking  establishments  that  applied  for  and
received an exemption. The most current 2011 data indicates approximately two-thirds
of  the  drinking  places  have  exemptions  (28).  Further  assessment  of  exempt  versus
nonexempt may provide more information. Also, even though we incorporated GMSs as
an  economic  indicator  in  our  analyses  of  adjusted  sales  and  numbers,  there  may  be
some  other  confounding  factors  or  events,  especially  those  that  could  affect  food
services and drinking places differently than the GMSs. These could potentially change
the effect of CIAAs on food services and drinking places adjusted sales and numbers.
Our  study  design  addressed  the  predominant  limitation  of  previous  pre-ban  and
post-ban  studies  and  concerns  of  opponents  of  more  comprehensive  smoking  bans

about  potential  loss  of  revenue.  The  results  of  this  segmented  regression  analysis  of
interrupted time-series approach are consistent with the previous studies and suggest
the  need  to  further  investigate  the  impact  of  CIAAs  on  drinking  places.  Overall,  the
indoor smoking bans had no negative business-related consequences, and for the most
part, the data suggested a positive impact. This finding should allay concerns about the
economic consequences of smoking restrictions on the hospitality industry and support
comprehensive  CIAA  ordinances  to  protect  the  health  and  well-being  of  those  who
patronize and work in these locations, especially in food-service establishments. Top of
Page  We  acknowledge  the  support,  review,  and  insightful  comments  provided  by  Dr
Stephen  M.  Ostroff,  MD,  Director  of  the  Bureau  of  Epidemiology  at  the  Pennsylvania
Department of Health at the time this study was initiated. This study was supported by
the CDC Coordinated Chronic Disease Prevention grant CDC-RFA-DP09-9010301PPHF11
and National Association of Chronic Disease Directors Epidemiology Capacity Building
grant NACDD-0612012. Top of Page Corresponding Author: Zhen-qiang Ma, MD, MPH,
MS, Pennsylvania Department of Health, Bureau of Epidemiology, 625 Forster St, Room
1000, Harrisburg, PA 17120. Telephone: 717-547-3224. E-mail: 
zma@pa.gov. Author Affiliations: Monica A. Fisher, Pennsylvania Department of Health,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Top of Page Top of Page Abbreviation: CIAA, Clean Indoor Air
Act.   Abbreviation: CIAA, Clean Indoor Air Act.a Model includes quadratic term for time. 
Top  of  Page  The  opinions  expressed  by  authors  contributing  to  this  journal  do  not
necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the  Public  Health  Service,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  or  the
authors' affiliated institutions.
 How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site? 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2013/13_0143.htm
