 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  The  material  in  this  report
originated in the National Center for 
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), 
Kevin Fenton, MD, PhD, Director, and the Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, Kenneth
G. Castro, MD, Director.
 Corresponding address: Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for 
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention 
(proposed),  CDC,  1600  Clifton  Road,  NE,  MS  E-10,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.  Telephone:
404-639-8120; Fax: 404-639-8604.
Summary
 Tuberculosis (TB) control can be particularly problematic in correctional and detention
facilities, in which persons 
from diverse backgrounds and communities are housed in close proximity for varying
periods. This report provides a framework 
and general guidelines for effective prevention and control of TB in jails, prisons, and
other correctional and detention 
facilities. Recommendations were developed on the basis of published guidelines and a
review of the scientific literature. Effective 
TB-prevention and -control measures in correctional facilities include early identification
of persons with TB disease through 

entry and periodic follow-up screening; successful treatment of TB disease and latent
TB infection; appropriate use of 
airborne  precautions  (e.g.,  airborne  infection  isolation,  environmental  controls,  and
respiratory protection); comprehensive 
discharge planning; and thorough and efficient contact investigation. These measures
should be instituted in close collaboration 
with  local  or  state  health  department  TB-control  programs  and  other  key  partners.
Continuing education of inmates, detainees, 
and correctional facility staff is necessary to maximize cooperation and participation. To
ensure TB-prevention and 
-control measures are effective, periodic program evaluation should be conducted.
Introduction
 Tuberculosis (TB) is a disease caused by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis that adversely affects public health around the world 
(1).  In  the  United  States,  TB  control  remains  a  substantial  public  health  challenge  in
multiple settings. TB can be 
particularly problematic in correctional and detention 
facilities (2), in which persons from diverse backgrounds and communities 
are housed in close proximity for varying periods. Effective TB prevention and control
measures in correctional facilities 
are needed to reduce TB rates among inmates and the general U.S. population.
 The  recommendations  provided  in  this  report  for  the  control  of  TB  in  correctional
facilities expand on, update, 
and supersede recommendations issued by the Advisory Council for the Elimination of
TB (ACET) in 1996 

(3).  This  report  provides  a  framework  and  general  guidelines  for  effective  prevention
and control of TB in jails, prisons, and other 
correctional  and  detention  facilities.  In  addition,  on  the  basis  of  existing  scientific
knowledge and applied experience of correctional 
and  public  health  officials,  this  report  defines  the  essential  activities  necessary  for
preventing transmission of 
M.  tuberculosis  in  correctional  facilities.  These  fundamental  activities  can  be
categorized as 1) screening (finding persons with TB disease 
and  latent  TB  infection  [LTBI]);  2)  containment  (preventing  transmission  of  TB  and
treating patients with TB disease and 
LTBI);  3)  assessment  (monitoring  and  evaluating  screening  and  containment  efforts);
and 4) collaboration between 
correctional facilities and public health departments 
in TB control. These overarching activities are best achieved when 
correctional facility and public health department 
staff are provided with clear roles of shared 
responsibility.
 The  recommendations  in  this  report  can  assist  officials  of  federal,  state,  and  local
correctional facilities in 
preventing  transmission  of  TB  and  controlling  TB  among  inmates  and  facility
employees. The target audience for this report includes 
public health department personnel, correctional medical directors and administrators,
private correctional health vendors, staff 
in  federal  and  state  agencies,  staff  in  professional  organizations,  and  health-care
professionals. The report is intended to 
assist  policymakers  in  reaching  informed  decisions  regarding  the  prevention  and
control of TB in correctional facilities.

Methods
 To  update  the  existing  guidelines,  with  assistance  from  ACET,  CDC  organized  and
convened the Tuberculosis 
in  Corrections  Working  Group,  an  ad  hoc  group  of  persons  with  expertise  in  public
health and health care in 
correctional facilities. Organizations represented in the Working Group included ACET,
the National Commission on Correctional 
Health Care, the American Correctional Association, the American Jail Association, and
the Society of Correctional Physicians. 
The  Working  Group  reviewed  published  guidelines  and  recommendations,  published
and unpublished policies and protocols, 
and peer-reviewed studies discussing overall TB prevention and control and aspects of
TB prevention and control specific 
to  correctional  and  detention  facilities.  These  guidelines,  recommendations,  policies,
protocols, and studies form the basis for 
the  Working  Group's  recommendations.  Because  controlled  trials  are  lacking  for  TB
prevention and control activities 
and interventions specific to correctional and detention facilities, the recommendations
have not been rated on the quality 
and quantity of the evidence. The recommendations reflect the expert opinion of the
Working Group members with regard to 
best practices, based on their experience and their review of the literature.
Summary of Changes from Previous Recommendations

 These  guidelines  are  intended  for  short-  and  long-term  confinement  facilities  (e.g.,
prisons, jails, and juvenile 
detention centers), which are typically referred to as correctional facilities throughout
this report. These recommendations 
differ as follows from those made in 1996:
 During 1980--2003, the number of incarcerated persons in the United States increased
fourfold, from 
approximately 500,000 in 1980 to approximately 2 million in 2003 
(4,5). A disproportionately high percentage of TB cases occur 
among persons incarcerated in U.S. correctional facilities. In 2003 at midyear, although
0.7% of the total US population 
was 
confined in prisons and jails, 3.2% of all TB cases nationwide occurred among residents
of correctional facilities 
(6).  Although  overall  incidence  of  new  TB  cases  among  the  U.S.  population  has
remained at <10 cases per 100,000 persons 
since 1993 (6), substantially higher case rates have been 
reported in correctional populations (2). For example, the 
incidence of TB among inmates in New Jersey during 1994 was 91.2 cases per 100,000
inmates, compared with 11.0 cases per 
100,000 persons among all New Jersey residents 
(3). In 1991, a TB case rate for inmates of a California prison was 184 cases 
per 100,000 persons, which was 10 times greater than the statewide rate 
(7). In addition, in 1993, the TB rate for inmates in 
the  New  York  State  correctional  system  was  139.3  cases  per  100,000  persons,  an
increase from the rate of 15.4 during 

1976--1978  (3,8).  In  California,  the  TB  case  rate  reported  from  an  urban  jail  in  a
high-prevalence area was 72.1 cases per 100,000 
inmates in 1998, representing 10% of the county's cases in that year 
(9). Studies have demonstrated the prevalence of LTBI 
among  inmates  to  be  as  high  as  25%  (10--14).  Other  studies  have  demonstrated  a
correlation 
between length of incarceration and positive tuberculin skin test (TST) 
response, indicating that transmission might have occurred 
in these facilities (15,16).
 At least three factors contribute to the high rate of TB in correctional and detention
facilities. First, disparate numbers 
of  incarcerated  persons  are  at  high  risk  for  TB  (e.g.,  users  of  illicit  substances  [e.g.,
injection drugs], persons of 
low  socioeconomic  status,  and  persons  with  human  immunodeficiency  virus  [HIV]
infection). These persons often have 
not received standard public health interventions or nonemergency medical care before
incarceration. Second, the 
physical structure of the facilities contributes to disease transmission, as facilities often
provide close living quarters, might 
have inadequate ventilation, and can be overcrowded 
(9,17--19). Third, movement of inmates into and out of overcrowded 
and  inadequately  ventilated  facilities,  coupled  with  existing  TB-related  risk  factors  of
the inmates, combine to make 
correctional and detention facilities a high-risk environment for the transmission 
of M. tuberculosis and make implementation of 
TB-control measures particularly difficult 
(19). Despite recent efforts to improve TB-control measures in correctional 

and  detention  facilities,  outbreaks  of  TB  continue  to  occur  in  these  settings,  and  TB
disease has been transmitted to persons 
living  in  nearby  communities  (20--22).  Consequently,  correctional  and  detention
facilities are critical settings in which to 
provide interventions for detecting and treating TB among a vulnerable population.
 
Addressing the Challenges of TB Control in Correctional Facilities
 Published recommendations for elimination of TB in the United States include testing
and treating inmates in 
correctional facilities for LTBI to prevent the development and transmission of TB 
(23). The basis for this recommendation is that 
LTBI and coinfection with HIV are more common in these underserved populations than
in the general population 
(24--26). However, treating correctional inmates for LTBI can be challenging.
 Before being incarcerated, inmates might have faced barriers to accessing community
health services necessary for 
the detection and treatment of TB disease and LTBI 
(27). In addition, inmates released from correctional facilities often do 
not attend clinic visits or adhere to treatment regimens. One study of inmates released
before completion of TB therapy 
indicated that only 43% made at least one visit to the clinic after release 
(28). In another jail setting, using an educational 
intervention increased the rate of clinic visits after release from 3% to only 23% 
(29).
 In the United States, TB is concentrated increasingly among the most disadvantaged
populations, particularly 
immigrants  (30).  Detained  immigrants  are  arriving  largely  from  countries  with  a  high

prevalence of TB (e.g., Mexico, the Philippines, 
and Vietnam) and therefore present unique challenges in the elimination of TB in the 
United States* (31). Social and legal 
barriers  often  make  standard  testing  and  treatment  interventions  inadequate  among
undocumented immigrants 
(31).  In  certain  instances,  these  patients  have  become  resistant  to  first-line  anti-TB
drugs because of the interrupted treatment 
received in their countries of origin (32). However, undocumented immigrants placed in
detention and correctional 
facilities  have  an  opportunity  to  receive  TB  screening  and  begin  treatment  for  TB
disease 
(33).
 
Rationale for Updating and Strengthening TB Control and Prevention Guidelines
 Transmission  of  M.  tuberculosis  continues  to  be  documented  within  correctional
facilities, primarily as a result 
of  undiagnosed  TB.  Inmates  with  undiagnosed  TB  disease  place  other  inmates  and
correctional staff at risk for TB, and 
when released, these persons also can infect persons living in surrounding communities
(16,17,20,21,22,34,35).
 Despite the continued transmission of TB in correctional settings, few comprehensive
evaluations of the implementation 
of TB-detection and -control procedures in correctional facilities have been performed 
(36--38). Nevertheless, correctional facilities are increasingly basing their TB prevention
and control procedures on studies and data that support 
judicious 

interventions,  including  screening,  case  finding,  case  management,  outbreak  and
contact investigations, and treatment 
for  LTBI  (7,9,14,21,28,33,34,39--46).  Improving  TB  prevention  and  control  practices
within these settings is necessary to 
reduce  rates  of  disease  and  eventually  eliminate  TB.  TB  prevention  and  control
practices within correctional 
facilities should be strengthened for multiple reasons:
 Early identification and successful treatment of persons with TB disease remains the
most effective means of 
preventing  disease  transmission  (47).  Therefore,  inmates  who  are  likely  to  have
infectious TB should be identified and begin 
treatment  before  they  are  integrated  into  the  general  correctional  facility  population
(i.e., at the time of admission into the 
correctional system). When possible, newly arrived inmates should not be housed with
other inmates until they have been 
appropriately screened for TB disease. Screening programs in the correctional setting
also allow for the detection of substantial numbers 
of persons with LTBI who are at high risk for progressing to TB disease and would likely
benefit from a course of treatment. 
This secondary benefit of screening programs is often limited by inability to initiate and
ensure completion of LTBI 
treatment,  particularly  in  short-term  correctional  facilities.  In  addition  to  screening  at
intake, routine (i.e., at least annual) screening 
of long-term inmates and correctional facility staff (e.g., custody and medical) should
be incorporated into the 
TB-control program (48,49).

 How screening activities should be implemented depends on multiple factors, including
1) the type of facility, 2) 
the prevalence of TB infection and disease in the facility, 3) the prevalence of TB in the
inmates' communities, 4) the 
prevalence of other risk factors for TB (e.g., HIV) in the inmate population, and 5) the
average length of stay of inmates in the 
facility. The type of screening recommended for a particular facility is determined by an
assessment of the risk for TB 
transmission  within  that  facility.  The  risk  assessment  should  be  performed  at  least
annually and should be made in collaboration with 
the local or state health department. A facility's TB risk can be defined as being minimal
or nonminimal. 
A facility has minimal TB risk if
 Any facility that does not meet these criteria should be categorized as a nonminimal TB
risk facility.
Screening Methods
 
Symptom Screening
 Whenever  possible,  health-care  professionals  should  perform  the  initial  screening.
However, correctional officers in 
jails  (particularly  those  housing  minimal  numbers  of  inmates)  frequently  administer
health intake questionnaires. If custody 
staff members conduct the intake screening, they should 
receive adequate periodic training in taking a medical history, 
making necessary observations, and determining the appropriate disposition of inmates

with signs or symptoms of possible 
medical  problems.  Staff  conducting  medical  intake  should  receive  appropriate
counseling and education regarding 
medical confidentiality.
 During their initial medical screening, inmates should be asked if they have a history of
TB disease or if they have 
been  treated  for  LTBI  or  TB  disease  previously.  Documentation  of  any  such  history
should be obtained from medical records, 
if  possible.  Inmates  should  be  observed  for  the  presence  of  a  cough  or  evidence  of
significant weight loss. All incoming 
inmates  in  any  size  jail,  prison,  or  other  detention  facility  (e.g.,  immigration
enforcement) should be immediately screened 
for symptoms of pulmonary TB by being asked if they have had a prolonged cough (i.e.,
one lasting 
>3  weeks),  hemoptysis  (i.e.,  bloody  sputum),  or  chest  pain.  The  index  of  suspicion
should be high when pulmonary symptoms are accompanied 
by general, systemic symptoms of TB (e.g., fever, chills, night sweats, easy fatigability,
loss of appetite, and weight loss). 
Inmates should be interviewed systematically (i.e., 
using a standardized questionnaire) to determine whether they have 
experienced symptoms in recent weeks. Inmates who have symptoms suggestive of TB
disease should immediately 
receive a thorough medical evaluation, including a TST or QFT-G, a chest radiograph,
and, if indicated, sputum examinations.
 Persons  with  symptoms  suggestive  of  TB  disease  or  with  a  history  of  inadequate
treatment for TB disease should 
be immediately placed in an AII 

room§ until they have undergone a thorough medical evaluation. If deemed infectious, 
such  persons  should  remain  in  isolation  until  treatment  has  rendered  them
noninfectious. Facilities without an on-site AII 
room should have a written plan for referring patients with suspected or confirmed TB
to a facility that is equipped to 
isolate, evaluate, and treat TB patients.
 Symptom screening alone is an unsatisfactory screening mechanism for TB, except in
facilities with a minimal risk for 
TB  transmission.  The  use  of  symptom  screening  alone  often  will  fail  to  detect
pulmonary TB in inmates.
 
Chest-Radiograph Screening
 Screening with chest radiographs can be an effective means of detecting new cases of
unsuspected TB disease at intake to 
a correctional facility. In addition, radiographic screening 
requires fewer subsequent visits than a TST (i.e., only those 
inmates with suspicious radiographs or TB symptoms require follow-up). However, such
screening will not identify inmates 
with  LTBI.  One  study  demonstrated  that  screening  inmates  with  a  chest  radiograph
doubled the TB case-finding rate and 
reduced  the  time  from  intake  into  the  correctional  facility  to  isolation  substantially
compared with TST testing (2.3 days and 7.5 
days,  respectively),  thereby  reducing  the  risk  for  TB  exposure  for  other  inmates  and
staff 
(50). Digital radiographs (miniature or full-size) provide 
enhanced imaging and improved storage and readability. 
A miniature radiograph can be performed in 

<1 minute and exposes the patient to approximately 
one tenth the radiation dose of a conventional radiograph. One 
cost-effectiveness  analysis  of  miniature  chest  radiography  for  TB  screening  on
admission to jail indicated that more cases 
were detected with this method than either TST or symptom screening, and the cost of
radiograph screening was less per 
case  detected  (51).  The  extent  to  which  radiologic  screening  is  used  in  a  given
institution should be dictated by multiple 
factors, including 1) local epidemiologic characteristics of TB disease; 2) inmate length
of stay; 3) the ability of the 
health-care professionals within the facility to conduct careful histories, tuberculin skin
or QFT-G testing, and cross-matches with 
state TB registries; and 4) timeliness of the radiographic 
study and its reading. Screening with chest radiographs 
might  be  appropriate  in  certain  jails  and  detention  facilities  that  house  substantial
numbers of inmates for short periods and 
serve populations at high risk for TB (e.g., those with high prevalence of HIV infection or
history of 
injection-drug  use  and  foreign-born  persons  from  countries  in  which  TB  prevalence  is
high).
 Inmates  who  are  infected  with  HIV  might  be  anergic  and  consequently  might  have
false-negative TST results. 
However,  routine  anergy  panel  testing  is  not  recommended  because  it  has  not  been
demonstrated to assist in diagnosing or 
excluding LTBI (52). In facilities that do not perform routine radiographic screening for
all inmates, a chest radiograph should be part 
of  the  initial  screening  of  HIV-infected  patients  and  those  who  are  at  risk  for  HIV

infection but whose status is unknown.
 In  facilities  with  on-site  radiographic  screening,  the  chest  radiograph  should  be
performed as part of intake screening 
and  read  promptly  by  a  physician,  preferably  within  24  hours.  Persons  who  have
radiographs suggestive of TB should be 
isolated  immediately  and  evaluated  further.  Sputum-smear  and  culture  examinations
should be performed for inmates whose 
chest  radiographs  are  consistent  with  TB  disease  and  might  be  indicated  for  at  least
certain persons who are symptomatic, 
regardless  of  their  TST,  QFT-G,  or  chest  radiograph  results  because  persons  with  HIV
and TB disease might have "negative" 
chest radiographs in addition to false-negative TST or QFT-G results.
 
Mantoux TST Screening
 Tuberculin  skin  testing  using  0.1  mL  of  5  tuberculin  units  (TU)  of  purified  protein
derivative (PPD) is the most 
common method of testing for TB infection. Multiple-puncture tests (e.g., the tine test)
should not be used to determine whether 
a person is infected. Persons who have a documented history of a positive TST result
(with a millimeter [mm] reading), 
a documented history of TB disease, or a reported history of a severe necrotic reaction
to tuberculin should be exempt from 
a  routine  TST.  For  persons  with  a  history  of  severe  necrotic  reactions  and  without  a
documented positive result with 
a millimeter reading, a QFT-G may be substituted for the TST. Otherwise, such persons
should be screened for symptoms 
of TB and receive a chest radiograph unless they have had one recently (i.e., within 6

months) and are not 
symptomatic.
 Pregnancy,
 lactation,
 or
 previous
 vaccination
 with
 Bacillus
Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine are not contraindications 
for  tuberculin  skin  testing.  The  TST  is  not  completely  sensitive  for  TB  disease;  its
sensitivity ranges from 75%--90% 
(53,54).  Despite  this  limitation,  skin  testing,  along  with  use  of  a  symptom  review,
frequently constitutes the most practical approach 
to screening for TB disease.
 A  trained  health-care  professional  should  place  the  TST  and  interpret  the  reaction
48--72 hours after the injection 
by  measuring  the  area  of  induration  (i.e.,  the  palpable  swelling)  at  the  injection  site.
The diameter of the indurated area should 
be measured across the width of the forearm. Erythema (i.e., the redness of the skin)
should not be measured. All reactions, 
even those classified as negative, should be recorded in millimeters of induration.
 In the majority of cases, a TST reaction of 
>10 mm induration is considered a positive result in inmates and 
correctional facility employees. However, an induration of 
>5 mm is considered a positive result in the following persons:
persons infected with HIV,
persons who are recent contacts of patients with TB 
disease,
persons with fibrotic changes on chest radiograph 

consistent with previous TB disease, 
organ  transplant  recipients  and  patients  with  other  immunocompromising  conditions
(e.g., persons receiving
>15 mg/day of prednisone for >1 month), and
persons suspected of having TB disease.
Persons  who  have  a  positive  TST  result  and  no  symptoms  suggestive  of  TB  disease
should be evaluated with a 
chest radiograph within 72 hours after the skin test is interpreted. Persons who have
symptoms suggestive of TB disease should 
be evaluated immediately and placed in an AII room until TB is ruled out (see Symptom
Screening).
The  use  of  two-step  testing  can  reduce  the  number  of  positive  TSTs  that  would
otherwise be misclassified as recent 
skin-test  conversions  during  future  periodic  screenings.  Certain  persons  who  were
infected with
M.  tuberculosis  years  earlier  exhibit  waning  delayed-type  hypersensitivity  to
tuberculin. When they are skin tested years after infection, they might have a 
false-negative TST result (even though they are truly infected). However, this first skin
test years 
after the infection might stimulate the ability to react to subsequent tests, resulting in a
"booster" reaction. When the test is repeated, the reaction might 
be  misinterpreted  as  a  new  infection  (recent  conversion)  rather  than  a  boosted
reaction. For two-step testing, persons 

whose  baseline  TSTs  yield  a  negative  result  are  retested  1--3  weeks  after  the  initial
test. If the second test 
result is negative, they are considered not infected. If the second test result is positive,
they are classified as having had previous TB infection. 
Two-step testing should be considered for the baseline testing of persons who report no
history of a recent TST and who will 
receive repeated TSTs as part of an institutional periodic skin-testing program. In the
majority of cases, a two-step TST is 
not practical in jails because of the short average length of stay of inmates.
In the past, a panel of other common antigens was often applied with the TST to obtain
information regarding 
the competence of the patient's cellular immune system and to identify anergy. More
recently, however, anergy testing has 
been  demonstrated  to  be  of  limited  usefulness  because  of  problems  with
standardization and reproducibility, the low risk for 
TB associated with a diagnosis of anergy, and the lack of apparent benefit of preventive
therapy for groups of anergic 
HIV-infected 
persons.  Therefore,  the  use  of  anergy  testing  in  conjunction  with  a  TST  is  no  longer
recommended routinely for 
screening programs for M. tuberculosis infection in the United States 
(52).
Intracutaneous inoculation with BCG is currently used 
worldwide as a vaccine against TB. BCG is a live 

attenuated Mycobacterium bovis strain that stimulates the immune system to protect
against TB. No reliable method has been developed 
to  distinguish  TST  reactions  caused  by  vaccination  with  BCG  from  those  caused  by
natural mycobacterial infections, 
although reactions of >20 mm of induration are not likely caused by BCG 
(55). TST is not contraindicated for persons who have 
been vaccinated with BCG, and the TST results of such persons are used to support or
exclude the diagnosis of
M. tuberculosis infection. A diagnosis 
of M. tuberculosis infection and treatment for LTBI should be considered for any 
BCG-vaccinated  person  who  has  a  positive  TST  reaction.  The  same  criteria  for
interpretation of TST results are used for both BCG-vaccinated 
and nonvaccinated persons (56).
QuantiFERON®-TB Gold Test 
In May 2005, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) licensed QFT-G. This in-vitro
diagnostic test measures 
the  amount  of  interferon-gamma  produced  by  cells  in  whole  blood  that  have  been
stimulated by mycobacterial peptides. 
The peptides used in the test mimic proteins known as 
ESAT-6 and CFP-10, which are present in M. 
tuberculosis  but  absent  from  all  BCG  strains  and  from  the  majority  of  commonly
encountered non-TB mycobacteria. The test is intended for use as 
a diagnostic tool for M. tuberculosis infection, 
including both TB disease and LTBI. As with a TST, QFT-G cannot 
distinguish between LTBI and TB disease and should be used in conjunction with risk
assessment, radiography, and other 

diagnostic evaluations. The advantages of QFT-G compared with TST are that 1) results
can be obtained after a single patient visit, 
2) the variability associated with skin-test reading can be reduced because "reading" is
performed in a qualified laboratory, and 
3) QFT-G is not affected by previous BCG vaccination and eliminates the unnecessary
treatment of persons with 
false-positive  results.  QFT-G  does  not  affect  the  result  of  future  QFT-G  tests  (i.e.,  no
"boosting" occurs). Limitations of the test include 
the  need  for  phlebotomy,  the  need  to  process  blood  specimens  within  12  hours  of
collection for the most recent version of 
the test, the limited number of laboratories that process the test, and a lack of clinical
experience in interpreting test results. 
The elimination of the second visit for reading the TST, however, is likely to render the
QFT-G competitive in 
cost-benefit considerations.
Although  the  performance  of  QFT-G  has  not  been  evaluated  sufficiently  in  select
populations of interest (e.g., 
HIV-infected  persons),  available  data  indicate  that  QFT-G  is  as  sensitive  as  TST  for
detection of TB disease and more specific than TST 
for detection of LTBI (57,58). CDC guidelines for QFT-G recommend that QFT-G can be
used in place of TST in 
all circumstances in which TST is currently used 
(58). This includes initial and periodic TB screening for 
correctional facility inmates and employees and testing of exposed persons in contact
investigations. Because data are insufficient 
regarding  performance  of  QFT-G  in  certain  clinical  situations,  as  with  a  negative  TST

result, a negative QFT-G result alone might 
not be sufficient to exclude M. 
tuberculosis  infection  in  these  situations.  Examples  of  such  clinical  scenarios  include
those 
involving patients with severe immunosuppression who have had recent exposure to a
patient with TB and patients being treated 
or about to undergo treatment with potent tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNF-a) antagonists. 
Use of Local Health Department TB Registry 
Correctional  facilities  and  local  health  departments  should  collaborate  to  ensure
effective TB screening in the 
correctional  setting.  Inmates  might  provide  inaccurate  information  on  admission  for
multiple reasons, ranging from forgetfulness 
and  confusion  to  deliberate  misrepresentation.  Health  departments  should  perform
cross-matches with the local TB registry 
and  search  for  matches  on  known  aliases,  birth  dates,  maiden  names,  and  other
personal information for inmates suspected 
of  having  TB  infection.  A  readily  accessible  record  of  previous  TB  history,
drug-susceptibility patterns, treatment, 
and  compliance  can  be  useful  in  determining  the  disposition  of  a  given  patient  with
suspected TB.
Initial Screening 
The  following  procedures  should  be  used  for  the  initial  screening  of  inmates  and
detainees (depending on their length 

of stay in the facility and the type of facility) and for all correctional facility employees,
regardless of the type of facility.
Inmates in Minimal TB Risk Facilities 
Inmates in all minimal TB risk correctional and detention facilities should be evaluated
on entry for symptoms of 
TB.  Persons  with  symptoms  of  TB  should  be  evaluated  immediately  to  rule  out  the
presence of infectious disease and kept in 
an  AII  room  until  they  are  evaluated.  If  the  facility  does  not  have  an  AII  room,  the
inmate should be transported to a 
facility  that  has  one.  In  addition,  all  newly  arrived  inmates  should  be  evaluated  for
clinical conditions and other factors that increase 
the risk for infection or the risk for progressing to TB disease, including the following:
HIV infection,
recent immigration,
history of TB,
recent close contact with a person with TB disease,
injection-drug use,
diabetes mellitus,
immunosuppressive therapy,
hematologic malignancy or lymphoma,
chronic renal failure,
medical conditions associated with substantial weight loss or malnutrition, or
history of gastrectomy or jejunoileal bypass.

Persons with any of these conditions require further screening with a TST, a QFT-G, or a
chest radiograph within 7 days 
of arrival. Regardless of the TST or QFT-G result, inmates known to have HIV infection
or other severe 
immunosuppression, and those who are at risk for HIV infection but whose HIV status is
unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part 
of  the  initial  screening.  Persons  who  have  an  abnormal  chest  radiograph  should  be
further evaluated to rule out TB disease; if 
TB disease is excluded as a diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if the TST or
QFT-G result is positive.
Inmates in Nonminimal TB Risk Prisons 
Immediately  on  arrival,  all  new  inmates  should  be  screened  for  symptoms,  and  any
inmate with symptoms suggestive of 
TB should be placed in an AII room and evaluated promptly for TB disease. If the facility
does not have an AII room, the 
inmate should be transported to a facility that has one. 
Inmates who have no symptoms require further screening with a TST, a 
QFT-G, or a chest radiograph within 7 days of 
arrival. Regardless of their TST or QFT-G status, inmates known to have 
HIV  infection  or  other  severe  immunosuppression,  and  those  who  are  at  risk  for  HIV
infection but whose HIV status is 
unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part of the initial screening. Persons
who have an abnormal chest 
radiograph should be further evaluated to rule out TB disease; if TB disease is excluded
as a diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if 

the TST or QFT-G result is positive. 
As  the  rate  of  TB  disease  in  the  United  States  has  decreased,  identification  and
treatment of persons with LTBI who are 
at  high  risk  for  TB  disease  have  become  essential  components  of  the  TB  elimination
strategy promoted by ACET 
(59).  Targeted  testing  using  the  TST  or  QFT-G  identifies  persons  at  high  risk  for  TB
disease who would benefit from treatment for 
LTBI. Prisons offer an excellent public health opportunity for identifying persons at high
risk for TB who can be screened for 
TB  infection  and  placed  on  LTBI  therapy,  if  indicated.  If  the  TST  is  used,  a  two-step
testing procedure should be 
strongly  considered  when  obtaining  a  baseline  reading.  A  single  step  QFT-G  is  an
adequate baseline. Inmates with a positive 
test should be evaluated for LTBI therapy after TB disease is excluded. 
Inmates in Nonminimal TB Risk Jails and Other Short-Term Detention Facilities
As in prisons, all new detainees in nonminimal TB risk jails should be screened on entry
for symptoms, and any 
detainee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should be placed immediately in an AII
room and evaluated promptly for TB disease. 
If the facility does not have an AII room, the inmate should be transported promptly to a
facility that does have one. 
Detainees without symptoms require further screening with a TST, a QFT-G, or a chest
radiograph within 7 days of arrival. 
Regardless  of  the  TST  or  QFT-G  result,  detainees  known  to  have  HIV  infection,  and
those who are at risk for HIV infection but 
whose HIV status is unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part of the initial

screening. Persons who have a 
positive result should be further evaluated to rule out TB disease. 
The primary purpose of screening in correctional settings is to detect TB disease. TST or
QFT-G screening in jails to 
initiate LTBI therapy often is not practical because of the high rate of turnover and short
lengths of stay. Although not all 
jail detainees have short lengths of stay, determining which 
detainees will be in the jail for a long term is difficult. 
Nationwide, approximately half of persons detained in local jails are released within 48
hours of admission. Thus, even if all 
detainees can be tested at intake, a large proportion will be unavailable to have their
TSTs read or to be evaluated when QFT-G test 
results are available. Of those still in custody, a substantial percentage will be released
before the radiographic and medical 
evaluation is completed. In a 1996 study, 43% of detainees at a county jail in Illinois
who had a positive TST result were released 
or transferred before their evaluation could be completed 
(3).
A substantial proportion of detainees who are incarcerated long enough to begin LTBI
therapy will be released 
before  completion  of  treatment.  A  San  Francisco  study  indicated  that  approximately
62% of detainees who were started on 
LTBI treatment were released before completion 
(40). These data illustrate the challenges of implementing a testing and 
treatment program for LTBI in jails with highly dynamic detainee populations. Certain
jails have adopted a targeted approach 

of  performing  TSTs  only  on  new  detainees  who  are  at  high  risk  for  TB  disease  (e.g.,
detainees with known HIV 
infection). Screening for TB and treating LTBI are most effective within the jail setting if
resources dedicated to discharge planning 
and reliable access to community-based treatment are available. Modest interventions
(e.g., education and incentives 
[see  Glossary])  in  the  jail  setting  can  lead  to  improvements  in  linking  released
detainees to postrelease medical care and increase 
the likelihood that therapy will be completed 
(60,61).
Persons in Holding or Booking Facilities 
City, county, and other law enforcement authorities frequently have facilities that hold
arrestees and detainees for short 
periods  of  time,  ranging  from  hours  to  multiple  days.  TB  symptom  screening  is
recommended for all persons at the time of entry 
into  these  facilities.  Any  detainee  who  has  symptoms  suggestive  of  TB  should  be
immediately isolated and transferred to a facility 
or hospital in which the detainee can be placed in an AII room and evaluated promptly
for TB disease.
Employees in All Correctional and Detention Facilities 
A  medical  history  relating  to  TB  should  be  obtained  from  and  recorded  for  all  new
employees at the time of hiring, and 
a physical examination for TB disease should be required. The results of the screening
and examination should be 
kept  confidential;  access  should  be  granted  to  public  health  and  infection  control

medical professionals only when necessary. 
In addition, a TST or QFT-G should be mandatory for all 
employees who do not have a documented history of a positive 
result. To improve the accuracy of the baseline result, a two-step TST or a single-step
QFT-G should be used for the initial 
screening  of  employees  who  have  not  been  tested  during  the  preceding  12  months.
Persons who have a positive TST or QFT-G 
result should have a chest radiograph taken and interpreted and should be required to
have a thorough medical evaluation; if 
TB  disease  is  excluded  as  a  diagnosis,  such  persons  should  be  considered  for  LTBI
therapy. All 
employees should be informed that they should seek appropriate follow-up and testing
for TB if they are immunosuppressed for any reason (e.g., have 
HIV infection). Any employee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should not 
return  to  the  workplace  until  a  clinician  has  excluded  a  diagnosis  of  infectious  TB
disease.
Other Persons Who Might Need to be Screened 
Certain persons who are neither inmates nor employees but who visit high-risk facilities
on a regular basis also should 
be  considered  for  screening.  These  persons  might  include  contractors  (e.g.,  food
handlers and service workers), volunteers, 
and those providing religious ministries. Screening of these persons should follow the
same procedures as those outlined 
for employees.
Periodic Screening 

Long-term inmates and all employees who have a negative TST or QFT-G result should
have follow-up testing at 
least annually. Persons who have a history of a positive test result should be screened
for symptoms of TB disease. Annual 
chest  radiographs  are  unnecessary  for  the  follow-up  evaluation  of  infected  persons.
Test results should be recorded in 
medical  records  and  in  a  retrievable  aggregate  database  of  all  TST  or  QFT-G  results.
Personal identifying information should be 
kept confidential.
Correctional  facilities  can  use  multiple  strategies  to  ensure  annual  screening  of
long-term inmates for newly acquired 
TB  infection.  Certain  institutions  schedule  annual  screening  on  the  inmate's  date  of
birth or on the anniversary of the 
inmate's most recent test. Other institutions and systems suspend 
inmate movement and screen the entire population on the same 
day  every  year.  Methods  of  screening  a  subset  of  the  inmate  population  (e.g.,  on  a
monthly basis) are beneficial because 
they provide an ongoing assessment of M. 
tuberculosis transmission within the facility.
Results from TST or QFT-G testing should be analyzed periodically to estimate the risk
for acquiring new infection in 
a correctional facility; however, this analysis should be completed by using only the test
results of facility employees and 
inmates  who  have  remained  in  the  facility  continually  during  the  interval  between

testing. The conversion rate equals the number 
of employees or inmates whose test results have converted from negative to positive
(i.e., the numerator) during a specific 
interval divided by the total number of previously negative employees or inmates who
were tested during the same interval (i.e., 
the denominator). In certain facilities, conducting an analysis of test results for specific
areas or groups within the facility might 
be appropriate.
More frequent screening is needed when a conversion rate is substantially higher than
previous rates or when other 
evidence of ongoing transmission is detected. A cluster (i.e., 
either two or more patients with TB disease that are linked 
by epidemiologic or genotyping data or two or more TST or 
QFT-G conversions occurring in the correctional facility 
among inmates who are epidemiologically linked) or other evidence of person-to-person
transmission also 
warrants additional epidemiologic investigation and possibly a revision of the facility's
TB prevention and control protocol.
Facilities in which the risk for infection with 
M. tuberculosis is minimal might not need to maintain a periodic 
screening  program.  However,  requiring  baseline  TST  or  QFT-G  testing  of  employees
would enable medical staff to 
distinguish  between  a  TST  or  QFT-G  conversion  and  a  positive  TST  or  QFT-G  result
caused by a previous exposure to 
M.  tuberculosis.  A  decision  to  discontinue  periodic  employee  screening  should  be

made in consultation with the local or state health department.
HIV Counseling, Testing, and Referral 
HIV  counseling,  testing,  and  referral  (CTR)  should  be  routinely  recommended  for  all
persons in settings in which 
the population is at increased behavioral or clinical risk for 
acquiring or transmitting HIV infection, regardless of 
setting prevalence (62). Because correctional facilities are considered settings in which
the population is at increased risk 
for  acquiring  or  transmitting  HIV,  routine  HIV  CTR  is  recommended  for  inmates.
Furthermore, HIV infection is the 
greatest risk factor for progression from LTBI to TB disease 
(63,64). Therefore, HIV CTR should be routinely offered to 
all inmates and correctional facility staff with LTBI or TB disease if their HIV infection
status is unknown at the time of 
their LTBI or TB disease diagnosis (64,65). Correctional 
facilities should be particularly aware of the need for 
preventing  transmission  of  M.  tuberculosis  in  settings  in  which  persons  infected  with
HIV might be housed or might work 
(66).
Use of Data to Refine Policies and Procedures 
Correctional and detention facilities are strongly encouraged to collect and analyze data
on the effectiveness of their 
TB screening policies and procedures. Working in conjunction with their state or local

TB-control program, correctional 
and  detention  facilities  should  refine  their  screening  policies  and  procedures  as
indicated by such data. In the absence of local 
data that justify revision, correctional and detention 
facilities should adhere to the screening recommendations 
detailed above.
Case Reporting
All states require designated health-care professionals to 
report suspected and confirmed cases of TB to their local or 
state  health  department;  this  reporting  is  mandatory  for  all  correctional  facilities,
whether private, federal, state, or 
local.  Correctional  facility  medical  staff  should  report  any  suspected  or  confirmed  TB
cases among inmates or employees to 
the appropriate health agency in accordance with state and local laws and regulations,
even if the inmate or detainee 
has  already  been  released  or  transferred  from  the  facility.  Reporting  cases  to  health
departments benefits the correctional facility 
by allowing it to obtain health department resources for case management and contact
investigation in both the facility and 
the  community.  For  each  suspected  case  of  TB,  the  diagnosis  or  the  exclusion  of  a
diagnosis of TB should be 
entered immediately 
into 1) the person's medical record, 2) the retrievable aggregate TB-control database at

the facility, and 3) the database at 
a centralized office if the system has multiple facilities. In addition, drug-susceptibility
results should be sent to the state or 
local health department for use in monitoring the rates of drug resistance in the health
department's jurisdiction. 
Drug-susceptibility reports also should be sent to all health departments managing the
infectious person's contacts because the 
choice of medication for LTBI treatment is based on these drug-susceptibility test 
results (64). Reports to local or state 
health departments should identify the agency that has custodial responsibility for the
inmate (e.g., county corrections agency, 
state  corrections  agency,  ICE,  Federal  Bureau  of  Prisons  [FBOP],  and  U.S.  Marshals
Service [USMS]) and the 
corresponding  identification  number  for  that  agency  (e.g.,  U.S.  alien  number,  FBOP
number, or USMS number). Federal law 
enforcement agencies frequently contract for bed space with local or private detention
facilities. Therefore, custodial authority 
and corresponding custody identification numbers should be verified with the facility's
custody staff; detention facility 
medical staff might not have this information available.
Isolation in an Airborne Infection Isolation Room
Initiation 
TB airborne precautions should be initiated for any patient who has signs or symptoms
of TB disease or who 

has documented TB disease and has not completed treatment or not been determined
previously to be noninfectious.
Discontinuation 
For patients placed in an AII room because of suspected infectious TB disease of the
lungs, airways, or larynx, 
airborne  precautions  can  be  discontinued  when  infectious  TB  disease  is  considered
unlikely and either 1) another diagnosis is made 
that explains the clinical syndrome or 2) the patient has three negative acid-fast bacilli
(AFB) sputum-smear results 
(67,68). The three sputum specimens should be collected 8--24 hours apart 
(69), and at least one should be an early morning 
specimen  (because  respiratory  secretions  pool  overnight).  Typically,  this  will  allow
patients with negative sputum-smear results to be 
released from an AII room in 2 days. Incarcerated patients for whom the suspicion of TB
disease remains after the collection of three 
negative AFB sputum-smear results should not be released from airborne precautions
until they are on standard multidrug anti-TB 
treatment  and  are  clinically  improving.  Because  patients  with  TB  disease  who  have
negative AFB sputum-smear results can still be 
infectious (70), patients with suspected disease who meet the above criteria for release
from airborne precautions should not be 
released to an area in which other patients with 
immunocompromising conditions are housed. 
A patient who has drug-susceptible TB of the lung, airways, or larynx, is on standard
multidrug anti-TB treatment, and 

has  had  a  significant  clinical  and  bacteriologic  response  to  therapy  (i.e.,  reduction  in
cough, resolution of fever, and 
progressively  decreasing  quantity  of  AFB  on  smear  result)  is  probably  no  longer
infectious. However, because culture and 
drug-susceptibility  results  are  not  typically  known  when  the  decision  to  discontinue
airborne precautions is made, all 
patients  with  confirmed  TB  disease  should  remain  in  an  AII  room  while  incarcerated
until they
have had three consecutive negative AFB sputum-smear results collected 8--24 hours
apart, with at least one being 
an early morning specimen,
have received standard multidrug anti-TB treatment, and
have demonstrated clinical improvement.
Because  the  consequences  of  transmission  of  MDR  TB  (i.e.,  TB  that  is  resistant  to
isoniazid and rifampin) are 
severe, infection-control practitioners might choose to keep persons with suspected or
confirmed MDR TB disease in an AII 
room  until  negative  sputum-culture  results  have  been  documented  in  addition  to
negative AFB sputum-smear results.
Environmental Controls
Overview 

Guidelines for preventing transmission of M. 
tuberculosis in health-care settings and for environmental infection control 
in health-care facilities have been published previously 
(71,72). These guidelines and this report can be used to 
educate  correctional  facility  staff  regarding  use  of  environmental  controls  in  TB
infection-control programs.
Environmental  controls  should  be  implemented  when  the  risk  for  TB  transmission
persists despite efforts to screen and 
treat infected inmates. Environmental controls are used to remove or inactivate 
M. tuberculosis in areas in which the organism 
could be transmitted. Primary environmental controls consist of controlling the source
of infection by using local exhaust 
ventilation (e.g., hoods, tents, or booths) and diluting and removing contaminated air
by using general ventilation. These controls 
help  prevent  the  spread  and  reduce  the  concentration  of  airborne  infectious  droplet
nuclei (see Glossary). Environmental 
controls  work  in  conjunction  with  administrative  controls  such  as  isolation  of  inmates
with suspected TB disease detected 
through  screening  (see  Glossary).  Secondary  environmental  controls  consist  of
controlling the airflow to prevent contamination of 
air in areas adjacent to the source (AII rooms) and cleaning the air (using a HEPA filter
or ultraviolet germicidal 
irradiation [UVGI]) to increase the number of equivalent 
ACH.¶ The efficiency of different primary or secondary environmental 
controls  varies;  details  concerning  the  application  of  these  controls  to  prevent

transmission of 
M. tuberculosis in health-care settings have been published previously 
(71). To be effective, secondary environmental controls should be used and 
maintained properly, and their strengths and limitations should be recognized. The 
engineering design and operational efficacy 
parameters  for  UVGI  as  a  secondary  control  measure  (i.e.,  portable  UVGI  units,
upper-room air UVGI, and in-duct UVGI) continue 
to evolve and require special attention in their design, selection, and maintenance.
Exposure  to  M.  tuberculosis  within  correctional  facilities  can  be  reduced  through  the
effective use of environmental 
controls  at  the  source  of  exposure  (e.g.,  an  infectious  inmate)  or  in  general  areas.
Source-control techniques can prevent or 
reduce  the  spread  of  infectious  droplet  nuclei  into  the  air  in  situations  in  which  the
source has been identified and the generation of 
the contaminant is localized by collecting infectious particles as they are released. Use
of these techniques is particularly 
prudent  during  procedures  that  are  likely  to  generate  infectious  aerosols  (e.g.,
bronchoscopy and sputum 
induction) and when inmates with infectious TB disease are coughing or sneezing.
Unsuspected and undiagnosed cases of infectious TB disease contribute substantially to
disease transmission 
within correctional facilities (73). When attempting to control this type of transmission,
source control is not a feasible 
option.  Instead,  general  ventilation  and  air  cleaning  should  be  relied  on  for
environmental control. General ventilation can be used 

to  dilute  the  air  and  remove  air  contaminants  and  to  control  airflow  patterns  in  AII
rooms or other correctional facility 
settings.  Air-cleaning  technologies  include  mechanical  air  filtration  to  reduce  the
concentration of
M. tuberculosis droplet nuclei and UVGI to kill or inactivate microorganisms so they
no longer pose a risk for infection.
Ventilation systems for correctional facility settings should be designed, and modified
when necessary, by 
ventilation
 engineers
 in
 collaboration
 with
 infection-control
 practitioners
 and
occupational health staff. Recommendations for 
designing  and  operating  ventilation  systems  in  correctional  facilities  have  been
published 
(48,49,74--76).  The  multiple  types  of  and  conditions  for  use  of  ventilation  systems  in
correctional-facility settings and the individual needs of these settings 
preclude provision of extensive guidance in this report.
Incremental  improvements  in  environmental  controls  (e.g.,  increasing  the  removal
efficiency of an existing filtration 
system in any area) are likely to lessen the potential for TB transmission from persons
with unsuspected or undiagnosed TB. 
This  information  should  not  be  used  in  place  of  consultation  with  experts  who  can
advise on ventilation system and air 
handling  design,  selection,  installation,  and  maintenance.  Because  environmental
controls will fail if they are not properly operated 
and  maintained,  routine  training  and  education  of  infection-control  and  maintenance
staff are key components to a successful 

TB infection-control program.
Airborne Infection Isolation Rooms 
Inmates known or suspected of having TB disease should be placed in an AII room or AII
cell that meets the design 
and operational criteria for airborne infection isolation described previously 
(71). Inmates deemed infectious should remain 
in  isolation  until  treatment  or  further  evaluation  has  ensured  that  they  are
noninfectious. Facilities without an on-site AII 
room 
should have a written plan for referring patients with suspected or confirmed TB to a
facility that is equipped to 
isolate, evaluate, and treat TB patients. 
New  or  renovated  facilities  should  ensure  that  a  sufficient  number  of  AII  rooms  are
available consistent with the facility 
risk  assessment.  Under  rare  circumstances,  if  an  AII  room  is  not  available  and  the
immediate transfer of the inmate with 
suspected infectious TB is not possible, the inmate should be housed temporarily in a
room that has been modified to prevent the 
escape of infectious aerosols outside the TB holding area. The heating, ventilating, and
air-conditioning (HVAC) system in 
this  temporary  TB  holding  area  might  have  to  be  manipulated  or  augmented  with
auxiliary exhaust fans to create an inward 
flow of air that reduces the potential escape of infectious aerosols. If possible, air from
these areas should be exhausted directly 

to the outdoors. If this is not feasible, the highest filtration efficiency compatible with
the installed HVAC system should 
be  used.  Because  TB  droplet  nuclei  are  approximately  1--5  micrometers  in  size,
filtration efficiency should be evaluated 
for  particles  in  that  size  range.  Filter  selection  based  on  the  American  Society  of
Heating, Refrigerating and 
Air-Conditioning  Engineers  (ASHRAE)  Standard  52.2  Minimum  Efficiency  Reporting
Value (MERV)--rating efficiency tables can help in 
this evaluation (77). Secondary air cleaning techniques (portable air cleaners and UVGI)
also can be used in these areas to 
increase effective air cleaning. 
Local Exhaust Ventilation 
Aerosol-producing  procedures  should  be  performed  in  an  area  with  a  type  of  local
exhaust ventilation that captures 
and removes airborne contaminants at or near their source without exposing persons in
the area to infectious agents. Local 
exhaust devices typically use hoods. Two types of hoods are used: enclosing devices, in
which the hood either partially or fully 
encloses the infectious source, and exterior devices, in which the infectious source is
near but outside the hood. Fully enclosed 
hoods,  booths,  or  tents  are  always  preferable  to  exterior  devices  because  of  their
superior ability to prevent contaminants 
from escaping.
Enclosing devices should have sufficient airflow to remove 
>99% of airborne particles during the interval between 

the departure of one patient and the arrival of the next. The time required to remove a
given percentage of airborne particles 
from an enclosed space depends on 1) the ACH number, 
2) the location of the ventilation inlet and outlet, and 3) the 
physical configuration of the room or booth. The time interval required to ensure the
proper level of airborne contaminant 
removal from enclosing devices varies according to ACH 
(Table 1). For example, if an enclosing device operates at six ACH, and the 
air  inlet  and  exhaust  locations  allow  for  good  air  mixing,  approximately  46  minutes
would be required to remove 99% of 
the  contaminated  air  after  the  aerosol-producing  procedure  has  ended.  Similarly,  an
additional 
23 minutes (total time: 69 minutes) would be required to 
increase the removal efficiency to 99.9%. Doubling the ventilation rate decreases the 
waiting time by half.
General Ventilation 
General  ventilation  is  used  to  1)  dilute  and  remove  contaminated  air,  2)  control  the
direction of airflow in a 
correctional  facility  setting,  and  3)  control  airflow  patterns  in  rooms.  Recommended
ventilation rates for correctional facility settings 
are typically expressed in ACH. Ventilation recommendations for selected areas in new
or renovated correctional 
facility  settings  should  be  followed  (Table  2).  The  feasibility  of  achieving  a  specific
ventilation rate depends on the construction 
and operational requirements of the ventilation system and might differ for retrofitted

and newly constructed facilities. 
The expense and effort of achieving a high ventilation rate might be reasonable for new
construction but not be as feasible 
when retrofitting an existing setting.
Ventilation  design  guidance  for  correctional  facilities  and  related  areas  has  been
published 
(78). This design guidance includes specific ventilation recommendations regarding 
total ventilation, filtration efficiency, and 
environmental design parameters. For minimum outdoor air supply recommendations,
the guidance refers to ASHRAE Standard 
62,  Ventilation  for  Acceptable  Indoor  Air  Quality.  In  2004,  ASHRAE  revised  and
renumbered this standard to 
ANSI/ASHRAE  Standard  62.1  (74).  For  areas  within  correctional  facilities  that  are  not
intended to contain persons with infectious TB, 
the  recommended  minimum  outdoor  air  supply  rates  should  meet  or  exceed  those
recommended in ANSI/ASHRAE 
Standard 62.1-2004 (74). When risk analysis 
reveals an enhanced potential for undiagnosed cases of infectious TB, facility 
designers and owners may consider using higher supply rates of outdoor air (e.g., those
recommended for areas within 
health-care 
facilities  anticipated  to  contain  infectious  patients).  Minimum  outdoor  air  supply
recommendations for health-care 
facilities  have  been  published  (71,79).  Because  correctional  areas  frequently  will  not
have an exact equivalent area within the 

health-care  environment,  the  designer  or  owner  should  identify  an  analogous
health-care area from which to choose the outdoor 
air supply recommendation. This selection should be made on the basis of occupant risk
factors for TB, occupant activities, 
and occupant density within the area. For example, the intake, holding, and processing
area of a higher risk correctional 
facility  might  be  considered  analogous  to  the  emergency  waiting  room  area  in  a
health-care facility. In that case, the 
recommended outdoor air supply would be at least two ACH.
The  direction  of  air  movement  relative  to  adjacent  areas  is  necessary  for  the
containment of contaminated air. Air within 
a  correctional  facility  should  flow  to  minimize  exposure  of  others  within  the  building
(Table 2). For example, air inside an 
AII room or cell should flow from the corridor and air-supply grille across the worker,
then across that patient, and finally out of 
the room. To ensure that air is flowing from the corridor into an AII room or cell, smoke
testing should be performed daily, even 
if the AII room or cell is equipped with a pressure-sensing device. Air flow (supply air
and exhaust air) should be measured at 
least  annually  and  compared  with  the  designed  air  flow  rates  to  ensure  that  optimal
directional air flow and air exchange rates are 
being maintained (Table 2).
Air Cleaning Methods 
Detailed information has been published regarding the selection, design, maintenance,

and safety considerations 
associated with air cleaning methods (i.e., filtration and UVGI) 
(71). Designers and end users should consult this information. 
Air  removed  from  areas  likely  to  contain  infectious  aerosols  (e.g.,  AII  cells,  sputum
collection and other procedure rooms, 
and intake areas) should be exhausted directly to the outdoors to ensure that it cannot
immediately reenter the building or pose 
a  hazard  to  persons  outside,  in  accordance  with  applicable  federal,  state,  and  local
regulations. If discharging air to the outside 
is  not  feasible,  HEPA  filters  should  be  used  to  clean  the  air  before  returning  to  the
general ventilation system. Such 
recirculation is acceptable only if the air is recirculated back into the same general area
from which it originated.
For general population areas in which infectious aerosols are not anticipated but might
be present (from persons 
with  undiagnosed  TB  disease),  total  exhaust  ventilation  should  be  considered  where
and when the outdoor 
environmental conditions (temperature and humidity) are compatible with a single-pass
system without undue energy or equipment 
costs.  When  recirculating  air  from  these  areas,  the  minimum  ASHRAE-recommended
level of filtration is a MERV-8 filter 
(78). However, CDC encourages selection and use of filters with higher MERV ratings to
provide an incremental improvement 
in the protection afforded by this mechanism. The filtration system should be designed
to prevent filter by-pass and to 
allow  filter  leakage  testing  and  safe  filter  changes.  A  combination  of  air  cleaning

methods (e.g., MERV-rated filters and 
supplemental UVGI) may be used to increase effective air cleaning.
When used, UVGI should be applied in-duct (i.e., inside the ductwork of existing HVAC
systems) or in the upper room 
of the area to be treated to ensure that organisms are inactivated. Upper-air systems
should be designed, installed, and 
monitored to ensure both sufficient irradiation in the upper room to inactivate 
M. tuberculosis and safe levels of UVGI in the 
occupied space.
Environmental Control Maintenance 
To be most effective, environmental controls should be 
installed, operated, and maintained correctly. Ongoing 
maintenance should be part of any written TB infection-control plan. The plan should
outline the responsibility and authority 
for maintenance and address staff training needs.
Failure to maintain environmental control systems properly has adversely impacted TB
control and prevention efforts 
at facilities throughout the United States. At one hospital, 
improperly functioning ventilation controls were believed to be 
a factor in the transmission of MDR TB disease to four persons (three patients and a
correctional officer), three of whom 
died (80). In three other multihospital studies evaluating the performance of AII rooms,
failure to routinely monitor 

air-pressure  differentials  (whether  manually  or  through  use  of  continuous  monitoring
devices) resulted in a substantial percentage of 
the rooms being under positive pressure 
(81--84).
Correctional  facilities  should  schedule  routine  preventive  maintenance  that  covers  all
components of the ventilation 
systems  (e.g.,  fans,  filters,  ducts,  supply  diffusers,  and  exhaust  grilles)  and  any
air-cleaning devices in use. Performance 
monitoring 
should be conducted to verify that environmental controls are operating as designed.
Performance monitoring should 
include  1)  directional  airflow  assessments  using  smoke  tubes  and  use  of  pressure
monitoring devices sensitive to pressures at 
0.001  inch  of  water  gauge  and  2)  measurement  of  supply  and  exhaust  airflows  to
compare with recommended air change rates 
for  the  respective  areas  of  the  facility.  Records  should  be  kept  to  document  all
preventive maintenance and repairs.
Standard procedures should be established to ensure that 
1) maintenance staff notify infection-control 
personnel before performing maintenance on ventilation systems servicing 
inmate-care areas and 2) infection-control staff 
request assistance from maintenance personnel in checking the 
operational status of AII cells and local exhaust devices (e.g., 
booths, hoods, and tents) before use. A protocol that is well written and followed will

help to prevent unnecessary exposures 
of  correctional  facility  staff  and  inmates  to  infectious  aerosols.  Proper  labeling  of
ventilation system components (e.g., 
ducts,  fans,  and  filters)  will  help  identify  air-flow  paths.  Clearly  labeling  which  fan
services a given area will help prevent 
accidental shutdowns (85). In addition, provisions should be made for emergency power
to avoid interruptions in the performance 
of essential environmental controls during a power failure.
Respiratory Protection
Considerations for Selection of Respirators 
Respiratory protection is used when administrative (i.e., identification and isolation of
infectious TB patients) 
and environmental controls alone have not reduced the risk for infection with 
M. tuberculosis to an acceptable level. The use 
of  respiratory  protection  is  most  appropriate  in  specific  settings  and  situations  within
correctional facilities. For 
example,  protection  is  warranted  for  inmates  and  facility  staff  when  they  enter  AII
rooms, transport infectious inmates, and 
participate in cough-inducing procedures.
Respirators  should  be  selected  from  those  approved  by  CDC/National  Institute  for
Occupational Safety and 
Health  (NIOSH)  under  the  provisions  of  Title  42,  Part  84  of  the  Code  of  Federal
Regulations 

(86). Decisions regarding which respirator is appropriate for a particular situation and
setting should be made on the basis of a risk assessment of the 
likelihood for TB transmission.** For correctional facilities, a CDC/NIOSH-approved N95
air-purifying respirator will provide 
adequate  respiratory  protection  in  the  majority  of  situations  that  require  the  use  of
respirators. If a higher level of respiratory 
protection  is  warranted,  additional  information  on  other  classes  of  air-purifying
respirators and powered air-purifying respirators 
(PAPRs) is available (71). The overall effectiveness of respiratory protection is affected
by 1) the level of respiratory protection 
selected  (i.e.,  the  assigned  protection  factor),  2)  the  fitting  characteristics  of  the
respirator model, 3) the care taken in donning 
the respirator, and 4) the effectiveness of the respiratory protection program, including
fit testing and worker training.
Implementing a Respiratory Protection Program 
All facilities should develop, implement, and maintain a respiratory-protection program
for health-care workers or 
other  staff  who  use  respiratory  protection.  Respiratory-protection  programs  are
required for facilities covered by the 
U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
(71,87--89). The key elements of a respiratory protection 
program include 1) assignment of responsibility, 2) training, and 3) fit testing 
(71,87,90,91). All correctional facility staff who 
use respirators for protection against infection with 
M. tuberculosis must participate in the facility's respiratory protection 

program  (e.g.,  understand  their  responsibilities,  receive  training,  receive  medical
clearance, and engage in fit testing) 
(71). In addition to staff members, visitors to inmates with TB disease should be offered
respirators to wear while in AII rooms and instructed 
on proper use. Certain regular visitors (e.g., law enforcement officials, social workers,
ministers and other religious 
representatives, and attorneys and other legal staff) might be there in an occupational
capacity. Each facility, regardless of TB risk 
classification  (i.e.,  minimal  or  nonminimal),  should  develop  a  policy  on  the  use  of
respirators by visitors of 
patients.
Precautions for Transporting Patients Between Correctional or Detention Facilities
Recommended precautions to take when transporting 
patients between facilities have been published 
(71). Patients with suspected or confirmed infectious TB disease should be transported
in an ambulance whenever possible. The 
ambulance ventilation system should be operated in the nonrecirculating mode and the
maximum amount of outdoor air be provided 
to 
facilitate  dilution.  If  the  vehicle  has  a  rear  exhaust  fan,  it  should  be  used  during
transport. If the vehicle is equipped with 
a supplemental recirculating ventilation unit that passes air through HEPA filters before
returning it to the vehicle, this 

unit should be used to increase the number of ACH. Airflow should be from the cab (i.e.,
front of vehicle) over the patient and 
out the rear exhaust fan. If an ambulance is not used, the ventilation system for the
vehicle should bring in as much outdoor air 
as  possible,  and  the  system  should  be  set  to  nonrecirculating.  If  possible,  the  cab
should be physically isolated from the rest of 
the vehicle, and the patient should be placed in the rear seat. Drivers or other persons
who are transporting patients 
with suspected or confirmed infectious TB disease in an enclosed vehicle should wear at
least an N95 disposable respirator. If 
the  patient  has  signs  or  symptoms  of  infectious  TB  disease  (i.e.,  positive  AFB
sputum-smear 
result), consideration might be given to having the patient wear a surgical or procedure
mask, if possible, during transport, in waiting areas, or when others 
are present.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Latent Tuberculosis Infection and 
Tuberculosis Disease 
The  principles  of  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  LTBI  and  TB  disease  discussed  in  this
section are guidelines and not meant 
to substitute for clinical experience and judgment. Medical providers not familiar with
the management of LTBI and TB 
disease should consult a person with expertise. All facilities' local operations procedures
should include plans for consultation 
with and referral to persons with expertise in TB and should include criteria delineating
when consultation and 

referral are indicated.
Although  the  index  of  suspicion  for  TB  disease  varies  by  individual  risk  factors  and
prevalence of TB in the 
population  served  by  the  correctional  facility,  correctional  facilities  typically  are
considered higher-risk settings (see 
Screening). A diagnosis of TB disease should be considered for any 
patient who has a persistent cough (i.e., one lasting 
>3 weeks) or other signs or symptoms compatible with TB disease (e.g., hemoptysis,
night sweats, weight loss, anorexia, and fever). 
Diagnostic  tests  for  TB  include  the  TST,  QFT-G,  chest  radiography,  and  laboratory
examination of sputum samples or other body 
tissues and fluids. 
Persons exposed to inmates with TB disease might become latently infected with 
M.  tuberculosis  depending  on  host  immunity  and  the  degree  and  duration  of
exposure. Therefore, the treatment of persons with TB disease plays a key role in 
TB control by stopping transmission and preventing 
potentially infectious cases from occurring 
(92). LTBI is an asymptomatic condition that can be diagnosed by the TST or QFT-G.
Interpreting TST Results 
A  baseline  screening  TST  result  of  >10  mm  induration  is  considered  positive  for  the
majority of correctional facility 
staff  and  inmates,  and  these  persons  should  be  referred  for  medical  and  diagnostic
evaluation. However, for correctional 
facility staff and inmates who have had a known exposure in a correctional facility (i.e.,

close contact with an inmate or staff 
member with infectious TB disease) after having a previous (baseline) TST value of 0
mm, TST results of 
>5  mm  should  be  considered  positive  and  interpreted  as  a  new  infection.
Correctional facility staff and inmates with a screening baseline TST result of 
>1  mm,  but  <10  mm,  who  are  subsequently  exposed  to  TB  disease,  should  be
considered newly infected if they have TST 
values increase by >10 mm on retest 
(Table 3). For example, a baseline TST result with 8 mm induration and a repeat TST
result 
1 year later with 18 mm induration would indicate a new infection. However, a repeat
TST result with 12 mm 
induration would not indicate a new infection.
When  decisions  are  made  for  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  LTBI  and  choosing  the
cut-off value for a positive 
reaction, certain risk factors (e.g., immunocompromising conditions and known contact
with a TB patient) should be 
assessed. Correctional facility staff and inmates who have TST indurations of 5--9 mm
should be advised that their results might be 
an indication for treatment under certain conditions. 
Special Considerations in Interpreting the TST 
Interpretation  of  the  TST  might  be  complicated  by  previous  vaccination  with  BCG,
anergy, and the "boosting" 
effect.  Detailed  recommendations  describing  how  the  TST  should  be  interpreted  in

relation to these possible confounders have 
been published (64,93).
Correctional Staff and Inmates who Refuse Testing for 
M. tuberculosis Infection 
A correctional facility staff member or inmate who refuses testing for 
M. tuberculosis infection should first be 
educated regarding the importance of routine screening of correctional facility staff and
inmates. If the person continues to refuse 
to have a TST, the option may be offered for the person to be tested using the QFT-G
test (and vice versa). The decision to 
offer  an  alternative  test  depends  on  the  reason  for  refusal  and  should  be  consistent
with the patient's underlying wishes 
(e.g.,  offering  QFT-G  in  place  of  TST  is  acceptable  if  the  patient  objects  to  having
injection of a substance but agrees to 
having blood drawn).
Interpreting the QuantiFERON®-TB Gold Test Data
Interpretation  of  QFT-G  data  is  initially  performed  electronically;  an  approved
interpretation method is 
automatically performed by the software supplied by the manufacturer 
(Table 4) (58). A complete description of the test's interpretation 
is included in the product insert.

Persons who have a positive QFT-G result should be 
referred for a medical and diagnostic evaluation. On serial testing, 
a person with QFT-G results changing from negative to positive should be referred for
medical and diagnostic evaluation 
and considered to be a QFT-G converter. Risk factors (e.g., the facility's prevalence of
TB disease and personal risk factors) 
should be assessed when making decisions about the diagnosis and treatment of LTBI.
Interpreting Chest Radiographs 
Persons with Suspected Pulmonary TB 
Multiple types of abnormalities demonstrated on chest 
radiographs are strongly suggestive of pulmonary TB 
disease, including upper-lobe infiltration, cavitation, and pleural 
effusion. Infiltrates can be patchy or nodular and observed in 
the apical or subapical posterior upper lobes or superior segment of the lower lobes. If
radiographic or clinical findings 
are
 consistent
 with
 TB
 disease,
 further
 studies
 (e.g.,
 medical
 evaluation,
mycobacteriologic examinations of sputa or tissue, 
and comparison of current and prior chest radiographs) should be performed 
(65). Persons with TB pleural effusions might 
have concurrent unsuspected pulmonary or laryngeal TB disease 
(94). These patients should be considered infectious 
until  pulmonary  and  laryngeal  TB  disease  is  excluded.  Patients  with  suspected
extrapulmonary TB disease also should be 
suspected of having pulmonary TB until concomitant pulmonary disease is excluded.

The  radiographic  presentation  of  pulmonary  TB  in  HIV-infected  persons  might  be
atypical. Apical cavitary disease is 
less common among such patients than HIV-negative patients. More common findings
among HIV-infected persons 
are  infiltrates  in  any  lung  zone,  mediastinal  or  hilar  adenopathy,  or,  in  rare  cases,  a
normal chest radiograph 
(65,95--97).
Persons with LTBI 
To exclude pulmonary TB disease, a chest radiograph is 
indicated for all persons in whom LTBI is diagnosed. If 
chest radiographs do not indicate pulmonary TB, and no symptoms consistent with TB
disease are present, persons with 
positive  test  results  for  TB  infection  should  be  considered  for  treatment  for  LTBI.
Persons with LTBI typically have normal 
chest radiographs, although they might have abnormalities suggestive of previous TB
disease or other pulmonary conditions. 
In certain patients with TB symptoms, pulmonary infiltrates might be apparent on chest
computed tomography scan 
or magnetic resonance imaging study but not on chest radiograph. Previous, healed TB
disease typically produces 
radiographic findings that differ from those associated with current TB disease. These
findings include nodules, fibrotic scars, 
calcified granulomas, and apical pleural thickening. Nevertheless, a chest radiograph by
itself cannot be used to distinguish 
between current and healed TB. Nodules and fibrotic 
scars might contain slowly multiplying tubercle bacilli and pose substantial risk 

for 
progression  to  TB  disease.  Calcified  nodular  lesions  (i.e.,  calcified  granulomas)  and
apical pleural thickening indicate lower 
risk for progression to TB disease (65).
Pregnant Women 
Because TB disease is dangerous to both the mother and the fetus, a pregnant woman
who has a positive TST 
or  QFT-G  result  or  who  is  suspected  of  having  TB  disease  should  receive  a  chest
radiograph (with shielding consistent with 
safety guidelines) as soon as feasible. If symptoms or other high-risk conditions (e.g.,
HIV infection) are identified, a 
chest radiograph might have to be performed during the first trimester of pregnancy 
(64,65,98).
Evaluation of Sputum Samples 
Sputum examination is a key diagnostic procedure for pulmonary TB disease 
(93) and is indicated for the following 
inmates and correctional facility staff:
persons suspected of having pulmonary TB disease 
because of a chest radiograph consistent with TB disease, 
particularly those with any respiratory symptoms suggestive of TB disease;
persons with chest radiographic findings suggestive of previous, healed TB disease;

HIV-infected persons with any pulmonary symptoms 
(regardless of chest radiograph findings); or
persons  suspected  of  having  pulmonary  TB  disease  for  which  bronchoscopy  is
planned (all sputum specimens should 
be  collected  and  final  results  of  staining  for  AFB  should  have  been  reviewed  before
proceeding with bronchoscopy 
[67]).
Specimen Collection 
Persons requiring smear- and culture-sputum examination should submit at least three
sputum specimens 
(collected 8--24 hours apart, with at least one specimen collected in the early morning) 
(71,99). Specimens should be collected in a sputum induction booth or in an AII room.
In 
resource-limited settings without environmental containment, collection 
is  safer  when  performed  outdoors.  Patients  should  be  instructed  how  to  produce  an
adequate sputum specimen, and a 
health-care  professional  should  supervise  and  observe  the  collection  of  sputum,  if
possible 
(93).  For  patients  who  are  unable  to  produce  an  adequate  sputum  specimen,
expectoration might be induced by inhalation of an aerosol of warm, 
hypertonic saline (71).
Laboratory Examination 

Detection  of  AFB  in  stained  smears  by  microscopy  can  provide  the  first
mycobacteriologic indication of TB disease. 
A positive result for AFB in a sputum smear is predictive of 
increased infectiousness; however, negative AFB 
sputum-smear results do not exclude a diagnosis of TB disease if clinical suspicion is
high. In 2002, only 63% of U.S. patients 
with reported positive sputum cultures had positive AFB sputum smears 
(100).
Although smears allow for the detection of mycobacteria, definitive identification, strain
typing, and 
drug-susceptibility testing of M. 
tuberculosis can be performed only via culture 
(93). A culture of sputum or other clinical specimen that contains 
M. tuberculosis provides a definitive diagnosis of TB disease. In the majority of cases,
identification of 
M.  tuberculosis  and  drug-susceptibility  results  are  available  within  28  days  using
recommended rapid methods (e.g., liquid culture and DNA probes). 
A negative culture result is obtained in approximately 14% of patients with confirmed
pulmonary TB disease 
(100) . Testing sputum with certain techniques (e.g., nucleic acid amplification [NAA])
facilitates the rapid detection and identification of
M.  tuberculosis,  but  should  not  replace  culture  and  drug-susceptibility  testing  in
patients with suspected TB disease 
(88,101,102).  Recommendations  for  use  and  interpretation  of  NAA  tests  in  the
diagnosis of TB disease have been published 

previously (101,102).
Laboratories should report positive smear results within 
24 hours of collection and positive cultures within 24 hours of 
the  notation  of  the  positive  culture.  Drug-susceptibility  tests  should  be  performed  on
initial isolates from all patients to assist 
in the identification of an effective anti-TB regimen. Drug-susceptibility tests should be
repeated if 1) sputum 
specimens continue to be culture-positive 3 months after initiation of treatment or if 2)
persons whose cultures had converted to 
negative subsequently revert to positive 
(65,93).
Treatment for LTBI 
Treatment for LTBI is essential to controlling and eliminating TB disease in the United
States because it 
substantially reduces the risk that TB infection will progress to TB disease 
(23). Certain persons are at high risk for developing TB 
disease  once  infected,  and  every  effort  should  be  made  to  begin  these  persons  on  a
standard LTBI treatment regimen and to 
ensure that they complete the entire course of treatment for LTBI . Before treatment for
LTBI is started, TB disease should be 
ruled  out  by  history,  medical  examination,  chest  radiography,  and  when  indicated,
mycobacteriologic studies.
Candidates for Treatment of LTBI 

Correctional facility staff and inmates in the following high-risk groups should be given
treatment for LTBI if their 
reaction to the TST is >5 mm, regardless of age 
(64,65):
HIV-infected persons,
recent contacts of a TB patient,
persons  with  fibrotic  changes  on  chest  radiograph  consistent  with  previous  TB
disease, and
patients  with  organ  transplants  and  other  immunocompromising  conditions  who
receive the equivalent of
>15 mg/day of prednisone for >1 month.
All  other  correctional  facility  staff  and  inmates  should  be  considered  for  treatment  of
LTBI if their TST results 
are  >10  mm  induration.  If  QFT-G  is  used,  any  correctional  facility  staff  member  or
inmate with a positive QFT-G result 
should  be  considered  for  LTBI  treatment.  Decisions  regarding  initiation  of  LTBI
treatment should include consideration of 
the  likelihood  of  the  patient  continuing  and  completing  LTBI  treatment  under
supervision if released from the facility 
before the treatment regimen is completed. 
Persons with previously positive TST results who have previously completed treatment
for LTBI (i.e.,

>6 months of isoniazid, 4 months of rifampin, or another regimen) do not need to be
treated again unless concern exists that reinfection 
has  occurred.  Other  persons  who  might  be  poor  candidates  for  treatment  of  LTBI
include those with a previous history of 
liver injury or a history of excessive alcohol consumption; 
active hepatitis and end-stage liver disease are relative 
contraindications to the use of isoniazid or pyrazinamide for treatment of LTBI 
(64,103). If the decision is made to treat such patients, 
baseline and follow-up monitoring of serum aminotransaminases are recommended.
Treatment Regimens for LTBI 
Standard regimens have been developed for the treatment of LTBI 
(Table 5). The preferred treatment for LTBI is 9 months 
of  daily  isoniazid  or  biweekly  dosing  administered  by  DOT.  Although  regimens  are
broadly 
applicable, modifications should be considered for certain populations (e.g., 
patients with HIV infection) and when drug resistance 
is suspected. 
Reports  of  severe  liver  injury  and  death  associated  with  the  combination  of  rifampin
and pyrazinamide for treatment 
of  LTBI  prompted  ATS  and  CDC  to  revise  previous  recommendations.  These
recommendations now state that this 
regimen typically should not be offered for the treatment of LTBI 
(64,103--107). If the potential benefits substantially outweigh 
the  demonstrated  risk  for  severe  liver  injury  and  death  associated  with  this  regimen
and the patient has no contraindications 

this  regimen  may  be  considered;  a  physician  with  experience  treating  LTBI  and  TB
disease should be consulted before use of 
this  regimen  (103).  Clinicians  should  continue  the  appropriate  use  of  rifampin  and
pyrazinamide in standard multidrug 
anti-TB regimens for the treatment of TB disease 
(65).
For all LTBI treatment regimens, nonadherence to intermittent dosing results in a larger
proportion of total doses 
missed  than  daily  dosing;  therefore,  all  patients  on  intermittent  treatment  should
receive DOT. In addition, DOT should be 
used with daily dosing of LTBI treatment whenever feasible. Patients with the highest
priority for DOT are those at the highest 
risk for progression from LTBI to TB disease, including 
persons with HIV infection and persons who are recent contacts 
of infectious patients with pulmonary TB. 
Contacts of Patients with Drug-Susceptible TB Disease 
Contacts  of  patients  with  drug-susceptible  TB  disease  who  once  tested  negative  but
subsequently have a positive TST 
result (i.e., >5 mm) should be evaluated for treatment of LTBI. The majority of persons
who are infected will have a positive 
TST  result  within  6  weeks  of  exposure;  therefore,  contacts  of  patients  with
drug-susceptible TB disease who have initial 
negative TSTs should be retested 8--10 weeks after the end of exposure to a patient
with suspected or confirmed TB disease 
(108). Persons with TB infection should be advised that they can be re-infected with 

M. tuberculosis if re-exposed 
(109--111). If they have not been treated previously, HIV-infected persons (regardless
of TST result or previous LTBI treatment history), 
persons  receiving  immunosuppressive  therapy  (regardless  of  TST  result  or  previous
LTBI treatment history), and persons with 
a known previous (to current exposure) positive TST also should be considered for LTBI
treatment.
Treatment  of  LTBI  should  not  be  started  until  a  diagnosis  of  TB  disease  has  been
excluded. If the presence of TB disease 
is  uncertain  because  of  an  equivocal  chest  radiograph,  a  standard  multidrug  anti-TB
therapy might be started and adjusted 
as  necessary,  depending  on  the  results  of  sputum  cultures,  drug-susceptibility  tests,
and clinical response 
(65).  If  cultures  are  obtained  without  initiating  therapy  for  TB  disease,  treatment  for
LTBI should not be initiated until all cultures are reported 
as negative, which might take 6--8 weeks.
Contacts of Patients with Drug-Resistant TB Disease 
Treatment for LTBI caused by drug-resistant M. 
tuberculosis organisms is complex and should be conducted in 
consultation  with  the  local  health  department's  TB  control  program  and  persons  with
expertise in the medical management of 
drug-resistant TB. Often this will require waiting for results of susceptibility testing of
the isolate from the presumed source 
patient.  Treatment  should  be  guided  by  in  vitro  susceptibility  test  results  from  the

isolate to which the patient was 
exposed (65,112,113).
Pretreatment Evaluation and Monitoring of Treatment 
Routine  laboratory  monitoring  during  treatment  of  LTBI  is  indicated  only  for  patients
with abnormal baseline tests and 
for persons at risk for hepatic disease. Baseline laboratory testing is indicated only for
persons infected with HIV, 
pregnant  women,  women  in  the  immediate  postpartum  period  (typically  within  3
months of delivery), persons with a history of 
liver disease, persons who use alcohol regularly, and persons who have or who are at
risk for chronic liver disease 
(64).
All patients should undergo clinical monitoring at least monthly. This monitoring should
include 1) a brief 
clinical assessment regarding the signs of hepatitis (i.e., nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain, jaundice, and yellow or brown urine) 
and  2)  education  about  the  adverse  effects  of  the  drug(s)  and  the  need  for  prompt
cessation of treatment and clinical 
evaluation should adverse effects occur. All aspects of the clinical encounter should be
conducted in private and in the patient's 
primary language. 
Severe  adverse  events  associated  with  the  administration  of  tuberculin  antigen  or
treatment of LTBI or TB disease 
(e.g.,  those  resulting  in  hospitalization  or  death)  should  be  reported  to  MedWatch,

FDA's Safety Information and Adverse 
Event Reporting Program at telephone 800-FDA-1088, by facsimile at 800-FDA-0178, or
via the Internet by sending Report 
Form  3500  (available  at  http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/3500.pdf).  Instructions
regarding the types of adverse events 
that  should  be  reported  are  included  on  MedWatch  report  forms.  In  addition,  severe
adverse effects associated with LTBI 
treatment should be reported to CDC's Division of Tuberculosis Elimination at telephone
404-639-8118.
Treatment for TB Disease 
A  decision  to  initiate  treatment  (i.e.,  combination  anti-TB  chemotherapy)  should  be
made on the basis of 
epidemiologic  information;  clinical,  pathological,  and  radiographic  findings;  and  the
results of microscopic examination of 
AFB-stained sputum smears and cultures for mycobacteria. A positive AFB-smear result
provides strong inferential evidence for 
the diagnosis of TB, and combination chemotherapy should be initiated promptly unless
other strong evidence against 
the  diagnosis  of  TB  disease  is  present  (e.g.,  a  negative  NAA  test).  If  the  diagnosis  is
confirmed by isolation of 
M. tuberculosis or a positive NAA test, treatment should be continued until a standard
course of therapy is completed. Because as few as 50% 
of patients with positive sputum culture results for 
M. tuberculosis will have negative sputum AFB-smear results 
(93), when initial 

AFB-smear  results  are  negative,  empiric  therapy  for  TB  is  indicated  if  the  clinical
suspicion for TB disease is high. 
Regardless of the decision to begin anti-TB treatment, diagnoses other than TB should
be considered and appropriate 
evaluations  undertaken  in  patients  with  negative  AFB-smear  results.  A  diagnosis  of
culture-negative pulmonary TB can be made if 
sputum cultures are negative, the TST result is positive (in this circumstance, a reaction
of 
>5 mm induration is considered positive), 
a clinical or radiographic response is observed 2 months after the initiation of therapy,
and no other diagnosis has 
been established. An adequate regimen for culture-negative pulmonary TB includes an
additional 2 months of isoniazid 
and rifampin to complete 4 months of treatment 
(65). If no clinical or radiographic response is 
observed  by  2  months,  treatment  can  be  stopped,  and  other  diagnoses  (including
inactive TB) should be considered. If AFB-smear results are negative, 
and  suspicion  for  TB  disease  is  low,  treatment  can  be  deferred  until  the  results  of
mycobacterial cultures are known and 
a comparison chest radiograph is available (typically at 2 months). Among persons who
have not begun treatment and in 
whom suspicion of TB is low, treatment of LTBI should be considered if 1) cultures are
negative, 2) the TST result is positive 
(>5  mm  induration),  and  3)  the  chest  radiograph  is  unchanged  after  2  months.  A
person with TB expertise should be 
consulted for unusual or complex situations.

Individualized case management should be provided for all patients with TB disease 
(114--116). In addition, patient management should be coordinated with officials of the
local or state health department; suspected or confirmed TB 
cases  should  be  reported  to  the  local  or  state  health  department  in  accordance  with
laws and regulations. Regimens for treating 
TB disease should contain multiple drugs to which the 
organisms are susceptible. For persons with TB disease, treatment with 
a  single  drug  can  lead  to  the  development  of  mycobacterial  resistance  to  that  drug.
Similarly, adding a single drug to a 
failing  anti-TB  regimen  is  not  recommended  because  it  can  lead  to  resistance  to  the
added drug 
(65).
For the majority of patients, the preferred regimen for treating TB disease consists of an
initial 2-month phase of 
isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, followed by a continuation phase of
isoniazid and rifampin lasting 
>4 months, for a minimum total treatment period of 6 months 
(Tables 6 and 7). The decision to stop therapy should be made on the basis of 
the number of doses taken within a maximum period (not simply a 6-month period) 
(65).  Persons  with  cavitary  pulmonary  TB  disease  and  positive  cultures  of  sputum
specimens at the completion of 2 months of therapy should receive a longer, 
7-month continuation phase of therapy (total duration: 
9 months) because of the substantially higher rate of relapse among persons 
with this type of TB disease (65).

If interruptions in TB therapy occur, the decision should be made whether to restart a
complete course of treatment 
or continue the regimen as originally intended. In the majority of instances, the earlier
the break in therapy and the longer 
its  duration,  the  more  serious  the  effect  and  the  greater  the  need  to  restart  the
treatment from the beginning. 
Continuous  treatment  is  more  important  in  the  initial  phase  of  therapy,  when  the
bacillary burden is highest and the chance of 
developing drug resistance is greatest. Although no evidence on which to base detailed
recommendations exists, examples of 
practical  algorithms  for  managing  interruptions  in  therapy  have  been  described
previously 
(65).
For  HIV-infected  persons  who  are  receiving  antiretroviral  therapy,  TB  treatment
regimens might need to be 
altered. Whenever possible, the care of persons with concomitant TB and HIV should be
provided by or in consultation with 
persons with expertise in the management of both TB and HIV-related disease 
(65). To prevent the emergence of rifampin 
resistance, persons with TB, HIV, and CD4+ T-lymphocyte cell counts <100 
cells/mm3 should not be treated with highly 
intermittent (i.e., once- or twice-weekly) regimens. These 
patients should instead receive daily therapy during the 
intensive phase (i.e., first 2 months) and receive daily dosing or 3 doses per week by
DOT during the continuation phase 
(117).  Antiretroviral  therapy  should  not  be  withheld  because  the  patient  is  being

treated for TB if it is otherwise indicated. Nevertheless, beginning 
both  antiretroviral  therapy  and  combination  chemotherapy  for  TB  at  nearly  the  same
time is not advisable. Although data on 
which  to  base  recommendations  are  limited,  experience  in  the  fields  of  HIV  and  TB
suggests that treatment for TB should 
be initiated first. Delaying the initiation of antiretroviral therapy until 4--8 weeks after
starting anti-TB therapy is 
advantageous  because  it  1)  better  enables  providers  to  ascribe  a  specific  cause  to  a
drug side effect, 2) decreases the severity of 
paradoxical  reactions,  and  3)  decreases  adherence  challenges  for  the  patient.  Until
controlled studies have been conducted that evaluate 
the optimal time for starting antiretroviral therapy in patients with HIV infection and TB,
this decision should be 
individualized on the basis of 1) the patient's initial response to treatment for TB, 2) the
occurrence of side effects, and 3) the availability 
of  multidrug  antiretroviral  therapy.  Because  drug-drug  interactions  might  be  less
frequent with use of rifabutin, substitution 
of  rifabutin  for  rifampin  might  be  indicated  with  certain  antiretroviral  medications.
Detailed information on TB treatment 
in HIV-infected persons has been published 
(65,107). Updates are posted on the Internet as new findings become available 
(at 
http://www.dhfs.state.wi.us/aids-hiv/resources/overviews/aids_hiv.htm, 
http://www.hiv-druginteractions.org, and 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/tb/tb_hiv_drugs/toc.htm). 
Drug-susceptibility testing should be performed on all initial isolates from patients with

TB disease. When results 
from  drug-susceptibility  tests  become  available,  the  treatment  regimen  should  be
adjusted accordingly 
(65,113,114,118,119) (Tables 6 and 
7).  Medical  providers  treating  patients  with  drug-resistant  TB  disease  should  seek
expert consultation 
and collaborate with the local health department for treatment decisions 
(65).
The  primary  determinant  of  treatment  outcome  is  patient  adherence  to  the  drug
regimen. Thus, careful attention should 
be paid to measures designed to enable and foster adherence 
(65,119,120). DOT is the preferred treatment strategy for 
all  persons  with  TB  disease  and  high-risk  (e.g.,  HIV  infected)  persons  with  LTBI.  DOT
should be used throughout 
the  entire  course  of  therapy  whenever  feasible.  Practitioners  providing  treatment  to
inmates should coordinate DOT with the 
local health department on an inmate's release. The local health department also may
be involved in monitoring therapy 
for correctional facility staff (65).
Challenges to Treatment Completion 
Achieving completion of treatment for LTBI or TB disease often is difficult, particularly in
correctional facilities. Movement 
of inmates both within and outside of correctional systems interferes with continuity of
care and might lead to treatment default 

(121).  Comprehensive  case  management  that  includes  discharge  planning  and
coordination with other correctional facilities and 
health  departments  is  needed  to  ensure  completion  of  therapy  for  patients  with  TB
disease and LTBI 
(42).
Multiple  studies  have  demonstrated  that  inmates  have  relatively  low  LTBI  treatment
completion rates, particularly those 
in jails who are likely to be released before their therapy has been completed 
(14,28,40,122). For a substantial proportion 
of  inmates,  referrals  for  follow-up  after  release  are  not  made;  of  inmates  whose
appointments are scheduled, 40%--60% will 
not attend their first clinic visit (36,40). Multiple interventions have been attempted to
improve LTBI treatment completion 
in this population, including patient education while in jail, use of incentives, and use of
DOT 
(61,122,123). None of these strategies has had substantial success, although 
patient education and use of DOT have increased completion rates modestly 
in  certain  situations  (61,122).  Active  case  management,  as  recommended  for  TB
disease, should be considered as a next step 
in improving the completion rates for LTBI treatment 
(14,42).
Discharge Planning
Correctional facilities should plan for the discharge of 

inmates and other detainees who have confirmed or suspected 
TB disease and those with LTBI who are at high risk for TB disease. Such planning is
crucial to effective local TB control 
efforts within the community to which released inmates 
return. Facilities should ensure that their discharge plan is 
comprehensive  and  effective;  the  process  should  include  1)  collaborating  with  public
health and other community health-care 
professionals,  2)  ensuring  continuity  of  case-management,  and  3)  evaluating
discharge-planning procedures and modifying procedures 
as needed to improve outcomes. 
Collaboration Between Correction Facilities and Public Health Officials
Postconfinement follow-up is a necessary component of 
TB-control efforts (35,124). Effective discharge 
planning requires collaboration between corrections and medical staff (both intra- and
inter-facility), and with public health 
and community-based service organizations 
(37). Correctional facilities and public health departments should overcome 
multiple obstacles associated with postdetention follow-up 
(125), including
short length of stay in a facility;
unscheduled release or transfer;
poorly  defined  or  implemented  channels  of  communication  between  correctional
and public health authorities;

limited  resources  (i.e.,  staff,  equipment,  and  medications)  available  to  provide
recommended TB prevention, 
screening, treatment, and discharge-planning services;
limited resources of the patient to make or keep appointments;
high prevalence of mental illness and substance abuse among correctional patients;
mistrust among inmates, which might result in the provision of aliases or incorrect
contact or locating information; and
reincarceration with disruption in treatment or termination of public benefits.
Collaboration is essential to ensure that TB-control efforts are undertaken in the most
cost-effective manner. 
Coordination  between  the  correctional  facility  and  the  public  health  department
maximizes the effectiveness of any efforts begun in 
a  correctional  facility  (126),  and  linking  released  detainees  to  the  public  health-care
system might improve 
post-release adherence (35) and reduce recidivism 
(127,128). The types of relationships forged will depend on the assessment of the 
TB risk in the facility and the community.
Comprehensive Discharge Planning 
Comprehensive  discharge  planning  is  an  important  component  of  case  management
and is essential for ensuring 
the  continuity  of  TB  management  and  therapy  among  persons  with  TB  disease  and
LTBI. Following release, former inmates 
face  housing,  employment,  and  other  crises  concerning  basic  needs  that  often  take

priority over their health. Multiple 
reports from the United States and other countries support the use of comprehensive
discharge planning in TB control 
efforts  (42,129,130).  Comprehensive  discharge  planning  should  be  implemented  for
inmates with confirmed TB disease, 
suspected TB disease, and LTBI who also are at high risk for TB disease. 
Discharge planning for persons with LTBI who are considered at high risk for developing
TB disease is critical if treatment 
is  begun  in  the  correctional  facility.  Starting  all  inmates  at  high  risk  on  LTBI  therapy
might not be feasible while they are in 
the  correctional  facility,  and  the  policy  determining  which  risk  groups  to  start  on
treatment should be made in collaboration 
with public health personnel. Collaboration ensures 
appropriate communication and adequate resources for treatment after transfer 
to another facility or after release to the community. At minimum, all inmates who have
begun therapy for LTBI in a 
correctional  facility  should  be  given  community  contact  information  for  follow-up  and
continuity of care. Ideally, all inmates demonstrated 
to  be  infected  with  TB  should  be  considered  for  therapy,  and  discharge  planning  to
facilitate therapy should be 
comprehensive  (124).  Because  of  high  recidivism  rates,  discharge-planning  efforts
should begin in the detention phase and continue in the 
post-detention  phase  to  ensure  continuity  of  care  as  inmates  move  among  different
facilities and between correctional facilities and 
the community.
Components of Discharge Planning 

Initiate Discharge Planning Early 
To  ensure  uninterrupted  treatment,  discharge  planning  for  inmates  who  receive  a
diagnosis of TB disease should begin 
as soon as possible after diagnosis (131). Corrections or health services administrators
(or their designees) should assign staff 
to notify the public health department of inmates receiving treatment for TB disease or
LTBI. Inmates with TB disease should 
be interviewed while still incarcerated (ideally by public health staff) to enable facility
administrators to assess and plan for 
the appropriate support and referrals that will be needed after discharge 
(131). Such personnel also should communicate 
with other facilities in the event of transfers of 
inmates.
Provide Case Management 
To  ensure  continuity  of  care,  all  correctional  facilities  should  assign  personnel
(preferably health-care professionals) to 
serve  as  case  managers.  These  managers  should  be  responsible  for  conducting
discharge planning in the facility, which 
entails coordinating follow-up and communicating treatment histories with public health
department and other 
health-care counterparts within the community 
(42). In addition, case managers should employ strategies (e.g., mental-illness triage 
and referral, substance-abuse assessment and treatment, and prerelease appointments
for medical care) to help former inmates 
meet basic survival needs on release. The role of case manager should be assigned to a

facility staff member who is capable 
of establishing good rapport with inmates; an effective case manager might be capable
of persuading TB patients who are 
being  released  into  the  community  to  supply  accurate  information  needed  to  ensure
follow-up care.
The following factors should be considered when planning community discharge of an
inmate receiving treatment for 
TB (132):
Where will the ex-inmate reside after discharge (e.g., a permanent residence, a halfway
house, or a shelter)?
Will family or other support be available?
Are cultural or language barriers present?
What  kind  of  assistance  will  be  needed  (e.g.,  housing,  social  services,  substance
abuse services, mental health 
services, medical services, and HIV/AIDS services)?
Does the inmate understand the importance of follow-up and know how to access
health-care services?
Obtain Detailed Contact Information 
To  facilitate  the  process  of  locating  former  inmates,  detailed  information  should  be
collected from all inmates with 
TB disease or LTBI for whom release is anticipated, including 
1) names, addresses, and telephone numbers of friends, 

relatives, and landlords; 2) anticipated place of residence; and 
3) areas typically frequented (e.g., restaurants, gyms, parks, 
and community centers) (61,133). Inmates also should complete a 
release form authorizing health department personnel 
to contact worksites, family members, corrections staff 
(parole officers), and public and private treatment centers. Inmates 
might give aliases or incorrect contact information because of fear of incrimination or
deportation. The use of an alias can be 
a barrier to continuity of care on reentry to a correctional facility.
Assess and Plan for Substance Abuse and Mental Health Treatment and for Other Social
Services
Substance  abuse  and  other  comorbid  mental  health  conditions  should  be  considered
when developing a 
comprehensive discharge plan. Addiction affects health care, medication 
adherence, housing opportunities, social relationships, 
and employment and might be the greatest barrier to continuity of care for TB 
(134). Mental illness can be a barrier when community service providers have not been
trained to interact with mentally ill patients. Persons who are mentally ill 
might  have  difficulties  keeping  medical  appointments.  Collaboration  between
corrections and health department personnel 
can  facilitate  the  placement  of  former  inmates  in  substance  abuse  or  mental-health
treatment programs to 
improve the likelihood of social stabilization and continuity of care 
(134,135).

Other  social  issues  present  barriers  to  released  inmates.  Loss  of  health  insurance
benefits while incarcerated is common, 
and  former  inmates  might  be  required  to  wait  30--365  days  after  release  to  become
re-eligible for benefits 
(136,137).  Certain  correctional  facilities  have  agreements  with  local  Social  Security
Administration field offices to facilitate swift reactivation 
of  these  benefits  (138);  creation  of  and  training  in  the  use  of  such  agreements  are
encouraged. Ideally, on entry into 
the correctional system, public benefits would be suspended, rather than terminated,
and reactivated on release to eliminate 
gaps in coverage. Application for public benefits and 
insurance should be incorporated into the discharge planning phase 
whenever  possible.  If  the  inmate  is  likely  to  have  limited  access  to  care  because  of
inability to pay for services on release, 
documentation should be made and another treatment mechanism identified 
(139).
Make Arrangements for Postrelease Follow-Up 
Before  release,  the  inmate  should  be  introduced  (preferably  face  to  face)  to  the
employee from the community treatment 
agency who is responsible for community-based treatment and care 
(139). When release dates are known, setting 
post-release appointments has been demonstrated to improve compliance 
(128,134,140). Patients with TB disease should be given a supply 
of  medication  at  discharge  adequate  to  last  until  their  next  medical  appointment.
Discharge planners can work with 
advocacy groups or private or government-funded programs to 

facilitate a safe, supported transition into the community 
(61).
Make Provisions for Unplanned Release and Unplanned Transfers
Administrative procedures should be in place for unscheduled discharge of inmates who
are being managed or treated 
for TB (36,141). Reporting requirements for inmates with TB disease who are released
or transferred to another facility 
vary  among  states  and  jurisdictions.  Despite  mandatory  notification  policies,
notification of public health officials varies 
from 87%--92% for inmates with TB disease 
(37,126) to only 17% for inmates with LTBI 
(36,37). Correctional facility staff responsible for health department notification should
relay information about all scheduled and unscheduled releases as 
it becomes available. All TB information concerning persons who are being transferred
to other correctional settings should 
be  provided  to  the  receiving  facility.  In  addition,  inmates  should  be  given  a  written
summary or discharge card outlining 
their  treatment  plan  to  ensure  continuity  of  care  in  case  of  unplanned  and
unanticipated release 
(131,142). Inmates with TB disease who are eligible for release or transfer to another
medical or correctional facility but continue to be infectious should remain 
in airborne precautions during and after transfer until noninfectious 
(132).
Provide Education and Counseling 

Patient education and documentation of education in the correctional facility is critical;
multiple misconceptions 
persist among inmates and facility staff regarding means of transmission, differences
between infection and disease, and methods 
of  prevention  and  treatment  for  TB  (143).  Persons  receiving  treatment  should  be
counseled about the importance of adhering 
to the treatment plan (131) as a measure to 
improve postrelease follow-up (61). Education should be 
delivered in the inmate's first preferred language and should be culturally sensitive with
respect to ethnicity, sex, and age 
(135,144--147).  The  inmate  should  be  actively  involved  in  all  education  sessions  to
encourage communication regarding previous transition 
experiences  (e.g.,  the  inmate's  treatment  motivations  and  any  positive  or  negative
experiences with specific providers) 
(141). Inmates with LTBI who have not been started on therapy should be counseled on
their risk factors, encouraged to visit the public 
health department, and provided with information about access to care after release.
DOT 
DOT  for  TB  disease  or  LTBI  in  the  correctional  setting  provides  an  opportunity  for
educating and counseling inmates 
and for establishing a routine of medication administration. The effect, if any, of DOT on
postrelease behavior has not 
been evaluated formally, but this practice might enhance 
adherence (122).

Community-Based Case Management after Release 
Case-management strategies begun in the correctional 
facility should be continued after release for former inmates 
with confirmed or suspected TB disease and those with LTBI who are at high risk for
progression to TB disease. Incentives 
and enablers (see Glossary) have improved adherence in 
incarcerated (35,60,61) and nonincarcerated 
(148,149)  populations,  and  incentives  combined  with  education  and  counseling
optimize both short- and long-term adherence 
(40,60,61,150).  Case  management  that  takes  into  account  cultural  differences  and
addresses not only TB-control matters but patient-defined 
needs (particularly among foreign-born persons) results in improved completion rates
for LTBI therapy 
(145).  Case  management  by  health  department  personnel  after  release  is  critical  for
continuity of care in the event of reincarceration. The provision 
of  follow-up  information  from  local  health  departments  and  community-based
organizations back to corrections staff is 
helpful in determining whether discharge planning is effective.
Discharge Planning for Immigration and Customs Enforcement Detainees
Background 
Persons with TB disease detained by ICE officers are a 
potential public health threat because they typically are 
highly  mobile,  likely  to  leave  and  reenter  the  United  States  before  completion  of  TB

therapy, and at high risk for 
interrupting treatment (151). Therefore, ensuring treatment of such 
detainees is important to the national strategy to eliminate TB in 
the United States (32,152).
In  March  2003,  the  detention  and  removal  functions  of  the  former  Immigration  and
Naturalization Service (INS) 
were transferred from the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) to the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security (DHS). ICE is 
a division of DHS and detains approximately 200,000 persons annually while enforcing
immigration law. ICE detainees 
are  screened  for  TB  disease  at  service  processing  centers,  staging  facilities,  contract
detention facilities, and local jails. 
Frequent transfers of ICE detainees between detention facilities are 
common.
ICE detention provides an opportunity to identify persons with confirmed and suspected
TB disease and initiate 
treatment, if appropriate. ICE detainees with confirmed or suspected TB disease receive
treatment while they are in custody. 
Presently,  ICE  does  not  deport  detainees  with  known  infectious  TB,  but  such  persons
might be deported when noncontagious, even 
if treatment has not been completed or the final culture and susceptibility results are
pending.
Discharge Planning for ICE Detainees 
In May 2004, ICE approved a policy to implement a short-term medical hold of persons

with suspected or confirmed 
TB  disease  until  continuity  of  care  is  arranged,  which  affords  the  ICE  health  services
program the time needed to facilitate 
continuity of TB therapy arrangements before the patient's 
release or removal. The ICE health services program seeks to enroll all 
persons 
with confirmed or suspected TB disease in programs that facilitate the continuity of TB
therapy between countries. 
These programs (e.g., CureTB, TB Net, and the 
U.S.-Mexico Binational Tuberculosis Referral and Case Management Project) 
facilitate TB referrals and follow-up for patients 
who move between the United States and other 
countries. 
ICE  field  office  directors  may  consider  a  stay  of  removal  for  persons  with  MDR  TB  or
other complicated cases, so they 
can receive and complete treatment in the United States 
before removal. In detention settings in which ICE detainees are 
held,  facility  staff  who  are  responsible  for  TB  communication  should  notify  the  ICE
health services program of persons 
with confirmed or suspected TB disease. Collaboration with 
detention facilities and local and state health departments will 
facilitate  enrollment  in  the  appropriate  continuity  of  care  program  before  transfer,
release, or repatriation. Correctional 
facility staff should identify these patients as ICE detainees when reporting TB cases to
local and state health departments.

Evaluation of Discharge Planning Effectiveness 
Evaluation  of  a  discharge  planning  program  is  critical  and  should  begin  with  an
assessment of existing programs 
and activities. Program evaluation should be incorporated into the overall correctional
quality improvement/assurance 
program  (153).  Data  from  program  evaluation  studies  should  be  documented  and
published to ensure that correctional facility 
and public health department staff are informed regarding effective measures and the
effective translation of research findings 
into practice (123). Evaluation of discharge planning should include measurements of
adherence to therapy,
cost  savings  (from  unduplicated  testing  for  persons  with  LTBI  and  completion  of
care without re-starts and extensions),
recidivism, and
the effectiveness of the collaboration between medical and corrections staff (both
within and among facilities) 
and between correctional facilities and the public health 
department and other community agencies.
Contact Investigation
Overview 

Multiple  outbreaks  of  TB,  including  those  involving  MDR  TB,  have  been  reported  in
prisons and jails, particularly 
among  HIV-infected  inmates  (17,22,45,154).  The  identification  of  a  potentially
infectious case of TB in a correctional facility 
should  always  provoke  a  rapid  response  because  of  the  potential  for  widespread  TB
transmission. A prompt public health response 
in a confined setting can prevent a TB outbreak or contain one that has already begun 
(16,21,155).
The overall goal of a TB contact investigation is to interrupt transmission of 
M.  tuberculosis.  Ongoing  transmission  is  prevented  by  1)  identifying,  isolating,  and
treating persons with TB disease (source and secondary-case patients) and 
2)  identifying  infected  contacts  of  the  source  patient  and  secondary  patients  and
providing them with a complete course 
of treatment for LTBI. The contact investigation can serve to educate corrections staff
and inmates about the risk, treatment, 
and prevention of TB in correctional facilities; inform staff and inmates regarding the
importance of engaging in 
recommended TB-control practices and procedures within the correctional system; and
emphasize the importance of completion of 
therapy for persons with TB disease and LTBI. 
Because  decisions  involved  in  planning  and  prioritizing  contact  investigations  in
correctional facilities are seldom simple, 
a multidisciplinary team is preferable. Health departments 
often can help correctional facilities in planning, implementing, 
and evaluating a TB contact investigation.

Data  collection  and  management  is  an  essential  component  of  a  successful
investigation 
(21,36). It requires a systematic approach to collecting, organizing, and analyzing 
TB-associated data. As part of the contact investigation, all staff 
and  investigation  personnel  should  adopt  a  uniform  approach.  Investigators  should
have a clear understanding of how a contact 
is defined and what constitutes an exposure 
(156--158).
Two correctional information systems are critical to the 
efficient conduct of a contact investigation: 1) an inmate 
medical record system containing TST results and other relevant information and 2) an
inmate tracking system. The lack of 
either  system  can  lead  to  the  unnecessary  use  of  costly  personnel  time  and  medical
evaluation resources (e.g., TSTs and 
chest 
radiographs).  Without  these  information  systems,  facilities  also  might  be  forced  to
implement costly lockdowns and 
mass screenings.
TB Transmission Factors 
TB transmission is determined by the characteristics of the source patient and exposed
contacts; the 
circumstances  surrounding  the  exposure  itself  also  determine  whether  ongoing
transmission will occur. The following variables should 

be accounted for when planning each contact investigation.
Characteristics of the Source Patient 
Source patients who have either cavitation on chest radiograph or AFB smear-positive
respiratory specimens are 
substantially more likely to transmit TB than persons who have neither characteristic 
(159--163) Delays in TB diagnosis in source 
patients have also been associated with an increased likelihood of transmission 
(164). Nonetheless, substantial variability exists 
among  the  infectiousness  of  a  given  TB  source  patient.  Although  AFB  smear  status,
cavitary disease, and 
delayed  diagnosis  increase  the  likelihood  of  transmission,  certain  persons  with  these
characteristics infect few persons, whereas others with none of 
these  characteristics  might  infect  multiple  persons.  The  best  measure  of  the
infectiousness of source patients is the 
documented infection rate among their contacts. 
Characteristics of Persons Who Have Been Identified as Contacts
Immunosuppression. HIV infection is the greatest single risk factor for progression to TB
disease. Therefore, 
HIV-infected contacts should receive the highest priority for evaluation of TB infection,
even if these persons had shorter duration 
of  exposure  than  other  contacts.  Persons  receiving  prolonged  therapy  with
corticosteroids, chemotherapy for cancer, or 
other immunosuppressive agents (e.g., TNF-a 
antagonists) also should be considered high priority for investigation. In 
addition,  persons  with  end-stage  renal  disease  and  diabetes  mellitus  should  be

promptly evaluated, because these conditions are 
associated with compromised immune function.
Age. Young children (i.e., those aged <4 years) are at high risk for rapid development
of TB disease, particularly 
TB meningitis. If an inmate with TB identifies a young child as a community contact, a
health department referral should 
be made immediately.
Exposure Characteristics 
Air volume. The volume of air shared between an infectious TB patient and susceptible
contacts is a major determinant 
of the likelihood of transmission. Infectious particles become more widely distributed as
air space increases, rendering them 
less likely to be inhaled.
Ventilation.  Ventilation  is  another  key  factor  in  the  risk  for  airborne  transmission  of
disease. Airborne infectious 
particles disburse throughout an entire enclosed space; thus, if air is 
allowed to circulate from the room occupied by an infectious 
patient  into  other  rooms  or  central  corridors,  their  occupants  also  will  be  exposed.
Areas that have 1) confined air systems with little 
or no ventilation or 2) recirculated air without HEPA filtration have been associated with
increased TB transmission.
Duration  of  exposure.  Although  transmission  of  TB  has  occurred  after  brief  exposure,
the likelihood of infection 

after exposure to an infectious patient is associated with the frequency and duration of
exposure. However, defining 
what  constitutes  a  substantial  duration  of  exposure  for  any  given  contact  is  difficult.
When conducting a contact 
investigation, priority should be given first to inmates and employees who were most
exposed to the source patient 
(21,154,162).
Decision to Initiate a Contact Investigation 
The decision to initiate a contact investigation for an 
inmate or detainee with possible TB is made on a case-by-case basis. 
Each  potential  source  patient's  clinical  presentation  and  opportunities  for  exposure
should be evaluated. Contact 
investigations should be conducted in the following circumstances:
Suspected  or  confirmed  pulmonary,  laryngeal,  or  pleural  TB  with  cavitary  disease  on
chest radiograph or 
positive AFB smears (sputum or other respiratory specimens). 
If the sputum smear is positive and the NAA is negative, TB 
is unlikely, and a contact investigation typically can be deferred. A negative NAA on an
AFB-smear-negative 
specimen, however, should not influence decisions about the contact investigation 
(102).
Suspected  or  confirmed  pulmonary  (noncavitary)  or  pleural  TB  with  negative  AFB

smears (sputum or 
other respiratory specimens) and a decision has been made to initiate TB treatment. 
A more limited initial investigation may be conducted for smear-negative cases.
Contact investigations typically are not indicated for extrapulmonary TB cases (except
for laryngeal and pleural TB), 
unless pulmonary involvement is also diagnosed. 
The decision as to whether the facility should conduct a contact investigation should be
guided by the probability that 
an  inmate  or  employee  has  pulmonary  TB.  Sputum  results  for  AFB  serve  as  a  major
determinant 
(165). However, in certain patients with pulmonary TB, collecting sputum samples is not
feasible. In this circumstance, other types of 
respiratory specimens (e.g., those from bronchoscopy) may be collected for AFB smear
and mycobacterial culture.
Principles for Conducting the Contact Investigation 
No  simple  formula  has  been  devised  for  deciding  which  contacts  to  screen  in  a
correctional facility contact 
investigation.  However,  the  investigation  should  be  guided  by  the  following  basic
principles:
Identified contacts should be stratified by their duration and intensity of exposure to the
source patient.

HIV-infected contacts should be classified as the highest priority group for screening
and initiation of LTBI 
therapy, regardless of duration and intensity of exposure.
Identified groups of contacts with the greatest degree of 
exposure should be screened immediately, followed by 
repeat testing at 8--10 weeks if the initial TST or QFT-G 
is negative.
The infection rate should be calculated to assess the level of TB transmission.
Decisions to expand the contact investigation to groups with less exposure should
be made on the basis of the 
calculated infection rate. If no evidence of transmission is observed, the investigation
should not be expanded. If transmission 
is occurring, the investigation should be expanded 
incrementally to groups with less exposure. When the group 
screened  shows  minimal  or  no  evidence  of  transmission,  the  contact  investigation
should not be expanded further.
Corrections  and  medical  staff  should  be  included  in  the  contact  investigation
depending on their exposure risks.
Ideally,  decisions  about  structuring  the  contact  investigation  should  be  made
collaboratively with the contact 
investigation  team  that  includes  input  from  the  state  or  local  health  department.  For
certain investigations, screening a convenience 
sample before expanding the investigation is prudent. For 
example, in jail investigations, multiple contacts might already have 
been  released,  rendering  those  who  remain  incarcerated  the  only  available  group  for

screening. If a substantial number of 
high priority contacts cannot be evaluated fully, a wider contact investigation should be
considered.
The  investigation  should  focus  on  identifying  the  contacts  at  highest  risk  for
transmission, screening them completely, 
and providing a full course of LTBI treatment for persons demonstrated to be infected.
In general, because 
wide-scale investigations divert attention away from the high priority 
activities necessary to interrupt transmission in the facility, 
mass screening of all persons who had any contact with the source patient should be
avoided 
(166).  Rarely  is  a  person  so  infectious  that  wide-scale  expansion  of  the  contact
investigation is necessary or beneficial.
Medical Evaluation of Contacts 
Appropriate  medical  evaluation  depends  on  both  the  immunologic  status  (e.g.,  HIV
infection) of the contact and 
previous  TST  or  QFT-G  results.  Adequate  knowledge  of  these  data  is  possible  only
through use of a medical record system that 
is complete, up-to-date, and reliable with regard to TST or 
QFT-G status, testing date, and documentation of the reading 
in  millimeters  (for  TST).  Without  an  adequate  medical  record  system  (and  therefore
definitive information regarding prior TST 
or QFT-G results), the true infection and transmission rates cannot be determined. The
lack of such information is likely to lead 

to unnecessary expansion of the contact investigation. 
All Contacts 
All  contacts  should  be  interviewed  for  symptoms  of  TB  disease  using  a  standard
symptom questionnaire. 
Symptomatic  contacts  should  receive  a  chest  radiograph  and  a  complete  medical
evaluation by a physician, regardless of TST 
or  QFT-G  status;  they  also  should  be  isolated  appropriately  (i.e.,  inmates  should  be
placed in an AII room if infectious TB 
is 
suspected by chest radiograph or clinical findings; staff should not be permitted 
to work).†† HIV testing should be 
considered for all contacts whose HIV status is unknown.
Inmates with Documented Previous Positive TST or QFT-G results
Inmates who are asymptomatic, HIV-negative, and have previous positive TST or QFT-G
results need no further 
follow-up, other than consideration for "routine" treatment of LTBI, if not completed in
the past. However, if such an inmate has 
any signs or symptoms suggestive of TB, further evaluation should be conducted (e.g.,
a chest radiograph for persons 
with respiratory symptoms). 
HIV-Infected Inmates 
HIV-infected  contacts  should  be  interviewed  for  symptoms,  have  a  TST  or  QFT-G  and
chest radiograph performed, 
and initiate a complete course of treatment for LTBI (once TB disease has been ruled

out), regardless of the TST or QFT-G 
result.  Treatment  should  be  initiated  even  for  persons  with  a  history  of  previous
treatment for LTBI or TB disease because of 
the possibility of re-infection. Those with a history of a negative TST or QFT-G should
have a TST or QFT-G placed at 
baseline  and  again  in  8--10  weeks.  The  results  of  the  TST  or  QFT-G  will  not  affect
treatment decisions, but they will 
provide  important  information  for  the  contact  investigation.  Anergy  testing  is  not
recommended 
(52).
Previous TST-Negative or QFT-G--Negative Inmates (HIV Negative)
Mandatory  tuberculin  skin  or  QFT-G  testing  of  all  previously  TST-  or  QFT-G--negative
inmate contacts should 
be  conducted  at  baseline  (unless  previously  tested  within  1--3  months  of  exposure).
Testing should be repeated 8--10 weeks 
from the most recent contact with the source patient 
(58,167).
TST and QFT-G Converters 
Persons whose TSTs or QFT-Gs convert or those with newly documented, positive TST or
QFT-G results should 
be  offered  treatment  for  LTBI  unless  medically  contraindicated.  If  inmate  contacts
refuse medically indicated treatment for 
LTBI, they should be monitored regularly for symptoms. Certain facilities have chosen
to monitor HIV-infected contacts 

with follow-up chest radiographs. 
Contact Investigation Stepwise Procedures 
The  following  steps  are  involved  in  conducting  a  contact  investigation  and  might
overlap in time. As soon as a person 
is  confirmed  or  suspected  of  having  TB  disease,  the  case  should  be  reported  to  the
appropriate local health authorities 
and contacts promptly evaluated.
Notify correctional management officials. 
Identification of TB in an inmate or facility staff member can be alarming 
for  other  inmates,  corrections  staff,  and  the  community.  The  administrator  should  be
notified through appropriate chain 
of command that a case of TB has been identified in the institution so that appropriate
briefing and educational efforts 
can be initiated.
Conduct a source patient chart review. 
The following data (with specific dates) should be collected: 1) history 
of  previous  exposure  to  TB,  2)  history  of  TB  symptoms  (e.g.,  cough,  fever,  and  night
sweats), 3) weight history 
(particularly unexplained weight loss), 4) chest radiograph reports, 5) previous TST or
QFT-G results, 6) mycobacteriology 
results  (e.g.,  AFB  smears,  cultures,  and  susceptibilities),  7)  NAA  test  results,  8)  HIV
status, and 
9) other medical risk factors.
Interview  the  source  patient.  A  chart  review  and  case  interview  should  be

accomplished within 1 working day 
for  persons  with  AFB  smear-positive  respiratory  specimens  or  cavitation  on  chest
radiograph and within 3 days for all 
other persons (165). Source patients should be asked concerning TB symptom history,
with a particular focus on duration 
of cough. Source patients also should be asked about where they conduct their daily
activities. Persons with confirmed 
or suspected TB who were detained during the course of the infectious period should be
interviewed regarding 
potential community contacts, particularly HIV-infected persons and young children; 
information  regarding  the  location  of  community  contacts  also  should  be  obtained.
Source patients should be questioned regarding contacts during a 
second interview conducted 7--14 days after the first.
Define the infectious period. Defining the infectious period for a source patient helps
investigators determine how 
far back to go when investigating potential contacts. The infectious period is typically
defined as 12 weeks 
before  TB  diagnosis  or  onset  of  cough  (whichever  is  longer).  If  a  patient  has  no  TB
symptoms, is AFB smear negative, and has 
a  noncavitary  chest  radiograph,  the  presumed  infectious  period  can  be  reduced  to  4
weeks before the date of first 
positive  finding  consistent  with  TB.  If  the  contact  investigation  reveals  that  TB
transmission occurred throughout the 
identified  infectious  period,  the  period  for  contact  investigation  might  need  to  be
expanded 
beyond 12 weeks.

Convene the contact investigation team. 
After TB is diagnosed, a team of professionals (e.g., 
infection-control,  medical,  nursing,  custody,  and  local  public  health  personnel)  should
be convened and charged with planning the contact 
investigation. A team leader should be identified and the roles and responsibilities of
each team member defined, and a schedule of 
regular meetings (documented formally with written minutes) should be established. In
addition, a 
communications  plan  and  a  plan  for  handling  contact  investigation  data  should  be
developed.
Update correctional management officials. 
Administrative personnel should be kept apprised of the strategy, 
process, and action steps involved in conducting the contact investigation.
Obtain source case inmate traffic history. 
The dates and locations of the source patient's housing during the 
infectious  period  and  information  regarding  employment  and  education  should  be
obtained. Groups of contacts should 
be prioritized according to duration of exposure and 
immune status.
Tour exposure sites. A tour should be conducted of each place the source patient
lived, worked, or went to school 
during the infectious period. In addition, information should be obtained regarding any
correctional facility that has housed 
the source patient during the infectious period, including 1) the number of inmates who
are housed together at one time, 
2)  the  housing  arrangement  (e.g.,  cells  versus  dorms),  3)  the  general  size  of  the  air
space, 4) the basics of the 

ventilation  system  (e.g.,  whether  air  is  recirculated),  5)  the  pattern  of  daily  inmate
movement (e.g., when eating, working, 
and recreating), and 6) the availability of data on other inmates housed at the same
time as the source patient. The 
assistance of a facility engineer often is necessary to help characterize the ventilation
system and airflow direction within 
a correctional facility.
Prioritize contacts. Contacts should be grouped according to duration and intensity
of exposure. Persons with the 
most  exposure  and  HIV-infected  or  other  immunosuppressed  contacts  (regardless  of
duration of exposure) are 
considered highest priority. Because progression from exposure to death can be rapid
among HIV-infected persons in a facility 
in which HIV-infected persons are housed or congregated separately, the entire group
should be given high priority 
(45).
Develop contact lists. Rosters of inmate and employee contacts from each location
should be obtained and their 
current  location  investigated.  Lists  of  exposed  contacts  should  be  generated  and
grouped according to current location (e.g., 
still incarcerated, released, and transferred).
Conduct a medical record review on each 
high-priority contact. TST or QFT-G status, chest radiograph 
history, history of treatment for LTBI, HIV status, and other high-risk medical conditions
should be recorded. Particular 
attention  should  be  given  to  weight  history  and  previous  visits  to  facility  health-care
professionals for respiratory symptoms. 

Dates should be carefully recorded.
Evaluate  HIV-infected  contacts  for  TB  disease  and  LTBI  promptly.  LTBI  therapy
should be initiated promptly among these persons once TB disease has been excluded.
Place and read initial TSTs or perform QFT-Gs on eligible contacts. 
Tuberculin  skin  or  QFT-G  testing  of  all  previously  TST-  or  QFT-G--negative  inmate
contacts should be conducted at baseline (unless previously tested within 
1--3  months  of  exposure).  Referrals  should  be  made  for  persons  who  have  been
released or transferred before receiving 
their initial TST or QFT-G.
Make referrals for contact evaluation. 
Referrals should be made to the local health department for inmate contacts 
of  the  source  case  who  have  been  released  or  transferred  to  another  facility.
Additionally, family members or frequent 
visitors  of  the  source  patient  should  be  investigated  by  the  health  department;
follow-up TST or 
QFT-G results for a substantial percentage of contacts of released inmates have been
obtained on re-arrest by matching the list of exposed contacts 
with the jail intake TST or QFT-G registry 
(21).
Calculate the infection rate and determine the need to expand the investigation. 
To  calculate the infection  rate, the total  number of inmates whose TST  or QFT-G has
converted from negative to positive should be divided by the 
total number with a TST placed and read or QFT-G performed. Persons with a history of
a prior positive TST or 
QFT-G should be excluded. The infection rate should be calculated by exposure site. In
addition, if using tuberculin skin 
testing,  separately  calculating  the  rate  for  U.S.-  versus  foreign-born  inmates  might

provide useful data 
(33);  foreign-born  contacts  often  have  a  history  of  BCG  vaccination,  and  a  TST
"conversion" among these contacts might represent a 
vaccination-associated "booster" TST response 
(168). The contact investigation team should analyze the infection rate(s) and 
decide whether to expand the investigation.
Place and read follow-up TSTs or perform follow-up QFT-Gs. 
Follow-up TSTs or QFT-Gs for contacts who had a negative TST or QFT-G result on initial
testing should be placed 8--10 weeks after exposure to the source patient 
has  ended.  Referrals  should  be  made  for  persons  who  have  been  released  or
transferred and need a follow-up TST or QFT-G.
Determine the infection/transmission rate. 
The infection rate from the second round of testing should be calculated. 
In addition, the need to expand the investigation should be determined.
Write  a  summary  report.  The  summary  report  should  briefly  describe  the
circumstances of the investigation, how it 
was  conducted,  the  results  of  the  investigation  (e.g.,  the  number  of  secondary  cases
identified and the infection 
and transmission rates), and any special interventions 
required (including follow-up plans). The report should be 
distributed to corrections administrators and the local health department.
Tuberculosis Training and Education of Correctional Workers and Inmates
TB  training  and  education  of  correctional  workers  and  other  persons  associated  with

any correctional facility (e.g., 
volunteers  and  inmates)  can  help  lower  the  risk  for  TB  transmission  and  disease.  To
ensure the effectiveness of such training and 
education, multiple factors should be considered. First, correctional facilities and local
or state health departments should collaborate 
when providing TB training and education to correctional workers; specifically, facilities
should routinely work with health 
department staff to provide them with corrections-specific training. Second, routine TB
education should be provided for all persons 
who spend significant time in the facility, and additional training should be given to any 
employee who will interact with persons at risk for TB. The ideal amount of training time
and information varies by the local risk for TB transmission and by the 
job descriptions and characteristics of those needing training. Finally, TB training and
education 
efforts  and  other  TB-related  events  should  be  documented  to  ensure  that  these
programs can be evaluated and updated.
Training and Education in Correctional Facilities 
Correctional workers, volunteers, inmates, and other persons spending significant time
in correctional facilities 
should receive training and education regarding 
M. tuberculosis as part of in-facility, preservice training or orientation. Training 
should be provided at least annually thereafter. 
In-facility  training  and  education  efforts  can  build  on  existing  sources  of  TB-related
preservice education and 
training.  Regional  and  national  professional  associations  frequently  provide  ongoing

education regarding TB and infection control, 
and national correctional health-care conferences and courses for medical professionals
working in correctional 
facilities regularly include TB in their curricula. 
TB-associated  training  should  be  designed  to  meet  the  needs  of  correctional  workers
with diverse job descriptions. 
In multiple facilities and for multiple categories of correctional workers, appropriate TB
training might be accomplished 
through  incorporation  of  the  topic  into  other  annual  employee  trainings  (e.g.,
bloodborne pathogen training); more extensive or 
topic-specific training should be developed for persons who are specifically involved in
TB control. Facilities that use inmates 
to provide peer-to-peer TB-education programs should provide similarly tailored training
to any participating 
inmates. Facilities located in areas with a high TB prevalence or whose inmates have
lived in such areas might need to increase the 
time and resources dedicated to TB training. 
The  correctional  facility  health  services  director  or  designee  (i.e.,  the  staff  member
responsible for a facility's TB 
control program) should collaborate with the local public health 
department to establish TB education and training activities. 
In addition, these staff members routinely should evaluate and update the facility's TB
training and education program 
in collaboration with the public health sector. External changes in the prevalence of TB
in the community, changes in state 
or  local  public  health  policies,  or  changes  in  national  TB  control  guidelines  might
necessitate the conduct of regular 

educational updates for staff.
Each  facility  should  maintain  training  records  to  monitor  correctional  worker  training
and education. Records 
of TB-related adverse events (e.g., documented in-facility transmission) also should be
monitored as a means of 
evaluating training and education outcomes. The circumstances of 
adverse events should be investigated, and the possibility of 
enhanced or altered training should be considered as an 
appropriate intervention.
Initial Training and Education for all Correctional Workers
Although the level and detail of any employee's initial TB 
training and education session will vary according to staff members' 
job  responsibilities,  the  following  components  should  be  included  for  all  correctional
workers, regardless of job function:
communication  regarding  the  basic  concepts  of  M.  tuberculosis  transmission,  signs,
symptoms, diagnosis 
(including the difference between LTBI and TB disease), and prevention;
provision of basic information regarding the importance of following up on inmates
or correctional 
workers demonstrating signs or symptoms of TB disease;
need for initiation of airborne precautions of inmates with suspected or confirmed

TB disease;
review of the policies and indications for discontinuing AII precautions;
discussion of basic principles of treatment for TB disease and LTBI; and
discussion regarding TB disease in immunocompromised 
persons.§§
Required Training for Correctional Workers in Facilities with AII Rooms
Correctional workers in facilities equipped with AII rooms also should be provided clear
guidelines regarding 
the  identification  and  containment  of  persons  with  TB  disease.  Education  efforts  for
these staff members should include 
1)  discussion  of  the  use  of  administrative  and  engineering  controls  and  personal
protective equipment and 2) a 
respiratory  protection  program  (including  annual  training)  as  mandated  by  OSHA
(Standard 29 CFR OSHA/DOL 
[87]).
Enhanced Training and Education for Correctional Workers in High-Risk Facilities
Correctional  workers  in  facilities  with  a  high  risk  for  TB  transmission  should  receive
enhanced and more frequent 
training and education concerning

the signs and symptoms of TB disease,
transmission of TB disease, and
TB  infection-control  policies  (including  instruction  on  and  location  of  the  facility's
written infection-control policies 
and procedures, exposure control plan, and respiratory protection program).
If  a  contact  investigation  is  being  conducted  because  of  suspected  or  confirmed
infectious TB, the health department 
or designated health provider should educate facility correctional workers in all aspects
of the investigation. Education 
should include information concerning
contact investigation guidelines 
(165),
TB transmission,
the  method  used  to  determine  a  contact's  risk  for  infection  and  prioritization  for
evaluation and treatment,
the noninfectiousness of inmates and correctional workers with LTBI,
the noninfectiousness of persons with TB disease who have responded to therapy
and have submitted three AFB 
negative sputum-smear results, and
patient confidentiality issues.

Facility  staff  members  who  are  responsible  for  TB-control  activities  should  stay
informed regarding current TB trends 
and treatment options. Conference attendance, participation in professional programs,
and other off-site training are 
effective  supplemental  training  strategies  for  correctional  worker  trainers  and  facility
medical and infection-control staff.
Training and Education of Public Health Department Staff 
State  and  local  health  department  staff  providing  consultation  or  direct  services  to  a
correctional facility (including 
those who act as liaisons) should receive training and education 
regarding the unique aspects of health care and TB control in 
the 
correctional facility setting. Correctional facility administrators, contracted correctional
facility health-care professionals, 
and  health  department  staff  should  collaborate  to  develop  an  appropriate  training
program. The use of self-study and 
other educational materials should be encouraged as a supplement to training. Certain
TB training resources also can be accessed 
on the Internet (Appendix A). Education and training of health department staff should
cover (but not be limited to) 
the following topics:

TB-related roles of correctional facility and health department staff;
methods of effectively collaborating with correctional 
facilities;
differences  between  and  among  jails,  prisons,  and  other  forms  of  detention
facilities;
correctional culture and the importance of respecting the mission and purpose (i.e.,
custody) of correctional facilities 
and correctional workers;
the health department's role in the discharge of inmates (see Discharge Planning);
and
the effect of the custody and movement of foreign 
detainees on local facilities.
Training and Education of Inmates 
Inmates  should  receive  education  from  facility  health-care  professionals  or  other
appropriately trained workers managing 
the  screening  or  treatment  process.  Education  and  training  should  be  appropriate  in
terms of the education level and language 
of the trainees. The following components should be incorporated into inmate training
and education programs:
general  TB  information  (provided  either  at  the  time  of  admission  or  when  being
screened for TB);

the meaning of a positive TST or QFT-G result and treatment options for LTBI;
comprehensive  TB  education,  including  the  infectiousness  of  and  treatment  for
inmates being confined with suspected 
or confirmed TB disease; and
the importance of completing treatment for inmates with LTBI or TB disease.
Program Evaluation
Six  steps  should  be  followed  to  ensure  successful  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  a
TB-prevention and -control program:
identifying collaborators,
describing the TB-control program,
focusing the evaluation to assess TB risk and performance,
collecting and organizing data,
analyzing data and forming conclusions, and
using the information to improve the TB program 
(169).
The  purpose  of  program  evaluation  is  to  improve  accountability,  enable  ongoing
learning and problem-solving, and 
identify opportunities for improvement. The evaluation process should be designed to
provide information relevant to 

the  stakeholders.  Measures  should  be  simple  and  the  communication  of  results
meaningful.
Identifying Collaborators 
TB control requires the collaboration of correctional systems, health departments, and
other community agencies; 
effective  program  evaluation  also  involves  teamwork.  Early  engagement  of  program
staff and internal and external 
collaborators  (including  custody  staff)  helps  ensure  that  the  evaluation  will  yield  the
information that is most useful to stakeholders. 
Such engagement also promotes mutual cooperation for constructive change. Although
multiple parties might be involved, each 
TB program should have a single person designated to be responsible for data quality
and program evaluation. Designating 
staff for these activities helps ensure that continuity and accountability are maintained.
Describing the Program 
Underlying  a  useful  evaluation  is  an  understanding  of  how  the  TB  program  currently
operates within the context of 
the facility. Evaluators should be knowledgeable about program goals and objectives,
strategies, expected 
program-associated  results,  and  the  way  in  which  the  program  fits  into  the  larger
organization and community. This information can typically 
be 

obtained by reviewing a facility's existing TB-control plan. In addition, all stakeholders
should agree on program goals 
before the evaluation is undertaken (169).
Focusing the Evaluation to Assess TB Risk and Performance
Risk Assessment 
Each facility should assess its level of TB risk at least annually 
(71). The TB risk assessment (see Screening) determines 
the types and levels of administrative and environmental controls needed. Assessment
of a facility's risk level includes analysis 
of disease burden and facility transmission, which can be conducted by examining the
following indicators:
Burden of disease 
---  community  rates  of  TB  disease  (including  other  communities  from  which
substantial numbers of inmates come; 
these data are available from local health 
departments),
--- the number of cases of TB disease in the facility during the preceding year, and
--- the number and percentage of inmates and staff with LTBI; and
Facility transmission 
---  the  number  and  percentage  of  staff  and  inmates  whose  tests  for  TB  infection

converted and the reasons for 
the conversion,
--- the number of TB exposure incidents (see Contact Investigation), and
--- evidence of person-to-person transmission.
Conversion  rates  (as  determined  by  annual  testing)  for  staff  and  inmates  should  be
determined and tracked over time 
to  monitor  for  unsuspected  transmission  in  the  facility.  In  larger  facilities,  conversion
rates for staff assigned to areas that 
might  place  them  at  higher  risk  for  TB  (e.g.,  booking  and  holding  areas,  day  rooms,
libraries, enclosed recreation areas, medical 
and dental areas, and transport vehicles) should be calculated and tracked. Staff should
analyze contributing factors to TB 
exposure  and  transmission  and  plan  for  corrective  intervention,  as  appropriate.  The
following performance measures should 
be  considered  when  determining  risk  within  all  correctional  facilities,  including  those
that function as a contract facility within 
a larger correctional system:
the  timeliness  with  which  patients  with  suspected  TB  disease  are  detected,  isolated,
and evaluated (see 
Performance Measurement for Improving Quality); and
other factors (e.g., the total number of patients with TB housed in the facility and

the number of persons housed in 
the facility who are risk for TB) that will help determine the controls needed 
(71).
Performance Measurement for Improving Quality 
The risk-assessment process enables the monitoring of risk for TB transmission (the key
program indicator) and helps 
guide  the  focus  and  intensity  of  ongoing  performance  measurement  and  monitoring.
Facilities at higher risk (e.g., those with cases 
of TB disease) benefit more from broader investigation of performance than facilities at
lower risk. 
Risk-assessment  findings  should  help  guide  the  development  of  simple  process
performance measures for each pertinent area of TB prevention 
and  control.  These  performance  measures  can  then  be  used  to  monitor  program
implementation and intermediate 
outcomes. Treatment completion and continuity of care are key performance indicators.
Each facility should have goals against which 
to  measure  performance  in  these  areas  (e.g.,  100%  of  patients  with  TB  disease  will
have documented treatment completion or, 
in the case of release or transfer, continuity of treatment on release). For LTBI, goals
might be that 100% of patients 
released during treatment will have a documented referral for continuity of care in the
community and that 90% of these patients 
will  follow-up  on  their  referral.  The  following  are  examples  of  possible  performance
measures that can be useful as part of a 
TB program evaluation, depending on the level of risk: 

Timeliness of screening and isolation 
--- time from inmate admission to testing for TB infection,
--- time from TB testing to obtaining test results,
--- time from positive TB infection test results to obtaining a chest radiograph,
--- time from identification of a suspect TB patient 
(either through symptoms or abnormal chest radiograph) 
to placement in an AII room, 
--- time from sputum collection to receipt of results, and
--- time from suspicious result (either via radiograph, smear-positive result, or 
smear-negative/culture-positive result) to initiation of contact investigation;
Treatment 
--- the number and percentage of patients with LTBI who initiated treatment and the
percentage of persons who completed 
the prescribed treatment for LTBI (excluding those released from or transferred out of
the facility),
--- the number and percentage of persons in whom TB disease was diagnosed who
completed the prescribed 
treatment  regimen  (excluding  those  released  from  or  transferred  out  of  the  facility),
and
--- the reasons for treatment interruption among persons who stop therapy; and

Continuity of care¶¶
--- the number and percentage of patients released before completing treatment for
TB disease or LTBI who 
had documented community appointments (or referrals) for continuity of care, and
--- the number and percentage of patients with confirmed and suspected TB disease
who kept their first 
medical appointment in the community.
Other pertinent performance measures for correctional 
facilities might include the adherence rates among inmates and 
staff who should undergo TB testing, the percentage of staff receiving TB education and
training annually, and the percentage 
of inmates receiving TB education.
Assessment of Collaboration 
On  an  annual  basis,  each  program  also  should  evaluate  its  success  in  working
collaboratively with local and state 
public health departments in each area of TB control (e.g., screening, containment, and
assessment). Correctional systems 
should meet with their respective public health departments each year to assess risk,
update TB policies and procedures, and 
assess  compliance  regarding  environmental  control  and  respiratory  protection
recommendations (see Environmental Controls 
and Respiratory Protection). Correctional systems also should assess collaboration with

other agencies to which the inmates 
are released.
Collecting and Organizing Data 
Data Sources 
As  part  of  quality  assessment,  all  facilities  that  house  persons  with  confirmed  or
suspected TB disease should 
conduct  periodic  reviews  of  medical  records  for  these  patients  and  for  a  sample  of
patients with LTBI. In collaboration with the 
public health department, the review should be conducted at least annually in facilities
with any confirmed or suspected cases of 
TB  (including  low-risk  facilities)  and  quarterly  in  higher-risk  facilities  with  numerous
cases. The record review should 
compare  actual  performance  against  time  standards,  protocols,  and  goals  for  TB
activities and outcomes (see Performance Measures 
for Improving Quality). Multiple tools are available for data collection (Appendix B) 
(131).
Medical  records  should  contain  information  regarding  TB  history  and  risk  factors,
treatment, and all other 
interventions and dates to enable performance to be monitored. Other sources of data
include log books, interviews with staff, 
and observations. Quality controls for TST placement and reading should be checked at
least annually. The quality of the 
data used for calculating performance also should be verified.

Information Infrastructure 
Effective  program  monitoring  and  evaluation  is  made  possible  through  the  reliable
collection of valid data and 
through analysis of these data. Health-care professionals responsible for the prevention
and control of TB within a correctional 
facility  should  have  access  to  complete  medical  records  and  a  database  of  essential
TB-related activity and 
measurements.  A  retrievable  aggregate  record  system  is  essential  for  tracking  all
inmates and for assessing the status of persons who have 
TB disease and LTBI, particularly in large jail and prison systems in which inmates are
transferred frequently from one facility 
or unit to another. This record system should maintain at minimum current information
about the location, screening 
results, treatment status, and degree of infectiousness of these persons. In addition to
facilitating case management, such a 
record system provides facilities with the information necessary for conducting annual
TB risk assessments, monitoring TB 
trends, measuring performance, and assessing the effectiveness of overall TB control
efforts. Information contained in health 
records 
should always be kept confidential; all staff members involved in program evaluation
should receive training to maintain 
the confidentiality of patient information.
Although medical databases can be maintained manually, electronic databases provide
additional benefits by enabling 

a  facility  to  1)  better  track  inmates  for  testing  and  case  management,  2)  access
information regarding tests for TB infection, 
3) share medical information regarding transferred inmates with other facilities, 4) link
with the local health department, and 
5) measure the effectiveness of TB-control efforts.
Analyzing Data and Drawing Conclusions 
In  a  multifacility  correctional  system,  evaluation  data  should  be  compiled  for  each
facility separately and in aggregate. 
Data should be analyzed against standards, which can be defined externally (e.g., by
national organizations or 
CDC-defined standards) or internally as established by the program collaborators 
(170). Once analyzed, conclusions should be drawn 
from  the  data  and  recommendations  for  program  improvement  developed.  The
evaluation and recommendations should be 
shared  with  program  staff,  administrators,  and  partners,  including  the  local  public
health department.
Using Information to Improve the TB Program 
The  final  step  in  the  evaluation  process  is  to  implement  the  recommendations  to
improve the TB program. Program 
staff  should  use  data  to  identify  and  remove  barriers  to  improving  performance,  and
administrators should make necessary 
revisions to policies or procedures.

Because the evaluation process is cyclical, assessing whether recommendations have
been implemented and 
whether  outcomes  are  improved  is  crucial.  Existing  data  can  be  used  to  clearly
demonstrate the effects of implemented interventions.
Collaboration and Responsibilities
The  management  of  TB  from  the  time  an  inmate  is  suspected  of  having  the  disease
until treatment is complete 
presents multiple opportunities for collaboration between correctional facilities and the
public health department. For example, 
public  health  agencies  can  partner  with  correctional  facilities  in  TB  screening  and
treatment activities. In a study of 20 urban 
jail systems and their respective public health departments, only 35% reported having
collaborated effectively when 
conducting TB-prevention and -control activities 
(38). Formal organizational mechanisms (e.g., designated 
liaisons,  regular  meetings,  health  department  TB  program  staff  providing  on-site
services, and written agreements) are associated with more 
effective collaboration between correctional facilities and health departments 
(37).
Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  each  designate  liaisons  for
TB-associated efforts. Liaisons should 
serve as a familiar and accessible communication link between collaborating entities.
The duty of liaison at the correctional 

facility should be assigned to the person responsible for TB control or to another staff
member familiar with TB control and 
patient management at the facility. Regular meetings 
between correctional facilities and health departments are 
important to establish communication and collaboration on TB-related issues 
(37,171). Jurisdictions with regularly scheduled meetings between 
jails and public health staff are 13 times more likely to report having highly effective
collaboration than jurisdictions that have 
not  established  such  meetings  (37).  For  example,  in  Florida,  the  state  TB-control
program and corrections health officials 
hold  quarterly  coordination  meetings  on  TB  issues  and  regularly  scheduled
collaborative TB 
case-review  conferences  (171),  activities  that  have  encouraged  communication
between facilities and local health departments.
The presence of health department staff in correctional 
facilities can help promote more effective collaboration 
(37,171). Functions provided by such personnel within the correctional facility setting
include screening, surveillance, education 
and training, contact investigation, and follow-up after release 
(171). For example, New York City Department of Health 
and  Mental  Hygiene  personnel  assigned  to  the  Rikers  Island  jail  interview  inmates,
monitor their care, suggest 
interventions or changes, and work with the jail to determine discharge planning needs
for continuity of care in the community. Data 
access links are available on site that enable health department personnel to promptly
inform corrections staff regarding 

previous  completed  therapy,  incomplete  work-up  or  therapy,  sputum-smear  results,
culture and 
drug-susceptibility  data,  and  ongoing  treatment  for  TB  cases  and  suspects.  These
on-site access links diminish the time spent in AII rooms and decrease the 
time required for patient work-up by providing confirmatory historical documentation.
Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  work  together  to  agree  on  and
delineate their respective roles 
and responsibilities. Establishing clear roles and responsibilities helps avoid duplication,
confusion, the potential for 
breaching patient confidentiality, excess expenditures, and missed opportunities.
Roles  and  responsibilities  should  be  clearly  defined  for  all  TB-control  activities  that
might require collaboration 
between correctional facilities and health departments, including
screening and treatment of inmates for LTBI and TB disease,
reporting of TB disease,
follow-up of inmates with symptoms or abnormal chest radiographs,
medical consultation regarding persons with confirmed and suspected TB disease,
contact investigations for reported TB cases,
continuity  of  treatment  and  discharge  planning  for  persons  with  TB  disease  and
LTBI,
training and education of correctional facility staff,
evaluation of screening and case management, and
facility risk assessment.

Agreements about roles and responsibilities may be formal or informal, but they should
be recorded in writing. 
Formal agreements include memoranda of understanding and written policies or plans.
Informal agreements may be as simple as an 
e-mail  summary  of  a  verbal  discussion  or  meeting.  The  format  for  recording  and
communicating agreements (e.g., 
checklists, flow charts, algorithms, and lists of steps) may vary depending on the need.
Once agreements are made, they should 
be reassessed periodically (see Program Evaluation).
Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  work  together  to  formulate
agreements that specify the information 
to be shared in a particular time frame, who will have access to specific information or
databases, and how patient 
confidentiality  will  be  protected.  Information  systems  provide  the  framework  for
recording and accessing pertinent 
information (see Program Evaluation). Health departments should provide correctional
facilities with pertinent TB surveillance information (e.g., 
local rates of drug resistance, the number of TB cases occurring in correctional facilities
relative to the community, and the 
number of TB cases identified in the community among recently incarcerated persons),
which can bolster support for 
TB-screening activities within these facilities.
Legislation or policy statements can effectively encourage or mandate collaboration on

issues (e.g., disease reporting, 
contact  investigation,  and  discharge  planning)  when  institutional  barriers  (e.g.,  time
and resources) inhibit collaboration. For 
example,  California  has  improved  discharge  planning  by  prohibiting  the  release  or
transfer of inmates with confirmed or suspected 
TB unless a written treatment plan has been received and accepted by the local health
officer 
(172).
 Arizona's
 state
 administrative
 code
 places
 responsibility
 for
 contact
investigations of TB exposures in correctional facilities on the correctional facility 
but requires consultation with (and reporting to) the local health department. ICE also
has developed a policy 
memorandum requesting that ICE field office directors grant a short-term hold on the
deportation of patients with TB disease to allow 
time for the ICE health services program to facilitate continuity of care.
Summary of Recommendations
Screening 
Early  identification  and  successful  treatment  of  persons  with  TB  disease  remains  the
most effective means of 
preventing disease transmission. Inmates who are likely to have infectious TB should be
identified and begin treatment before they 
are released into the general population. Screening programs in the correctional setting
also allow for the detection of 
substantial numbers of persons with LTBI who are at high risk for TB disease and would
likely benefit from a course of treatment.

The type of screening recommended for a particular correctional facility is determined
by an assessment of the risk for 
TB transmission within that facility. The risk assessment should be performed annually
and should be conducted in 
collaboration with the local or state health department. A facility's TB risk level can be
defined as minimal or nonminimal. 
A facility should be classified as having minimal TB risk on the basis of four criteria:
No cases of infectious TB have occurred in the facility in the last year.
The facility does not house substantial numbers of 
inmates with risk factors for TB (e.g., HIV infection and 
injection-drug use).
The  facility  does  not  house  substantial  numbers  of  new  immigrants  (i.e.,  persons
arriving in the United States within 
the previous 5 years) from areas of the world with high rates of TB.
Employees of the facility are not otherwise at risk for TB.
Any  facility  that  does  not  meet  all  of  these  criteria  should  be  categorized  as  being  a
nonminimal TB risk facility.
Inmates in all minimal TB risk correctional and detention facilities require an evaluation
at entry for symptoms of 
TB.  Persons  with  symptoms  of  TB  require  an  immediate  evaluation  to  rule  out  the

presence of infectious disease and must be 
kept in an AII room until they are evaluated. All newly 
arrived inmates should be evaluated for clinical conditions and other 
factors that increase the risk for TB disease. Persons who have any of these conditions
require further screening with a TST, a 
QFT-G, or a chest radiograph within 7 days of arrival. Regardless of TST or QFT-G result,
inmates known to have HIV infection 
or other severe immunosuppression, as well as inmates who are at risk for HIV infection
but whose HIV status is 
unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part of the initial screening. Persons
who have an abnormal chest radiograph 
should  be  evaluated  further  to  rule  out  TB  disease;  if  TB  disease  is  excluded  as  a
diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if 
the TST or QFT-G is positive.
In  nonminimal  TB  risk  prisons,  symptom  screening  assessment  should  be  performed
immediately for all new inmates. 
Any inmate who has symptoms suggestive of TB should be placed in an AII room and
evaluated promptly for TB disease. 
Inmates  who  have  no  symptoms  require  further  screening  with  a  TST,  a  QFT-G,  or  a
chest radiograph within 7 days of 
arrival. Regardless of their TST or QFT-G status, inmates known to have HIV infection or
other severe immunosuppression, 
and inmates who are at risk for HIV infection but whose HIV status is unknown, should
have a chest radiograph taken as part 
of  the  initial  screening.  Persons  who  have  an  abnormal  chest  radiograph  should  be
evaluated further to rule out TB disease; if 

TB disease is excluded as a diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if the TST or
QFT-G result is positive.
Symptom screening should be performed immediately on entry for all new detainees in
nonminimal TB risk jails. 
Any detainee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should be placed in an AII room and
promptly evaluated for TB 
disease. Detainees who are without symptoms require further screening with a TST, a
QFT-G, or a chest radiograph within 7 days 
of  arrival.  Regardless  of  TST  or  QFT-G  result,  detainees  known  to  have  HIV  infection,
and detainees who are at risk for 
HIV infection but whose HIV status is unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as
part of the initial 
screening. Persons who have a positive result should be further evaluated to rule out TB
disease. Screening in jails with the TST or QFT-G 
for purposes of initiating LTBI therapy often is not practical 
because of the high rate of turnover and short lengths of stay.
A  medical  history  relating  to  TB  should  be  obtained  from  and  recorded  for  all  new
employees at the time of hiring, and 
a  physical  examination  for  TB  disease  should  be  required.  In  addition,  TST  or  QFT-G
screening should be mandatory for 
all  employees  who  do  not  have  a  documented  positive  result.  Persons  who  have  a
positive TST or QFT-G result should have 
a chest radiograph taken and interpreted and should be 
required to have a thorough medical evaluation; if TB disease 
is  excluded  as  a  diagnosis,  such  persons  should  be  considered  for  LTBI  therapy.  All

employees should be informed 
and  instructed  to  seek  appropriate  follow-up  and  screening  for  TB  if  they  are
immunosuppressed for any reason (e.g., 
HIV  infection,  organ  transplant  recipient  receiving  immunosuppressive  therapy,  and
treatment with 
TNF-a antagonist). Any employee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should not 
return to the workplace until a clinician has excluded a diagnosis 
of contagious TB disease.
In general, long-term inmates and all employees who have a negative baseline TST or
QFT-G result should have 
follow-up testing at least annually. Persons who have a history of a positive test result
should be screened annually for symptoms of 
TB disease. Annual chest radiographs are unnecessary for the follow-up evaluation of
infected persons. Test results should 
be recorded in medical records and in a retrievable aggregate database of all TST or
QFT-G results.
Case Reporting 
Correctional  facility  medical  staff  must  report  any  suspected  or  confirmed  TB  cases
among inmates or employees to 
the appropriate health agency in accordance with state and local laws and regulations,
even if the inmate or detainee has 
already been released or transferred from the 
facility.  Reporting  cases  to  health  departments  benefits  the  correctional  facility  by
allowing it 

to obtain health department resources for case management and contact investigation
in both the facility and the community. 
In  addition,  drug-susceptibility  results  should  be  used  to  inform  optimal  therapy  and
sent to the state or local health department 
for 
use  in  monitoring  the  rates  of  drug  resistance.  The  drug-susceptibility  reports  also
should be sent to all health 
departments managing contacts of the TB case because the choice of medication for
LTBI treatment is based on drug-susceptibility test 
results of the source case. Reports to local or state health departments should identify
the agency that has custodial responsibility for 
the inmate.
Airborne Infection Isolation 
TB  airborne  precautions  should  be  initiated  for  any  patient  who  1)  has  signs  or
symptoms of TB disease or 2) 
has documented TB disease and has not completed treatment or not previously been
determined to be non-infectious. For 
patients placed in an AII room because of suspected infectious TB disease of the lungs,
airways, or larynx, airborne precautions can 
be discontinued when infectious TB disease is considered unlikely and either 1) another
diagnosis is made that explains 
the clinical syndrome or 2) the patient has three negative AFB sputum-smear results.
Incarcerated patients in whom the 
suspicion  of  TB  disease  remains  after  the  collection  of  three  negative  AFB

sputum-smear results should not be released from an 
AII  room  until  they  are  on  standard  multidrug  anti-TB  treatment  and  are  clinically
improving. A patient who has 
drug-susceptible  TB  of  the  lung,  airways,  or  larynx;  who  is  on  standard  multidrug
anti-TB treatment; and who has had a clinical 
and  bacteriologic  response  to  therapy  is  probably  no  longer  infectious.  However,
because culture and drug-susceptibility 
results typically are not known when the decision to discontinue airborne precautions is
made, all patients in whom the probability 
of TB disease is high should remain in an AII room while incarcerated until they have 1)
had three consecutive negative 
AFB  sputum  smear  results,  2)  received  standard  multidrug  anti-TB  treatment,  and  3)
demonstrated clinical improvement.
Environmental Controls 
Environmental  controls  should  be  implemented  when  the  risk  for  TB  transmission
persists despite efforts to screen and 
treat infected inmates. Environmental controls are used to remove, inactivate, or kill 
M. tuberculosis in areas in which the 
organism  could  be  transmitted.  Primary  environmental  controls  consist  of  controlling
the source of infection by using local 
exhaust  ventilation  (e.g.,  hoods,  tents,  or  booths)  and  diluting  and  removing
contaminated air using general ventilation. 
Secondary  environmental  controls  consist  of  controlling  the  airflow  to  prevent
contamination of air in areas adjacent to the source 
(AII  rooms)  and  cleaning  the  air  using  HEPA  filtration  and/or  UVGI.  The  efficiency  of

different primary or 
secondary environmental controls varies. A detailed 
discussion concerning the application of environmental controls has been 
published previously(71).
Personal Respiratory Protection 
Respiratory protection is used when administrative (i.e., identification and isolation of
infectious TB patients) 
and environmental controls alone have not reduced the risk for infection with 
M. tuberculosis to an acceptable level. The use 
of respiratory protection might be most appropriate in specific settings and situations
within correctional facilities; for 
example,  protection  is  warranted  for  inmates  and  facility  staff  when  they  enter  AII
rooms, transport infectious inmates in an 
enclosed vehicle, and perform or participate in 
cough-inducing procedures. In correctional facilities, a CDC/NIOSH-approved 
N95 air-purifying respirator will provide adequate respiratory protection in the majority
of situations that require the use 
of respirators.
All  correctional  facility  staff  members  who  use  respirators  for  protection  against
infection with 
M. tuberculosis must participate in the facility's respiratory protection program (e.g.,
understand their responsibilities, receive training, 
receive  medical  clearance,  and  engage  in  fit  testing).  All  facilities  should  develop,
implement, and maintain a 

respiratory-protection  program  for  health-care  workers  or  other  staff  who  use
respiratory protection. (Respiratory-protection programs are 
required  for  facilities  covered  by  OSHA.)  In  addition  to  staff  members,  visitors  to
inmates with TB disease should be given 
respirators  to  wear  while  in  AII  rooms  and  instructed  how  to  ensure  their  own
respiratory protection by checking their respirator for 
a  proper  seal.  Each  facility,  regardless  of  TB  risk  classification  (i.e.,  minimal  or
nonminimal), should develop a policy on the 
use of respirators by visitors of patients.
Diagnosis and Treatment of LTBI and TB Disease 
A diagnosis of TB disease should be considered for any 
patient who has a persistent cough (>3 weeks) or other signs 
or  symptoms  compatible  with  TB  disease  (e.g.,  bloody  sputum  [hemoptysis],  night
sweats, weight loss, anorexia, and 
fever).  Diagnostic  tests  for  TB  include  the  TST,  QFT-G,  chest  radiography,  and
laboratory examination of sputum samples or 
other  body  tissues  and  fluids.  Persons  exposed  to  inmates  with  TB  disease  might
become infected with LTBI, depending on 
host immunity and the degree and duration of exposure. Therefore, the treatment of
persons with TB disease plays a key role in 
TB  control  by  stopping  transmission  and  preventing  potentially  infectious  cases  from
developing. LTBI is an 
asymptomatic condition that can be diagnosed by the TST or QFT-G.
Regardless  of  age,  correctional  facility  staff  and  inmates  in  the  following  high-risk

groups should be given treatment 
for LTBI if their reaction to the TST is 
>5 mm:
HIV-infected persons,
recent contacts of a TB patient,
persons  with  fibrotic  changes  on  chest  radiograph  consistent  with  previous  TB
disease, and
patients  with  organ  transplants  and  other  immunocompromising  conditions  who
receive the equivalent of 
>15 mg/day of prednisone for >1 month.
All  other  correctional  facility  staff  and  inmates  should  be  considered  for  treatment  of
LTBI if their TST result is 
>10 mm induration. The preferred treatment for LTBI is 9 months of daily isoniazid or
biweekly dosing administered by 
DOT. Although LTBI treatment regimens are broadly applicable, modifications should be
considered for certain populations 
(e.g., patients with HIV infection) and when drug resistance is suspected.
Individualized case management should be provided for all patients with TB disease. In
addition, patient 
management  should  be  coordinated  with  officials  of  the  local  or  state  health
department. Regimens for treating TB disease must 
contain  multiple  drugs  to  which  the  organisms  are  susceptible.  For  the  majority  of

patients, the preferred regimen for treating 
TB disease consists of an initial 2-month phase of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and
ethambutol, followed by a 
continuation phase of isoniazid and rifampin lasting 
>4 months, for a minimum total treatment period of 6 months. The decision to 
stop therapy should be based on the number of doses taken within a maximum period
(not simply a 6-month 
period).  Persons  with  cavitary  pulmonary  TB  disease  and  positive  cultures  of  sputum
specimens at the completion of 
2  months  of  therapy  should  receive  a  longer,  7-month  continuation  phase  of  therapy
(total duration: 9 months) because of the substantially higher rate 
of relapse among persons with this type of TB disease.
Drug-susceptibility testing should be performed on all initial 
M. tuberculosis isolates from patients with TB disease. 
When  results  from  drug-susceptibility  tests  become  available,  the  treatment  regimen
should be adjusted accordingly. 
Medical providers treating patients with drug-resistant TB disease should seek expert
consultation and collaborate with the local 
health department for treatment decisions.
TB  treatment  regimens  might  need  to  be  altered  for  HIV-infected  persons  who  are
receiving antiretroviral 
therapy. Whenever possible, the care of persons with concomitant TB and HIV should
be provided by or in consultation 
with experts in the management of both TB and HIV-related disease.

The primary determinant of treatment outcome is patient adherence to the drug 
regimen.  Thus,  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to  measures  designed  to  enable  and
foster adherence. DOT is the preferred treatment strategy for all persons with 
TB  disease  and  high-risk  (e.g.,  HIV  infected)  persons  with  LTBI.  DOT  should  be  used
throughout the entire course of 
therapy  whenever  feasible.  Practitioners  providing  treatment  to  inmates  should
coordinate DOT with the local health 
department on an inmate's release. The local health department also may be involved
in monitoring therapy for correctional facility staff.
Discharge Planning 
Postrelease  follow-up  is  a  necessary  component  of  TB  control  efforts.  Effective
discharge planning requires 
collaboration  between  corrections  and  medical  staff  (both  intra-  and  interfacility),  as
well as with public health and 
community-based service organizations.
To ensure uninterrupted treatment, discharge planning for inmates in whom TB disease
is diagnosed must begin as soon 
as possible after diagnosis. Corrections or health service 
administrators (or their designees) should assign staff to 
notify  the  public  health  department  of  inmates  receiving  treatment  for  TB  disease  or
LTBI. Inmates with TB disease should be 
interviewed 
while still incarcerated (ideally by public health staff) to enable facility administrators to

assess and plan for the 
appropriate support and referrals that will be needed after discharge.
All correctional facilities should assign personnel (preferably 
health-care professionals) to serve as case managers. 
These managers should be responsible for conducting discharge planning in the facility,
which entails coordinating follow-up 
and communicating treatment histories with public health department and other 
health-care counterparts within the community.
Contact Investigation 
The overall goal of a TB contact investigation is to interrupt transmission of 
M.  tuberculosis.  Ongoing  transmission  is  prevented  by  1)  identifying,  isolating,  and
treating other persons with TB disease (e.g., secondary patients) and 2) 
identifying infected contacts of the source and secondary patients and providing them
with a complete course of treatment for LTBI.
Because  decisions  involved  in  planning  and  prioritizing  contact  investigations  in
correctional facilities are seldom simple, 
the process benefits from the input of a larger, 
multi-disciplinary team when possible. The best preparation for 
contact investigations in correctional facilities is ongoing, formal collaboration between
correctional and public health officials.
The decision to initiate a contact investigation for an 
inmate or detainee with possible TB is made on a case-by-case basis. 

In general, contact investigations should be conducted in the following circumstances:
1) suspected or confirmed 
pulmonary, laryngeal, or pleural TB and cavitary disease on chest radiograph or positive
AFB smear results (sputum or other 
respiratory specimens) or 2) suspected or confirmed pulmonary (noncavitary) or pleural
TB and negative AFB smear results (sputum 
or other respiratory specimens) and a decision has been made to initiate TB treatment.
A more limited initial investigation 
may be conducted for smear-negative cases.
Contact  investigation  should  be  conducted  in  a  stepwise  fashion  that  includes  1)
notifying correctional 
management  officials;  2)  conducting  a  chart  review  of  the  source  patient;  3)
interviewing the source patient; 4) defining the 
infectious period; 5) convening the contact investigation team; 6) 
updating correctional management officials about the strategy, 
process, and action steps involved in conducting the contact investigation; 7) obtaining
source case inmate traffic history (i.e., the 
dates and locations of the TB source patient's housing during the infectious period); 8)
touring exposure sites; 9) 
prioritizing contacts according to duration and intensity 
of exposure and risk factors for becoming infected with TB and progressing 
to TB disease; 10) developing contact lists; 11) conducting a medical record review on
each high-priority contact; 12) 
evaluating  HIV-infected  contacts  promptly;  13)  placing  and  reading  initial  TSTs  or
QFT-Gs on eligible contacts; 14) making referrals 
for  contact  evaluation  (e.g.,  referrals  to  the  local  health  department  for  contacts  of

inmates who have been released or 
transferred to another facility, family members, frequent visitors of the source 
patient); 15) calculating the infection rate and 
determining  the  need  to  expand  the  investigation;  16)  placing  and  reading  follow-up
TSTs or QFT-Gs; 17) determining the 
infection/transmission  rate  from  the  second  round  of  testing;  and  18)  writing  a
summary report.
Training and Education 
Although the level and detail of any employee's initial TB training and education session
will vary according to 
staff members' job responsibilities, the following components should be included for all
correctional workers, regardless of 
job function: 1) communication regarding the basic concepts of 
M. tuberculosis transmission, signs, symptoms, 
diagnosis  (including  the  difference  between  LTBI  and  TB  disease),  and  prevention;  2)
provision of basic information regarding 
the importance of following up on inmates or correctional workers demonstrating signs
or symptoms of TB disease; 
3) explanation of the need for initiation of AII of inmates with suspected or confirmed
TB disease; 4) review of the policies 
and  indications  for  discontinuing  AII  precautions;  5)  discussion  of  basic  principles  of
treatment for TB disease and LTBI; and 
6) discussion regarding TB disease in immunocompromised persons.
Correctional  workers  in  facilities  with  a  high  risk  of  TB  transmission  should  receive

enhanced and more frequent 
training  and  education  regarding  1)  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  TB  disease,  2)
transmission of TB disease, and 3) 
infection-control
 policies
 (including
 instruction
 on
 and
 location
 of
 written
infection-control policies and procedures, the facility's 
exposure control plan, and the respiratory protection program).
State  and  local  health  department  staff  providing  consultation  or  direct  services  to  a
correctional facility (including 
those who act as liaisons) should receive training and education 
regarding the unique aspects of health care and TB control in 
the  correctional  facility  setting.  Correctional  facility  administrators,  contracted
correctional facility health-care professionals, 
and 
health department staff should collaborate to develop an appropriate training program.
Inmates should receive education 
from facility health-care professionals or other appropriately trained workers managing
the screening or treatment 
process. Education and training should be appropriate in terms of the education level
and language of the trainees.
Program Evaluation 
Program  evaluation  should  be  performed  based  on  the  CDC  framework.  Successful
monitoring and evaluation of 
a TB-prevention and -control program includes identifying collaborators, describing the

TB-control program, focusing 
the  evaluation  to  assess  TB  risk  and  performance,  collecting  and  organizing  data,
analyzing data and forming conclusions, 
and using the information to improve the TB program.
Collaboration and Responsibilities 
The  management  of  TB  from  the  time  an  inmate  is  suspected  of  having  the  disease
until treatment is complete 
presents multiple opportunities for collaboration between correctional facilities and the
public health department. 
Formal organizational mechanisms (e.g., designated liaisons, regular meetings, health
department TB-program staff providing 
on-site  services,  and  written  agreements)  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  associated
with more effective 
collaboration between correctional facilities and health departments.
Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  each  designate  liaisons  for
TB-associated efforts. Liaisons should 
serve as a familiar and accessible communication link between collaborating entities.
The duty of liaison at the correctional 
facility should be assigned to the person responsible for TB control or to another staff
member familiar with TB control and 
patient management at the facility.
Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  work  together  to  agree  on  and
delineate their respective roles 

and responsibilities. Establishing clear roles and responsibilities helps avoid duplication,
confusion, the potential for 
breaching  patient  confidentiality,  excess  expenditures,  and  missed  opportunities.
Agreements about roles and responsibilities may 
be  formal  or  informal,  but  they  should  be  recorded  in  writing  to  avoid
misunderstandings and to give the agreement 
longevity beyond personal relationships.
Acknowledgments 
The  following  persons  contributed  to  this  report:  G.  Scott  Earnest,  PhD,  Michael  G.
Gressel, PhD, Kenneth R. Mead, MS, Division 
of  Applied  Research  and  Technology;  Teresa  A.  Seitz,  MPH,  Douglas  B.  Trout,  MD,
Division of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations, and 
Field Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, CDC.
References
Elzinga  G,  Raviglione  MC,  Maher  D.  Scale  up:  meeting  targets  in  global  tuberculosis
control. Lancet 2004;363:814--9.
MacNeil J, Lobato MN, Moore M. An unanswered health disparity: tuberculosis among
correctional inmates, 1993 through 2003. Am J 
Public Health 2005;95:1800--5.
CDC.
 Prevention
 and
 control
 of
 tuberculosis
 in
 correctional
 facilities:
recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination 
of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1996;45(No. RR-8):1--27.
Bureau  of  Justice  Statistics.  Adult  correctional  populations,  1980--2004.  Washington,

DC: US Department of Justice, Office of Justice 
Programs; 2005. Available at 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/glance/corr2.htm.
US Department of Justice. Prison and jail inmates at midyear 2003. Bureau of Justice
Statistics Bulletin; 2004. NCJ 203947.
CDC. Reported tuberculosis in the United States, 2003. Atlanta, GA: US Department
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2004.
CDC.  Probable  transmission  of  multidrug-resistant  tuberculosis  in  a  correctional
facility---California. MMWR 1993;42:48--51.
Braun MM, Truman BI, Maguire B, et al. Increasing incidence of tuberculosis in a prison
inmate population: association with HIV 
infection. JAMA 1989;261:393--7.
White MC, Tulsky JP, Portillo CJ, Menendez E, Cruz E, Goldenson 
J. Tuberculosis prevalence in an urban jail: 1994 and 1998. Int J Tuberc 
Lung Dis 2001;5:400--4.
Salive ME, Vlahov D, Brewer TF. Coinfection with tuberculosis and 
HIV-1 in male prison inmates. Public Health Rep 1990;105:307--10.
Spencer  SS,  Morton  AR.  Tuberculosis  surveillance  in  a  state  prison  system.  Am  J
Public Health 1989;79:507--9.
CDC.
 Tuberculosis
 prevention
 in
 drug-treatment
 centers
 and
 correctional
facilities---selected U.S. sites, 1990--1991. MMWR 1993;42: 210--3.
Alcabes  P,  Vossenas  P,  Cohen  R,  Braslow  C,  Michaels  D,  Zoloth  S.  Compliance  with
isoniazid prophylaxis in jail. Am Rev Respir 
Dis 1989;140:1194--7.
Lobato MN, Leary LS, Simone PM. Treatment for latent TB in correctional facilities: a
challenge for TB elimination. Am J Prev Med 

2003;24:249--53.
Bellin  EY,  Fletcher  DD,  Safyer  SM.  Association  of  tuberculosis  infection  with
increased time in or admission to the New York City jail 
system. JAMA 1993;269:2228--31.
Stead WW. Undetected tuberculosis in prison: source of infection for community at
large. JAMA 1978;240:2544--7.
Jones  TF,  Craig  AS,  Valway  SE,  Woodley  CL,  Schaffner  W.  Transmission  of
tuberculosis in a jail. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:557--63.
Koo DT, Baron RC, Rutherford GW. Transmission of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in a California state prison, 1991. Am J Public 
Health 1997;87:279--82.
MacIntyre  CR,  Kendig  N,  Kummer  L,  Birago  S,  Graham  NM.  Impact  of  tuberculosis
control measures and crowding on the incidence 
of tuberculosis infection in Maryland prisons. Clin Infect Dis 1997;24:1060--7.
Jones  TF,  Woodley  CL,  Fountain  FF,  Schaffner  W.  Increased  incidence  of  the
outbreak strain of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the 
surrounding community after an outbreak in a jail. South Med J 2003;96:155--7.
Bur S, Golub JE, Armstrong JA, et al. Evaluation of an extensive tuberculosis contact
investigation in an urban community and jail. Int J 
Tuberc Lung Dis 2003;7:S417--23.
CDC.
 Tuberculosis
 transmission
 in
 multiple
 correctional
 facilities---Kansas,
2002--2003. MMWR 2004;53:734--8.
Institute of Medicine, Committee on the Elimination of Tuberculosis in the United States.
Ending neglect: the elimination of tuberculosis in 
the United States. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000.
Graham NM, Nelson KE, Solomon L, et al. Prevalence of tuberculin positivity and skin

test anergy in HIV-1 seropositive and seronegative 
drug users. JAMA 1992;267:369--72.
Wallace  R,  Wallace  D.  Socioeconomic  determinants  of  health:  community
marginalization and the diffusion of disease and disorder in the 
United States. BMJ 1997;314:1341--5.
Zolopa AR, Hahn JA, Gorter R, et al. HIV and tuberculosis infection in San Francisco's
homeless adults. JAMA 1994;272:455--61.
Hammett TM, Gaiter JL, Crawford C. Reaching seriously at-risk populations: health
interventions in criminal justice settings. Health Educ 
Behav 1998;25:99--120.
Bandyopadhyay  T,  Murray  H,  Metersky  ML.  Cost-effectiveness  of  tuberculosis
prophylaxis after release from short-term correctional 
facilities. Chest 2002;121:1771--5.
Tulsky  JP,  Pilote  L,  Hahn  JA,  et  al.  Adherence  to  isoniazid  prophylaxis  in  the
homeless: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern 
Med 2000;160:697--702.
Iademarco  MF,  Castro  KG.  Epidemiology  of  tuberculosis.  Semin  Respir  Infect
2003;18:225--40.
Moua  M,  Guerra  FA,  Moore  JD,  Valdiserri  RO.  Immigrant  health:  legal  tools/legal
barriers. J Law Med Ethics 2002;30:189--96.
CDC.  Post-detention  completion  of  tuberculosis  treatment  for  persons  deported  or
released from the custody of the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service---United States, 2003. MMWR 2003;52:438--41.
Saunders DL, Olive DM, Wallace SB, Lacy D, Leyba R, Kendig NE. Tuberculosis screening
in the federal prison system: an opportunity to 
treat  and  prevent  tuberculosis  in  foreign-born  populations.  Public  Health  Rep
2001;116:210--8.

Mohle-Boetani  JC,  Miguelino  V,  Dewsnup  DH,  et  al.  Tuberculosis  outbreak  in  a
housing unit for human immunodeficiency virus-infected 
patients  in  a  correctional  facility:  transmission  risk  factors  and  effective  outbreak
control. Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:668--76.
Frieden  TR,  Fujiwara  PI,  Washko  RM,  Hamburg  MA.  Tuberculosis  in  New  York
City---turning the tide. N Engl J Med 1995;333:229--33.
Reichard  AA,  Lobato  MN,  Roberts  CA,  Bazerman  LB,  Hammett  TM.  Assessment  of
tuberculosis screening and management practices of large 
jail systems. Public Health Rep 2003;118:500--7.
Lobato MN, Roberts CA, Bazerman LB, Hammett TM. Public health and correctional
collaboration in tuberculosis control. Am J Prev 
Med 2004;27:112--7.
Roberts  CA,  Lobato  MN,  Bazerman  LB,  Klieg  R,  Reichert  AA,  Hammett  TM.
Tuberculosis prevention and control in large jails: a challenge 
to tuberculosis elimination. Am J Prev Med 2006;30:125--30.
Layton  MC,  Henning  KJ,  Alexander  TA,  et  al.  Universal  radiographic  screening  for
tuberculosis among inmates upon admission to jail. Am 
J Public Health 1997;87:1335--7.
Tulsky JP, White MC, Dawson C, Hoynes TM, Goldenson J, Schecter 
G. Screening for tuberculosis in jail and clinic follow-up after release. Am 
J Public Health 1998;88:223--6.
Brock  NN,  Reeves  M,  LaMarre  M,  DeVoe  B.  Tuberculosis  case  detection  in  a  state
prison system. Public Health Rep 1998;113:359--64.
Klopf  LC.  Tuberculosis  control  in  the  New  York  State  Department  of  Correctional
Services: a case management approach. Am J Infect 
Control 1998;26:534--7.
Anderson  KM,  Keith  EP,  Norsted  SW.  Tuberculosis  screening  in  Washington  State

male correctional facilities. Chest 1986;89:817--21.
Bergmire-Sweat  D,  Barnett  BJ,  Harris  SL,  Taylor  JP,  Mazurek  GH,  Reddy  V.
Tuberculosis outbreak in a Texas prison, 1994. Epidemiol 
Infect 1996;117:485--92.
Valway  SE,  Richards  SB,  Kovacovich  J,  Greifinger  RB,  Crawford  JT,  Dooley  SW.
Outbreak of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis in a New York 
State prison, 1991. Am J Epidemiol 1994;140:113--22.
CDC. Drug-susceptible tuberculosis outbreak in a state correctional facility housing
HIV-infected inmates---South Carolina, 1999--2000. MMWR 2000;49:1041--4.
CDC.  Tuberculosis  morbidity  among  U.S.-born  and  foreign-born  populations---United
States, 2000. MMWR. 2002;51:101--4.
National Commission on Correctional Health Care. Standards for health services in jails.
Chicago, IL: National Commission on 
Correctional Health Care; 2003.
National Commission on Correctional Health Care. Standards for health services in
prisons. Chicago, IL: National Commission on 
Correctional Health Care; 2003.
Puisis M, Feinglass J, Lidow E, Mansour M. Radiographic screening for tuberculosis in
a large urban county jail. Public Health Rep 
1996;111:330--4.
Jones TF, Schaffner W. Miniature chest radiograph screening for tuberculosis in jails:
a cost effectiveness analysis. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2001;164:77--81.
CDC.  Anergy  skin  testing  and  tuberculosis  preventive  therapy  for  HIV-infected
persons: revised recommendations. MMWR 1996;46(No. 
RR-15):1--10.
Huebner  RE,  Schein  MF,  Bass  JB  Jr.  The  tuberculin  skin  test.  Clin  Infect  Dis

1993;17:968--75.
Holden  M,  Dubin  MR,  Diamond  PH.  Frequency  of  negative  intermediate-strength
tuberculin sensitivity in patients with active tuberculosis. 
N Engl J Med 1971;285:1506--9.
Mckay A, Kraut A, Murdzak C, Yassi A. Determinants of tuberculin reactivity among
health care workers: interpretation of positivity 
following BCG vaccination. Can J Infect Dis 1999;10:134--9.
CDC. The role of BCG vaccine in the prevention and control of tuberculosis in the
United States. MMWR 1996;45(No. RR-4):1--18.
Mori T, Sakatani M, Yamagishi F, et al. Specific detection of tuberculosis infection: an
interferon-gamma--based assay using new antigens. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:59--64.
CDC. Guidelines for using the QuantiFERON®-TB Gold test for detecting 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, United States. 
MMWR 2005;54(No. RR-15):49--55.
CDC.  Tuberculosis  elimination  revisited:  obstacles,  opportunities,  and  a  renewed
commitment. MMWR 1999;48(No. RR-9):1--13.
White MC, Tulsky JP, Reilly P, McIntosh HW, Hoynes TM, Goldenson J. A clinical trial of a
financial incentive to go to the tuberculosis clinic 
for isoniazid after release from jail. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 1998;2:506--12.
White MC, Tulsky JP, Goldenson J, Portillo CJ, Kawamura M, Menendez E. Randomized
controlled trial of interventions to improve follow-up 
for
 latent
 tuberculosis
 infection
 after
 release
 from
 jail.
 Arch
 Intern
 Med
2002;162:1044--50.
CDC.  Revised  guidelines  for  HIV  counseling,  testing,  and  referral.  MMWR
2001;50(No. RR-19):1--57.

Selwyn  PA,  Hartel  D,  Lewis  VA,  et  al.  A  prospective  study  of  the  risk  of  tuberculosis
among intravenous drug users with human 
immunodeficiency virus infection. N Engl J Med 1989;320:545--50.
American Thoracic Society, CDC. Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent
tuberculosis infection. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2000;161:S221--47.
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Treatment of tuberculosis. MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-11):1--80.
Edlin  BR,  Tokars  JI,  Grieco  MH,  et  al.  An  outbreak  of  multidrug-resistant  tuberculosis
among hospitalized patients with the 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1514--21.
Al Zahrani K, Al Jahdali H, Poirier L, Rene P, Menzies D. Yield of smear, culture and
amplification tests from repeated sputum induction for 
the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2001;5:855--60.
Conde  MB,  Soares  SL,  Mello  FC,  et  al.  Comparison  of  sputum  induction  with
fiberoptic bronchoscopy in the diagnosis of tuberculosis: 
experience  at  an  acquired  immune  deficiency  syndrome  reference  center  in  Rio  de
Janeiro, Brazil. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:2238--40.
Frieden
 T,
 ed.
 Toman's
 tuberculosis:
 case
 detection,
 treatment,
 and
monitoring---questions and answers. 2nd ed. Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization; 2004.
Behr MA, Warren SA, Salamon H, et al. Transmission of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis from patients smear-negative for acid-fast bacilli. 
Lancet 1999;353:444--9.
CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care settings, 2005. MMWR 2005;54(No. 
RR-17): 1--140.

CDC.
 Guidelines
 for
 environmental
 infection
 control
 in
 health-care
 facilities:
recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection 
Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 2003;52 (No. RR-10):1--44.
Institute of Medicine. Tuberculosis in the workplace. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press; 2001.
American National Standards Institute, American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air-Conditioning Engineers. ANSI/ASHRAE 
Standard 62.1-2004. Ventilation for acceptable indoor air quality. Atlanta, GA: American
Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and 
Air-Conditioning Engineers; 2004.
American Correctional Association. Standards for adult correctional institutions, 4th
ed. Lanham, MD: American Correctional Association; 2003.
American  Correctional  Association.  2004  standards  supplement.  Lanham,  MD:
American Correctional Association; 2004.
American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigerating  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.
ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 52.2-1999. Method of testing 
general ventilation air-cleaning devices for removal efficiency by particle size. Atlanta,
GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and 
Air-Conditioning Engineers; 2000.
American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigerating  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.  Justice
facilities. 2003 ASHRAE Handbook: HVAC 
applications.
 Atlanta,
 GA:
 American
 Society
 of
 Heating,
 Refrigerating
 and
Air-Conditioning Engineers; 2003:8.1--8.3.
American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigerating  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.  Health
care facilities. 2003 ASHRAE Handbook: 
HVAC  applications.  Atlanta,  GA:  American  Society  of  Heating,  Refrigerating  and
Air-Conditioning Engineers; 2003:7.1--7.14.

Ikeda  RM,  Birkhead  GS,  DiFerdinando  GT  Jr,  et  al.  Nosocomial  tuberculosis:  an
outbreak of a strain resistant to seven drugs. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:152--9.
Pavelchak  N,  DePersis  RP,  London  M,  et  al.  Identification  of  factors  that  disrupt
negative air pressurization of respiratory isolation rooms. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:191--5.
Kenyon  TA,  Ridzon  R,  Luskin-Hawk  R,  et  al.  A  nosocomial  outbreak  of
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Ann Intern Med 1997; 127:32--6.
Fraser  VJ,  Johnson  K,  Primack  J,  Jones  M,  Medoff  G,  Dunagan  WC.  Evaluation  of
rooms with negative pressure ventilation used for 
respiratory  isolation  in  seven  midwestern  hospitals.  Infect  Control  Hosp  Epidemiol
1993;14:623--8.
Sutton PM, Nicas M, Reinisch F, Harrison RJ. Evaluating the control of tuberculosis
among healthcare workers: adherence to CDC guidelines 
of three urban hospitals in California. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:487--93.
Streifel  AJ.  Design  and  maintenance  of  hospital  ventilation  systems  and  the
prevention of airborne nosocomial infections. In: Mayall CG, 
ed.  Hospital  epidemiology  and  infection  control.  2nd  ed.  Philadelphia,  PA:  Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 1999:1211--21.
US Department of Health and Human Services. Respiratory protective devices. (Title
42 CFR part 84). Federal Register 2004;42:84.
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration,  Department  of  Labor.  Personal
protective devices--respiratory protection. (29 CFR 
part 1910.134). Federal Register 2004;29:1910.134.
American  National  Standards  Institute.  American  national  standard  practices  for
respiratory protection. ANSI Standard Number 288.2-1992. 

New York, NY: American National Standards Institute; 1992.
European  Committee  for  Standardization.  Respiratory  protective  devices:  filtering
half masks to protect against particles---requirements, 
testing, marking. Brussels, Belgium: European Committee for Standardization; 2001.
CDC. Protect yourself against tuberculosis---a respiratory protection guide for health
care workers. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC; 1995:1--25.
CDC. NIOSH guide to industrial respiratory protection. Atlanta, GA: US Department
of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, CDC; 1987:1--296.
Ferebee  SH.  Controlled  chemoprophylaxis  trials  in  tuberculosis:  a  general  review.
Bibl Tuberc 1970;26:28--106.
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Diagnostic
standards and classification of tuberculosis in adults 
and children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161:1376--95.
Conde MB, Loivos AC, Rezende VM, et al. Yield of sputum induction in the diagnosis
of pleural tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2003;167:723--5.
Greenberg  SD,  Frager  D,  Suster  B,  Walker  S,  Stavropoulos  C,  Rothpearl  A.  Active
pulmonary tuberculosis in patients with AIDS: spectrum 
of radiographic findings (including a normal appearance). Radiology 1994;193:115--9.
Havlir DV, Barnes PF. Tuberculosis in patients with human immunodeficiency virus
infection. N Engl J Med 1999;340:367--73.
Pitchenik AE, Rubinson HA. The radiographic appearance of tuberculosis in patients
with the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
and pre-AIDS. Am Rev Respir Dis 1985;131:393--6.
Snider D. Pregnancy and tuberculosis. Chest 1984;86:S10--3.

Siddiqui AH, Perl TM, Conlon M, Donegan N, Roghmann MC. Preventing nosocomial
transmission of pulmonary tuberculosis: when 
may isolation be discontinued for patients with suspected tuberculosis? Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:141--4.
CDC. Reported tuberculosis in the United States, 2002. Atlanta, GA: US Department
of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, CDC; 2003.
CDC. Nucleic acid amplification tests for tuberculosis. MMWR 1996;45:950--2.
CDC. Update: nucleic acid amplification tests for tuberculosis. MMWR 2000;49:593--4.
CDC, American Thoracic Society. Update: fatal and severe liver injuries associated with
rifampin and pyrazinamide for latent 
tuberculosis
 infection,
 and
 revisions
 in
 American
 Thoracic
 Society/CDC
recommendations---United States, 2001. MMWR 2001;50:733--5.
CDC,  American  Thoracic  Society.  Update:  adverse  event  data  and  revised  American
Thoracic Society/CDC recommendations against the use 
of  rifampin  and  pyrazinamide  for  treatment  of  latent  tuberculosis  infection---United
States, 2003. MMWR 2003;52:735--9.
CDC.  Fatal  and  severe  hepatitis  associated  with  rifampin  and  pyrazinamide  for  the
treatment of latent tuberculosis infection---New York 
and Georgia, 2000. MMWR 2001;50:289--91.
CDC. Update: fatal and severe liver injuries associated with rifampin and pyrazinamide
treatment for latent tuberculosis infection. 
MMWR 2002;51:998--9.
CDC.  Prevention  and  treatment  of  tuberculosis  among  patients  infected  with  human
immunodeficiency virus: principles of therapy and 
revised recommendations. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-20):1--58.
Menzies RI. Tuberculin skin testing. In: Reichman LB, Hershfield ES, eds. Tuberculosis: a

comprehensive international approach. 2nd ed. 
New York, NY: Marcel Dekker; 2000:279--322.
Caminero  J,  Pena  M,  Campos-Herrero  M,  et  al.  Exogenous  reinfection  with
tuberculosis on a European island with a moderate incidence 
of disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:717--20.
Small
 PM,
 Shafer
 RW,
 Hopewell
 PC,
 et
 al.
 Exogenous
 reinfection
 with
multidrug-resistant 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in patients with 
advanced HIV infection. N Engl J Med 1993;328:1137--44.
van  Rie  A,  Warren  R,  Richardson  M,  et  al.  Exogenous  reinfection  as  a  cause  of
recurrent tuberculosis after curative treatment. N Engl J 
Med 1999;341:1174--9.
Iseman
 MD,
 Madsen
 LA.
 Drug-resistant
 tuberculosis.
 Clin
 Chest
 Med
1989;10:341--53.
Iseman  MD.  Treatment  of  multidrug-resistant  tuberculosis.  N  Engl  J  Med
1993;329:784--91.
Chaulk CP, Moore-Rice K, Rizzo R, Chaisson RE. Eleven years of community-based
directly observed therapy for tuberculosis. 
JAMA 1995;274:945--51.
Chaulk  CP,  Kazandjian  VA.  Directly  observed  therapy  for  treatment  completion  of
tuberculosis: census statement of the Public Health 
Tuberculosis Guidelines Panel. JAMA 1998;279:943--8.
Weis SE, Slocum PC, Blais FX, et al. The effect of directly observed therapy on the
rates of drug resistance and relapse in tuberculosis. N Engl 
J Med 1994;330:1179--84.
CDC.  Acquired  rifamycin  resistance  in  persons  with  advanced  HIV  disease  being

treated for active tuberculosis with intermittent 
rifamycin-based regimens. MMWR 2002;51:214--5.
Goble M, Iseman MD, Madsen LA, Waite D, Ackerson L, Horsburgh CR Jr. Treatment of
171 patients with pulmonary tuberculosis resistant 
to isoniazid and rifampin. N Engl J Med 1993;328:527--32.
Simone PM, Iseman MD. Drug-resistant tuberculosis: a deadly and growing danger. J
Respir Dis 1992;13:960--71.
Initial therapy for tuberculosis in the era of multidrug resistance: recommendations
of the Advisory Council for the Elimination 
of Tuberculosis. MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-7):1--8.
Cummings KC, Mohle-Boetani J, Royce SE, Chin DP. Movement of tuberculosis patients
and the failure to complete anti-tuberculosis 
treatment. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:1249--52.
Nolan  CM,  Roll  L,  Goldberg  SV,  Elarth  AM.  Directly  observed  isoniazid  preventive
therapy for released jail inmates. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1997;155:583--6.
White  MC,  Tulsky  JP,  Menendez  E,  Arai  S,  Goldenson  J,  Kawamura  LM.  Improving
tuberculosis therapy completion after jail: translation 
of research into practice. Health Educ Res 2005;20:163--74.
Brewer  TF,  Heymann  SJ.  To  control  and  beyond:  moving  toward  eliminating  the
global tuberculosis threat. J Epidemiol Community 
Health 2004;58:822--5.
National
 Commission
 on
 Correctional
 Health
 Care.
 Health
 status
 of
soon-to-be-released inmates. Chicago, IL: National Commission 
on Correctional Health Care; 2002.
Hammett TM, Harmon P, Maruschak LM. 1996--1997 update: HIV/AIDS, STDs, and TB
in correctional facilities: issues and 

practices.  Washington,  DC:  US  Department  of  Justice,  Office  of  Justice  Programs,
National Institute of Justice; 1999. NCJ 176344.
Vigilante  KC,  Flynn  MM,  Affleck  PC,  et  al.  Reduction  in  recidivism  of  incarcerated
women through primary care, peer counseling, and 
discharge planning. J Women's Health 1999;8:409--15.
Freudenberg N, Wilets I, Greene MB, Richie BE. Linking women in jail to community
services: factors associated with rearrest and retention 
of  drug-using  women  following  release  from  jail.  J  Amer  Med  Womens  Assoc
1998;53:89--93.
Wilcock  K,  Hammett  TM,  Parent  DG.  Controlling  tuberculosis  in  community
corrections. Washington, DC: National Institute of 
Justice Research in Action; 1995:1--11.
Marco A, Cayla JA, Serra M, et al. Predictors of adherence to tuberculosis treatment
in supervised therapy programme for detainees before and 
after  release.  Study  Group  of  Adherence  to  Tuberculosis  Treatment  of  Prisoners.  Eur
Respir J 1998;12:967--71.
CDC. The status of TB prevention and control measures in large city and county jails
in the U.S. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, CDC; 2003. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/tb/pubs/tbrelat_articles/statustb_jails/toc.htm.
CDC. Self-study modules on tuberculosis: TB surveillance and case management in
hospitals and institutions. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 1999.
Menendez E, White MC, Tulsky JP. Locating study subjects: predictors and successful
search strategies with inmates released from a U.S. 
county jail. Control Clin Trials 2001;22:238--47.
Rich JD, Holmes L, Salas C, et al. Successful linkage of medical care and community

services for HIV-positive offenders being released 
from prison. J Urban Health 2001;78:279--89.
Sumartojo  E.  When  tuberculosis  treatment  fails:  a  social  behavioral  account  of
patient adherence. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;147:1311--20.
Bartlett JG, Tripoli LC, Rappaport ES, Ruby W. HIV in corrections. Chesterfield, MO:
Correctional Medicine Institute; 2000. Available at
http://www.cm-institute.org/hivin.htm. 
Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law. Finding the key to successful transition from
jail to the community: an explanation of federal Medicaid 
and  disability  program  rules.  Washington,  DC:  Bazelon  Center  for  Mental  Health  Law;
2001. Available at 
http://www.bazelon.org/issues/criminalization/findingthekey.html.
Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law. Building bridges: an act to reduce recidivism
by improving access to benefits for individuals 
with  psychiatric  disabilities  upon  release  from  incarceration:  model  law  and
commentary. Washington, DC: Bazelon Center for Mental Health 
Law; 2002.
Osher F, Steadman HJ, Barr H. A best practice approach to community re-entry from
jails for inmates with co-occurring disorders: the 
APIC  model.  Delmar,  NY:  The  National  GAINS  Center  for  People  with  Co-occurring
Disorders in the Justice System; 2002.
Richie  BE,  Freudenberg  N,  Page  J.  Reintegrating  women  leaving  jail  into  urban
communities: a description of a model program. J Urban 
Health 2001;78:290--303.
Conklin T, Lincoln T, Wilson R. A public health manual for correctional health care.
Ludlow, MA: Hampden County Sheriffs Department; 2002.
Safyer S, Richmond L, Bellin E, Fletcher D. Tuberculosis in correctional facilities: the

tuberculosis control program at the Montefiore 
Medical Center Rikers Island Health Services. J Law Med Ethics 1993;21:342--51.
Woods GL, Harris SL, Solomon D. Tuberculosis knowledge and beliefs among prison
inmates and lay employees. J Correctional Health 
Care 1997;4:61--9.
White  MC,  Duong  TM,  Cruz  ES,  et  al.  Strategies  for  effective  education  in  a  jail
setting: the Tuberculosis Prevention Project. Health Promot 
Pract 2003;4:422--9.
Goldberg SV, Wallace J, Jackson JC, Chaulk CP, Nolan CM. Cultural case management
of latent tuberculosis infection. Int J Tuberc Lung 
Dis 2004;8:76--82.
Grinstead O, Zack B, Faigles B. Collaborative research to prevent HIV among male
prison inmates and their female partners. Health Educ 
and Behav 1999;26:225--38.
National  Commission  on  Correctional  Health  Care.  Position  statement  on
management of tuberculosis in correctional facilities. Chicago, 
IL: National Commission on Correctional Health Care; 1996.
Malotte CK, Rhodes F, Mais KE. Tuberculosis screening and compliance with return
for skin test reading among active drug users. Am J 
Public Health 1998;88:792--6.
Perlman  DC,  Friedmann  P,  Horn  L,  et  al.  Impact  of  monetary  incentives  on
adherence to referral for screening chest x-rays after syringe 
exchange-based tuberculin skin testing. J Urban Health 2003;80:428--37.
Johnston M, Cronin V, Wells M, Johri S. Individual educational sessions and inmate
follow-up for latent tuberculosis infection treatment after 
jail release---a pilot study. Journal of Correctional Health Care 2003;10:47--58.

CDC.  Preventing  and  controlling  tuberculosis  along  the  U.S.-Mexico  border  MMWR
2001;50(No. RR-1):1--27.
Federal  Tuberculosis  Task  Force.  Federal  Tuberculosis  Task  Force  Plan  in  response  to
the Institute of Medicine Report, Ending neglect: the elimination 
of tuberculosis in the United States. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2003.
McNabb SJN, Surdo AM, Redmond A, et al. Applying a new conceptual framework to
evaluate tuberculosis surveillance and action 
performance and measure the costs, Hillsborough County, Florida, 2002. Ann Epidemiol
2004;14:640--5.
McLaughlin  SI,  Spradling  P,  Drocuik  D,  Ridzon  R,  Pozsik  CJ,  Onorato  I.  Extensive
transmission of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis among 
congregated, HIV-infected prison inmates in South Carolina, United States. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis 2003;7:665--72.
Kimerling ME, Shakes CF, Carlisle R, Lok KH, Benjamin WH, Dunlap NE. Spot sputum
screening: evaluation of an intervention in two 
homeless shelters. Int J Tuber Lung Dis 1999;3:613--9.
Marks  SM,  Taylor  Z,  Qualls  NL,  Shrestha-Kuwahara  RJ,  Wilce  MA,  Nguyen  CH.
Outcomes of contact investigations of infectious 
tuberculosis patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:2033--8.
Reichler MR, Reves R, Bur S, et al. Evaluation of investigations conducted to detect
and prevent transmission of tuberculosis. 
JAMA 2002;287:991--5.
Gerald LB, Bruce F, Brooks CM, et al. Standardizing contact investigation protocols.
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2003;7:S369--74.
Shaw  JB,  Wynn-Williams  N.  Infectivity  of  pulmonary  tuberculosis  in  relation  to

sputum status. Am Rev Tuberc 1954;69:724--32.
Grzybowski  S,  Barnett  GD,  Styblo  K.  Contacts  of  cases  of  active  pulmonary
tuberculosis. Bull Int Union Tuberc 1975;50:90--106.
Rose CE, Zerbe GO, Lantz SO, Bailey WC. Establishing priority during investigation of
tuberculosis contacts. Am Rev Respir Dis 
1979;119:603--9.
Bailey  WC,  Gerald  LB,  Kimerling  ME,  et  al.  Predictive  model  to  identify  positive
tuberculosis skin test results during contact investigations. 
JAMA 2002;287:996--1002.
Gerald  LB,  Tang  S,  Bruce  F,  et  al.  A  decision  tree  for  tuberculosis  contact
investigation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:1122--7.
Golub JE, Bur S, Cronin WA, et al. Delayed tuberculosis diagnosis and tuberculosis
transmission [Abstract]. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2005;2:A271.
CDC.  Guidelines  for  the  investigation  of  contacts  of  persons  with  infectious
tuberculosis: recommendations from the National 
Tuberculosis Controllers Association and CDC. MMWR 2005;54(No. RR-15):1--47.
Rodriguez  EM,  Steinbart  S,  Shaulis  G,  Bur  S,  Dwyer  DM.  Pulmonary  tuberculosis  in  a
high school student and a broad contact 
investigation: lessons relearned. Md Med J 1996;45:1019--22.
Menzies  D.  Interpretation  of  repeated  tuberculin  tests:  boosting,  conversion,  and
reversion. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;159:15--21.
Moreno S, Blazquez R, Novoa A, et al. The effect of BCG vaccination on tuberculin
reactivity and the booster effect among hospital 
employees. Arch Intern Med 2001;161:1760--5.
CDC.  Framework  for  program  evaluation  in  public  health.  MMWR  1999;48(No.
RR-11):1--40.
CDC. Controlling tuberculosis in the United States. MMWR 2005;54 (No. RR-12):1--81.

Hammett  TM.  Public  health/corrections  collaborations:  prevention  and  treatment  of
HIV/AIDS, STDs, and TB. Washington, DC: 
US Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice; 1998.
California Health And Safety Code, Section 121361. Available at 
http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/calaw.html.
* The epidemiology of TB in the United States has changed dramatically since the early
1990s. Immigration from countries with a high prevalence of 
TB  contributes  substantially  to  the  continued  high  rates  of  disease  and  transmission
among foreign-born persons. In 2003, the rate of TB among 
foreign-born persons in the Untied States was 8.7 times higher than the rate for persons
born in the United States. More than half of new TB cases in 2003 occurred 
in foreign-born persons, particularly those from Mexico, the Philippines, and Vietnam. Of
114 patients in whom multi-drug resistant TB (MDR TB) 
were diagnosed, foreign-born persons accounted for 
95  (83%)  cases  (6).  Detention  facilities  and  local  jails  frequently  contract  with  U.S.
Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) to house detainees, a practice that should be accounted for
in assessing a facility's risk status.
† Therapy that involves providing the anti-TB drugs directly to the patient and watching
as the patient swallows the medications. DOT is the preferred 

core  management  strategy  for  all  patients  with  TB.  DOT  for  LTBI  is  referred  to
sometimes as directly observed preventive therapy.
§ Formerly called a negative pressure isolation room, an AII room is a single-occupancy
patient-care room used to isolate persons with suspected or 
confirmed 
infectious TB disease. Environmental factors are controlled in AII rooms to minimize the
transmission of infectious agents that are usually spread from 
person  to  person  by  droplet  nuclei  associated  with  coughing  or  aerosolization  of
contaminated fluids. AII rooms should provide negative pressure in the room so 
clean air flows under the door gap into the room, an air flow rate of 6--12 air changes
per hour (ACH), and direct exhaust of air from the room to the outside of 
the building or recirculation of air through a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter.
¶  ACH  is  the  ratio  of  the  volume  of  air  entering  the  room  or  booth  per  hour  to  the
volume of that room or booth. It equals the exhaust airflow (Q) in cubic 
feet per minute (cfm) divided by the volume of the room or booth (V) in cubic feet 
(ft3) multiplied by 60 minutes per hour, as expressed thus: 
** Surgical masks should never be worn in place of a respirator. Surgical masks often fit
so poorly that they provide only minimal protection from 
any airborne hazard, including M. 
tuberculosis. Surgical masks are designed to protect others from the wearer; they are
not designed or tested to provide 

respiratory protection to the wearer.
††  Asymptomatic  contacts  with  normal  chest  radiographs  typically  do  not  require
isolation.
§§  Because  being  immunocompromised  (having  pathologic  or  iatrogenic  immune
suppression, e.g., HIV infection or chemotherapy) is a risk factor 
for TB disease, correctional workers should be educated on the relation between TB and
medical conditions associated with being 
immunocompromised. Correctional workers should be encouraged to discuss known or
possible immunocompromising conditions with their private physicians or 
health-care professionals. 
¶¶  Public  health  departments  typically  track  treatment  completion  rates  for  patients
referred to their care.
Table 1
Return to top.
Table 2
Return to top.
Table 3
Return to top.
Table 4
Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Table 6

Return to top.
Table 7
Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  

An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 6/22/2006
  Persons who have a positive TST result and no symptoms suggestive of TB disease
should be evaluated with a 
chest radiograph within 72 hours after the skin test is interpreted. Persons who have
symptoms suggestive of TB disease should 
be evaluated immediately and placed in an AII room until TB is ruled out (see Symptom
Screening).
 The  use  of  two-step  testing  can  reduce  the  number  of  positive  TSTs  that  would
otherwise be misclassified as recent 
skin-test  conversions  during  future  periodic  screenings.  Certain  persons  who  were
infected with
M.  tuberculosis  years  earlier  exhibit  waning  delayed-type  hypersensitivity  to
tuberculin. When they are skin tested years after infection, they might have a 
false-negative TST result (even though they are truly infected). However, this first skin
test years 
after the infection might stimulate the ability to react to subsequent tests, resulting in a

"booster" reaction. When the test is repeated, the reaction might 
be  misinterpreted  as  a  new  infection  (recent  conversion)  rather  than  a  boosted
reaction. For two-step testing, persons 
whose  baseline  TSTs  yield  a  negative  result  are  retested  1--3  weeks  after  the  initial
test. If the second test 
result is negative, they are considered not infected. If the second test result is positive,
they are classified as having had previous TB infection. 
Two-step testing should be considered for the baseline testing of persons who report no
history of a recent TST and who will 
receive repeated TSTs as part of an institutional periodic skin-testing program. In the
majority of cases, a two-step TST is 
not practical in jails because of the short average length of stay of inmates.
 In  the  past,  a  panel  of  other  common  antigens  was  often  applied  with  the  TST  to
obtain information regarding 
the competence of the patient's cellular immune system and to identify anergy. More
recently, however, anergy testing has 
been  demonstrated  to  be  of  limited  usefulness  because  of  problems  with
standardization and reproducibility, the low risk for 
TB associated with a diagnosis of anergy, and the lack of apparent benefit of preventive
therapy for groups of anergic 
HIV-infected 
persons.  Therefore,  the  use  of  anergy  testing  in  conjunction  with  a  TST  is  no  longer
recommended routinely for 
screening programs for M. tuberculosis infection in the United States 
(52).
 Intracutaneous inoculation with BCG is currently used 

worldwide as a vaccine against TB. BCG is a live 
attenuated Mycobacterium bovis strain that stimulates the immune system to protect
against TB. No reliable method has been developed 
to  distinguish  TST  reactions  caused  by  vaccination  with  BCG  from  those  caused  by
natural mycobacterial infections, 
although reactions of >20 mm of induration are not likely caused by BCG 
(55). TST is not contraindicated for persons who have 
been vaccinated with BCG, and the TST results of such persons are used to support or
exclude the diagnosis of
M. tuberculosis infection. A diagnosis 
of M. tuberculosis infection and treatment for LTBI should be considered for any 
BCG-vaccinated  person  who  has  a  positive  TST  reaction.  The  same  criteria  for
interpretation of TST results are used for both BCG-vaccinated 
and nonvaccinated persons (56).
 QuantiFERON®-TB  Gold  Test   In  May  2005,  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration
(FDA) licensed QFT-G. This in-vitro diagnostic test measures 
the  amount  of  interferon-gamma  produced  by  cells  in  whole  blood  that  have  been
stimulated by mycobacterial peptides. 
The peptides used in the test mimic proteins known as 
ESAT-6 and CFP-10, which are present in M. 
tuberculosis  but  absent  from  all  BCG  strains  and  from  the  majority  of  commonly
encountered non-TB mycobacteria. The test is intended for use as 
a diagnostic tool for M. tuberculosis infection, 
including both TB disease and LTBI. As with a TST, QFT-G cannot 
distinguish between LTBI and TB disease and should be used in conjunction with risk
assessment, radiography, and other 
diagnostic evaluations. The advantages of QFT-G compared with TST are that 1) results

can be obtained after a single patient visit, 
2) the variability associated with skin-test reading can be reduced because "reading" is
performed in a qualified laboratory, and 
3) QFT-G is not affected by previous BCG vaccination and eliminates the unnecessary
treatment of persons with 
false-positive  results.  QFT-G  does  not  affect  the  result  of  future  QFT-G  tests  (i.e.,  no
"boosting" occurs). Limitations of the test include 
the  need  for  phlebotomy,  the  need  to  process  blood  specimens  within  12  hours  of
collection for the most recent version of 
the test, the limited number of laboratories that process the test, and a lack of clinical
experience in interpreting test results. 
The elimination of the second visit for reading the TST, however, is likely to render the
QFT-G competitive in 
cost-benefit considerations.
 Although  the  performance  of  QFT-G  has  not  been  evaluated  sufficiently  in  select
populations of interest (e.g., 
HIV-infected  persons),  available  data  indicate  that  QFT-G  is  as  sensitive  as  TST  for
detection of TB disease and more specific than TST 
for detection of LTBI (57,58). CDC guidelines for QFT-G recommend that QFT-G can be
used in place of TST in 
all circumstances in which TST is currently used 
(58). This includes initial and periodic TB screening for 
correctional facility inmates and employees and testing of exposed persons in contact
investigations. Because data are insufficient 
regarding  performance  of  QFT-G  in  certain  clinical  situations,  as  with  a  negative  TST
result, a negative QFT-G result alone might 
not be sufficient to exclude M. 

tuberculosis  infection  in  these  situations.  Examples  of  such  clinical  scenarios  include
those 
involving patients with severe immunosuppression who have had recent exposure to a
patient with TB and patients being treated 
or about to undergo treatment with potent tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNF-a)  antagonists.    Correctional  facilities  and  local  health  departments  should
collaborate to ensure effective TB screening in the 
correctional  setting.  Inmates  might  provide  inaccurate  information  on  admission  for
multiple reasons, ranging from forgetfulness 
and  confusion  to  deliberate  misrepresentation.  Health  departments  should  perform
cross-matches with the local TB registry 
and  search  for  matches  on  known  aliases,  birth  dates,  maiden  names,  and  other
personal information for inmates suspected 
of  having  TB  infection.  A  readily  accessible  record  of  previous  TB  history,
drug-susceptibility patterns, treatment, 
and  compliance  can  be  useful  in  determining  the  disposition  of  a  given  patient  with
suspected TB.
  The  following  procedures  should  be  used  for  the  initial  screening  of  inmates  and
detainees (depending on their length 
of stay in the facility and the type of facility) and for all correctional facility employees,
regardless of the type of facility.
 Inmates in Minimal TB Risk Facilities  Inmates in all minimal TB risk correctional and
detention facilities should be evaluated on entry for symptoms of 
TB.  Persons  with  symptoms  of  TB  should  be  evaluated  immediately  to  rule  out  the
presence of infectious disease and kept in 
an  AII  room  until  they  are  evaluated.  If  the  facility  does  not  have  an  AII  room,  the
inmate should be transported to a 

facility  that  has  one.  In  addition,  all  newly  arrived  inmates  should  be  evaluated  for
clinical conditions and other factors that increase 
the risk for infection or the risk for progressing to TB disease, including the following:
 Persons with any of these conditions require further screening with a TST, a QFT-G,
or a chest radiograph within 7 days 
of arrival. Regardless of the TST or QFT-G result, inmates known to have HIV infection
or other severe 
immunosuppression, and those who are at risk for HIV infection but whose HIV status is
unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part 
of  the  initial  screening.  Persons  who  have  an  abnormal  chest  radiograph  should  be
further evaluated to rule out TB disease; if 
TB disease is excluded as a diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if the TST or
QFT-G result is positive.
 Inmates  in  Nonminimal  TB  Risk  Prisons   Immediately  on  arrival,  all  new  inmates
should be screened for symptoms, and any inmate with symptoms suggestive of 
TB should be placed in an AII room and evaluated promptly for TB disease. If the facility
does not have an AII room, the 
inmate should be transported to a facility that has one. 
Inmates who have no symptoms require further screening with a TST, a 
QFT-G, or a chest radiograph within 7 days of 
arrival. Regardless of their TST or QFT-G status, inmates known to have 
HIV  infection  or  other  severe  immunosuppression,  and  those  who  are  at  risk  for  HIV
infection but whose HIV status is 
unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part of the initial screening. Persons
who have an abnormal chest 
radiograph should be further evaluated to rule out TB disease; if TB disease is excluded
as a diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if 

the TST or QFT-G result is positive.  As the rate of TB disease in the United States has
decreased, identification and treatment of persons with LTBI who are 
at  high  risk  for  TB  disease  have  become  essential  components  of  the  TB  elimination
strategy promoted by ACET 
(59).  Targeted  testing  using  the  TST  or  QFT-G  identifies  persons  at  high  risk  for  TB
disease who would benefit from treatment for 
LTBI. Prisons offer an excellent public health opportunity for identifying persons at high
risk for TB who can be screened for 
TB  infection  and  placed  on  LTBI  therapy,  if  indicated.  If  the  TST  is  used,  a  two-step
testing procedure should be 
strongly  considered  when  obtaining  a  baseline  reading.  A  single  step  QFT-G  is  an
adequate baseline. Inmates with a positive 
test  should  be  evaluated  for  LTBI  therapy  after  TB  disease  is  excluded.   Inmates  in
Nonminimal TB Risk Jails and Other Short-Term Detention Facilities
 As in prisons, all new detainees in nonminimal TB risk jails should be screened on entry
for symptoms, and any 
detainee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should be placed immediately in an AII
room and evaluated promptly for TB disease. 
If the facility does not have an AII room, the inmate should be transported promptly to a
facility that does have one. 
Detainees without symptoms require further screening with a TST, a QFT-G, or a chest
radiograph within 7 days of arrival. 
Regardless  of  the  TST  or  QFT-G  result,  detainees  known  to  have  HIV  infection,  and
those who are at risk for HIV infection but 
whose HIV status is unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part of the initial
screening. Persons who have a 
positive result should be further evaluated to rule out TB disease.  The primary purpose

of screening in correctional settings is to detect TB disease. TST or QFT-G screening in
jails to 
initiate LTBI therapy often is not practical because of the high rate of turnover and short
lengths of stay. Although not all 
jail detainees have short lengths of stay, determining which 
detainees will be in the jail for a long term is difficult. 
Nationwide, approximately half of persons detained in local jails are released within 48
hours of admission. Thus, even if all 
detainees can be tested at intake, a large proportion will be unavailable to have their
TSTs read or to be evaluated when QFT-G test 
results are available. Of those still in custody, a substantial percentage will be released
before the radiographic and medical 
evaluation is completed. In a 1996 study, 43% of detainees at a county jail in Illinois
who had a positive TST result were released 
or transferred before their evaluation could be completed 
(3).
 A substantial proportion of detainees who are incarcerated long enough to begin LTBI
therapy will be released 
before  completion  of  treatment.  A  San  Francisco  study  indicated  that  approximately
62% of detainees who were started on 
LTBI treatment were released before completion 
(40). These data illustrate the challenges of implementing a testing and 
treatment program for LTBI in jails with highly dynamic detainee populations. Certain
jails have adopted a targeted approach 
of  performing  TSTs  only  on  new  detainees  who  are  at  high  risk  for  TB  disease  (e.g.,
detainees with known HIV 
infection). Screening for TB and treating LTBI are most effective within the jail setting if

resources dedicated to discharge planning 
and reliable access to community-based treatment are available. Modest interventions
(e.g., education and incentives 
[see  Glossary])  in  the  jail  setting  can  lead  to  improvements  in  linking  released
detainees to postrelease medical care and increase 
the likelihood that therapy will be completed 
(60,61).
 Persons  in  Holding  or  Booking  Facilities   City,  county,  and  other  law  enforcement
authorities frequently have facilities that hold arrestees and detainees for short 
periods  of  time,  ranging  from  hours  to  multiple  days.  TB  symptom  screening  is
recommended for all persons at the time of entry 
into  these  facilities.  Any  detainee  who  has  symptoms  suggestive  of  TB  should  be
immediately isolated and transferred to a facility 
or hospital in which the detainee can be placed in an AII room and evaluated promptly
for TB disease.
 Employees in All Correctional and Detention Facilities  A medical history relating to
TB should be obtained from and recorded for all new employees at the time of hiring,
and 
a physical examination for TB disease should be required. The results of the screening
and examination should be 
kept  confidential;  access  should  be  granted  to  public  health  and  infection  control
medical professionals only when necessary. 
In addition, a TST or QFT-G should be mandatory for all 
employees who do not have a documented history of a positive 
result. To improve the accuracy of the baseline result, a two-step TST or a single-step
QFT-G should be used for the initial 
screening  of  employees  who  have  not  been  tested  during  the  preceding  12  months.

Persons who have a positive TST or QFT-G 
result should have a chest radiograph taken and interpreted and should be required to
have a thorough medical evaluation; if 
TB  disease  is  excluded  as  a  diagnosis,  such  persons  should  be  considered  for  LTBI
therapy. All 
employees should be informed that they should seek appropriate follow-up and testing
for TB if they are immunosuppressed for any reason (e.g., have 
HIV infection). Any employee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should not 
return  to  the  workplace  until  a  clinician  has  excluded  a  diagnosis  of  infectious  TB
disease.
 Other  Persons  Who  Might  Need  to  be  Screened   Certain  persons  who  are  neither
inmates nor employees but who visit high-risk facilities on a regular basis also should 
be  considered  for  screening.  These  persons  might  include  contractors  (e.g.,  food
handlers and service workers), volunteers, 
and those providing religious ministries. Screening of these persons should follow the
same procedures as those outlined 
for employees.
  Long-term inmates and all employees who have a negative TST or QFT-G result should
have follow-up testing at 
least annually. Persons who have a history of a positive test result should be screened
for symptoms of TB disease. Annual 
chest  radiographs  are  unnecessary  for  the  follow-up  evaluation  of  infected  persons.
Test results should be recorded in 
medical  records  and  in  a  retrievable  aggregate  database  of  all  TST  or  QFT-G  results.
Personal identifying information should be 
kept confidential.
 Correctional  facilities  can  use  multiple  strategies  to  ensure  annual  screening  of

long-term inmates for newly acquired 
TB  infection.  Certain  institutions  schedule  annual  screening  on  the  inmate's  date  of
birth or on the anniversary of the 
inmate's most recent test. Other institutions and systems suspend 
inmate movement and screen the entire population on the same 
day  every  year.  Methods  of  screening  a  subset  of  the  inmate  population  (e.g.,  on  a
monthly basis) are beneficial because 
they provide an ongoing assessment of M. 
tuberculosis transmission within the facility.
 Results from TST or QFT-G testing should be analyzed periodically to estimate the risk
for acquiring new infection in 
a correctional facility; however, this analysis should be completed by using only the test
results of facility employees and 
inmates  who  have  remained  in  the  facility  continually  during  the  interval  between
testing. The conversion rate equals the number 
of employees or inmates whose test results have converted from negative to positive
(i.e., the numerator) during a specific 
interval divided by the total number of previously negative employees or inmates who
were tested during the same interval (i.e., 
the denominator). In certain facilities, conducting an analysis of test results for specific
areas or groups within the facility might 
be appropriate.
 More frequent screening is needed when a conversion rate is substantially higher than
previous rates or when other 
evidence of ongoing transmission is detected. A cluster (i.e., 
either two or more patients with TB disease that are linked 
by epidemiologic or genotyping data or two or more TST or 

QFT-G conversions occurring in the correctional facility 
among inmates who are epidemiologically linked) or other evidence of person-to-person
transmission also 
warrants additional epidemiologic investigation and possibly a revision of the facility's
TB prevention and control protocol.
 Facilities in which the risk for infection with 
M. tuberculosis is minimal might not need to maintain a periodic 
screening  program.  However,  requiring  baseline  TST  or  QFT-G  testing  of  employees
would enable medical staff to 
distinguish  between  a  TST  or  QFT-G  conversion  and  a  positive  TST  or  QFT-G  result
caused by a previous exposure to 
M.  tuberculosis.  A  decision  to  discontinue  periodic  employee  screening  should  be
made in consultation with the local or state health department.
  HIV counseling, testing, and referral (CTR) should be routinely recommended for all
persons in settings in which 
the population is at increased behavioral or clinical risk for 
acquiring or transmitting HIV infection, regardless of 
setting prevalence (62). Because correctional facilities are considered settings in which
the population is at increased risk 
for  acquiring  or  transmitting  HIV,  routine  HIV  CTR  is  recommended  for  inmates.
Furthermore, HIV infection is the 
greatest risk factor for progression from LTBI to TB disease 
(63,64). Therefore, HIV CTR should be routinely offered to 
all inmates and correctional facility staff with LTBI or TB disease if their HIV infection
status is unknown at the time of 
their LTBI or TB disease diagnosis (64,65). Correctional 
facilities should be particularly aware of the need for 

preventing  transmission  of  M.  tuberculosis  in  settings  in  which  persons  infected  with
HIV might be housed or might work 
(66).
  Correctional  and  detention  facilities  are  strongly  encouraged  to  collect  and  analyze
data on the effectiveness of their 
TB screening policies and procedures. Working in conjunction with their state or local
TB-control program, correctional 
and  detention  facilities  should  refine  their  screening  policies  and  procedures  as
indicated by such data. In the absence of local 
data that justify revision, correctional and detention 
facilities should adhere to the screening recommendations 
detailed above.
  All states require designated health-care professionals to 
report suspected and confirmed cases of TB to their local or 
state  health  department;  this  reporting  is  mandatory  for  all  correctional  facilities,
whether private, federal, state, or 
local.  Correctional  facility  medical  staff  should  report  any  suspected  or  confirmed  TB
cases among inmates or employees to 
the appropriate health agency in accordance with state and local laws and regulations,
even if the inmate or detainee 
has  already  been  released  or  transferred  from  the  facility.  Reporting  cases  to  health
departments benefits the correctional facility 
by allowing it to obtain health department resources for case management and contact
investigation in both the facility and 
the  community.  For  each  suspected  case  of  TB,  the  diagnosis  or  the  exclusion  of  a
diagnosis of TB should be 
entered immediately 

into 1) the person's medical record, 2) the retrievable aggregate TB-control database at
the facility, and 3) the database at 
a centralized office if the system has multiple facilities. In addition, drug-susceptibility
results should be sent to the state or 
local health department for use in monitoring the rates of drug resistance in the health
department's jurisdiction. 
Drug-susceptibility reports also should be sent to all health departments managing the
infectious person's contacts because the 
choice of medication for LTBI treatment is based on these drug-susceptibility test 
results (64). Reports to local or state 
health departments should identify the agency that has custodial responsibility for the
inmate (e.g., county corrections agency, 
state  corrections  agency,  ICE,  Federal  Bureau  of  Prisons  [FBOP],  and  U.S.  Marshals
Service [USMS]) and the 
corresponding  identification  number  for  that  agency  (e.g.,  U.S.  alien  number,  FBOP
number, or USMS number). Federal law 
enforcement agencies frequently contract for bed space with local or private detention
facilities. Therefore, custodial authority 
and corresponding custody identification numbers should be verified with the facility's
custody staff; detention facility 
medical staff might not have this information available.
  TB airborne precautions should be initiated for any patient who has signs or symptoms
of TB disease or who 
has documented TB disease and has not completed treatment or not been determined
previously to be noninfectious.
  For patients placed in an AII room because of suspected infectious TB disease of the

lungs, airways, or larynx, 
airborne  precautions  can  be  discontinued  when  infectious  TB  disease  is  considered
unlikely and either 1) another diagnosis is made 
that explains the clinical syndrome or 2) the patient has three negative acid-fast bacilli
(AFB) sputum-smear results 
(67,68). The three sputum specimens should be collected 8--24 hours apart 
(69), and at least one should be an early morning 
specimen  (because  respiratory  secretions  pool  overnight).  Typically,  this  will  allow
patients with negative sputum-smear results to be 
released from an AII room in 2 days. Incarcerated patients for whom the suspicion of TB
disease remains after the collection of three 
negative AFB sputum-smear results should not be released from airborne precautions
until they are on standard multidrug anti-TB 
treatment  and  are  clinically  improving.  Because  patients  with  TB  disease  who  have
negative AFB sputum-smear results can still be 
infectious (70), patients with suspected disease who meet the above criteria for release
from airborne precautions should not be 
released to an area in which other patients with 
immunocompromising conditions are housed.  A patient who has drug-susceptible TB of
the lung, airways, or larynx, is on standard multidrug anti-TB treatment, and 
has  had  a  significant  clinical  and  bacteriologic  response  to  therapy  (i.e.,  reduction  in
cough, resolution of fever, and 
progressively  decreasing  quantity  of  AFB  on  smear  result)  is  probably  no  longer
infectious. However, because culture and 
drug-susceptibility  results  are  not  typically  known  when  the  decision  to  discontinue
airborne precautions is made, all 
patients  with  confirmed  TB  disease  should  remain  in  an  AII  room  while  incarcerated

until they
 Because the consequences of transmission of MDR TB (i.e., TB that is resistant to
isoniazid and rifampin) are 
severe, infection-control practitioners might choose to keep persons with suspected or
confirmed MDR TB disease in an AII 
room  until  negative  sputum-culture  results  have  been  documented  in  addition  to
negative AFB sputum-smear results.
  Guidelines for preventing transmission of M. 
tuberculosis in health-care settings and for environmental infection control 
in health-care facilities have been published previously 
(71,72). These guidelines and this report can be used to 
educate  correctional  facility  staff  regarding  use  of  environmental  controls  in  TB
infection-control programs.
 Environmental  controls  should  be  implemented  when  the  risk  for  TB  transmission
persists despite efforts to screen and 
treat infected inmates. Environmental controls are used to remove or inactivate 
M. tuberculosis in areas in which the organism 
could be transmitted. Primary environmental controls consist of controlling the source
of infection by using local exhaust 
ventilation (e.g., hoods, tents, or booths) and diluting and removing contaminated air
by using general ventilation. These controls 
help  prevent  the  spread  and  reduce  the  concentration  of  airborne  infectious  droplet
nuclei (see Glossary). Environmental 
controls  work  in  conjunction  with  administrative  controls  such  as  isolation  of  inmates
with suspected TB disease detected 
through  screening  (see  Glossary).  Secondary  environmental  controls  consist  of
controlling the airflow to prevent contamination of 

air in areas adjacent to the source (AII rooms) and cleaning the air (using a HEPA filter
or ultraviolet germicidal 
irradiation [UVGI]) to increase the number of equivalent 
ACH.¶ The efficiency of different primary or secondary environmental 
controls  varies;  details  concerning  the  application  of  these  controls  to  prevent
transmission of 
M. tuberculosis in health-care settings have been published previously 
(71). To be effective, secondary environmental controls should be used and 
maintained properly, and their strengths and limitations should be recognized. The 
engineering design and operational efficacy 
parameters  for  UVGI  as  a  secondary  control  measure  (i.e.,  portable  UVGI  units,
upper-room air UVGI, and in-duct UVGI) continue 
to evolve and require special attention in their design, selection, and maintenance.
 Exposure to M. tuberculosis within correctional facilities can be reduced through the
effective use of environmental 
controls  at  the  source  of  exposure  (e.g.,  an  infectious  inmate)  or  in  general  areas.
Source-control techniques can prevent or 
reduce  the  spread  of  infectious  droplet  nuclei  into  the  air  in  situations  in  which  the
source has been identified and the generation of 
the contaminant is localized by collecting infectious particles as they are released. Use
of these techniques is particularly 
prudent  during  procedures  that  are  likely  to  generate  infectious  aerosols  (e.g.,
bronchoscopy and sputum 
induction) and when inmates with infectious TB disease are coughing or sneezing.
 Unsuspected  and  undiagnosed  cases  of  infectious  TB  disease  contribute
substantially to disease transmission 
within correctional facilities (73). When attempting to control this type of transmission,

source control is not a feasible 
option.  Instead,  general  ventilation  and  air  cleaning  should  be  relied  on  for
environmental control. General ventilation can be used 
to  dilute  the  air  and  remove  air  contaminants  and  to  control  airflow  patterns  in  AII
rooms or other correctional facility 
settings.  Air-cleaning  technologies  include  mechanical  air  filtration  to  reduce  the
concentration of
M. tuberculosis droplet nuclei and UVGI to kill or inactivate microorganisms so they
no longer pose a risk for infection.
 Ventilation  systems  for  correctional  facility  settings  should  be  designed,  and
modified when necessary, by 
ventilation
 engineers
 in
 collaboration
 with
 infection-control
 practitioners
 and
occupational health staff. Recommendations for 
designing  and  operating  ventilation  systems  in  correctional  facilities  have  been
published 
(48,49,74--76).  The  multiple  types  of  and  conditions  for  use  of  ventilation  systems  in
correctional-facility settings and the individual needs of these settings 
preclude provision of extensive guidance in this report.
 Incremental  improvements  in  environmental  controls  (e.g.,  increasing  the  removal
efficiency of an existing filtration 
system in any area) are likely to lessen the potential for TB transmission from persons
with unsuspected or undiagnosed TB. 
This  information  should  not  be  used  in  place  of  consultation  with  experts  who  can
advise on ventilation system and air 
handling  design,  selection,  installation,  and  maintenance.  Because  environmental
controls will fail if they are not properly operated 
and  maintained,  routine  training  and  education  of  infection-control  and  maintenance

staff are key components to a successful 
TB infection-control program.
  Inmates known or suspected of having TB disease should be placed in an AII room or
AII cell that meets the design 
and operational criteria for airborne infection isolation described previously 
(71). Inmates deemed infectious should remain 
in  isolation  until  treatment  or  further  evaluation  has  ensured  that  they  are
noninfectious. Facilities without an on-site AII 
room 
should have a written plan for referring patients with suspected or confirmed TB to a
facility that is equipped to 
isolate, evaluate, and treat TB patients.  New or renovated facilities should ensure that
a sufficient number of AII rooms are available consistent with the facility 
risk  assessment.  Under  rare  circumstances,  if  an  AII  room  is  not  available  and  the
immediate transfer of the inmate with 
suspected infectious TB is not possible, the inmate should be housed temporarily in a
room that has been modified to prevent the 
escape of infectious aerosols outside the TB holding area. The heating, ventilating, and
air-conditioning (HVAC) system in 
this  temporary  TB  holding  area  might  have  to  be  manipulated  or  augmented  with
auxiliary exhaust fans to create an inward 
flow of air that reduces the potential escape of infectious aerosols. If possible, air from
these areas should be exhausted directly 
to the outdoors. If this is not feasible, the highest filtration efficiency compatible with
the installed HVAC system should 
be  used.  Because  TB  droplet  nuclei  are  approximately  1--5  micrometers  in  size,

filtration efficiency should be evaluated 
for  particles  in  that  size  range.  Filter  selection  based  on  the  American  Society  of
Heating, Refrigerating and 
Air-Conditioning  Engineers  (ASHRAE)  Standard  52.2  Minimum  Efficiency  Reporting
Value (MERV)--rating efficiency tables can help in 
this evaluation (77). Secondary air cleaning techniques (portable air cleaners and UVGI)
also can be used in these areas to 
increase effective air cleaning.   Aerosol-producing procedures should be performed in
an area with a type of local exhaust ventilation that captures 
and removes airborne contaminants at or near their source without exposing persons in
the area to infectious agents. Local 
exhaust devices typically use hoods. Two types of hoods are used: enclosing devices, in
which the hood either partially or fully 
encloses the infectious source, and exterior devices, in which the infectious source is
near but outside the hood. Fully enclosed 
hoods,  booths,  or  tents  are  always  preferable  to  exterior  devices  because  of  their
superior ability to prevent contaminants 
from escaping.
 Enclosing devices should have sufficient airflow to remove 
>99% of airborne particles during the interval between 
the departure of one patient and the arrival of the next. The time required to remove a
given percentage of airborne particles 
from an enclosed space depends on 1) the ACH number, 
2) the location of the ventilation inlet and outlet, and 3) the 
physical configuration of the room or booth. The time interval required to ensure the
proper level of airborne contaminant 
removal from enclosing devices varies according to ACH 

(Table 1). For example, if an enclosing device operates at six ACH, and the 
air  inlet  and  exhaust  locations  allow  for  good  air  mixing,  approximately  46  minutes
would be required to remove 99% of 
the  contaminated  air  after  the  aerosol-producing  procedure  has  ended.  Similarly,  an
additional 
23 minutes (total time: 69 minutes) would be required to 
increase the removal efficiency to 99.9%. Doubling the ventilation rate decreases the 
waiting time by half.
  General ventilation is used to 1) dilute and remove contaminated air, 2) control the
direction of airflow in a 
correctional  facility  setting,  and  3)  control  airflow  patterns  in  rooms.  Recommended
ventilation rates for correctional facility settings 
are typically expressed in ACH. Ventilation recommendations for selected areas in new
or renovated correctional 
facility  settings  should  be  followed  (Table  2).  The  feasibility  of  achieving  a  specific
ventilation rate depends on the construction 
and operational requirements of the ventilation system and might differ for retrofitted
and newly constructed facilities. 
The expense and effort of achieving a high ventilation rate might be reasonable for new
construction but not be as feasible 
when retrofitting an existing setting.
 Ventilation  design  guidance  for  correctional  facilities  and  related  areas  has  been
published 
(78). This design guidance includes specific ventilation recommendations regarding 
total ventilation, filtration efficiency, and 
environmental design parameters. For minimum outdoor air supply recommendations,
the guidance refers to ASHRAE Standard 

62,  Ventilation  for  Acceptable  Indoor  Air  Quality.  In  2004,  ASHRAE  revised  and
renumbered this standard to 
ANSI/ASHRAE  Standard  62.1  (74).  For  areas  within  correctional  facilities  that  are  not
intended to contain persons with infectious TB, 
the  recommended  minimum  outdoor  air  supply  rates  should  meet  or  exceed  those
recommended in ANSI/ASHRAE 
Standard 62.1-2004 (74). When risk analysis 
reveals an enhanced potential for undiagnosed cases of infectious TB, facility 
designers and owners may consider using higher supply rates of outdoor air (e.g., those
recommended for areas within 
health-care 
facilities  anticipated  to  contain  infectious  patients).  Minimum  outdoor  air  supply
recommendations for health-care 
facilities  have  been  published  (71,79).  Because  correctional  areas  frequently  will  not
have an exact equivalent area within the 
health-care  environment,  the  designer  or  owner  should  identify  an  analogous
health-care area from which to choose the outdoor 
air supply recommendation. This selection should be made on the basis of occupant risk
factors for TB, occupant activities, 
and occupant density within the area. For example, the intake, holding, and processing
area of a higher risk correctional 
facility  might  be  considered  analogous  to  the  emergency  waiting  room  area  in  a
health-care facility. In that case, the 
recommended outdoor air supply would be at least two ACH.
 The  direction  of  air  movement  relative  to  adjacent  areas  is  necessary  for  the
containment of contaminated air. Air within 

a  correctional  facility  should  flow  to  minimize  exposure  of  others  within  the  building
(Table 2). For example, air inside an 
AII room or cell should flow from the corridor and air-supply grille across the worker,
then across that patient, and finally out of 
the room. To ensure that air is flowing from the corridor into an AII room or cell, smoke
testing should be performed daily, even 
if the AII room or cell is equipped with a pressure-sensing device. Air flow (supply air
and exhaust air) should be measured at 
least  annually  and  compared  with  the  designed  air  flow  rates  to  ensure  that  optimal
directional air flow and air exchange rates are 
being maintained (Table 2).
  Detailed  information  has  been  published  regarding  the  selection,  design,
maintenance, and safety considerations 
associated with air cleaning methods (i.e., filtration and UVGI) 
(71). Designers and end users should consult this information. 
Air  removed  from  areas  likely  to  contain  infectious  aerosols  (e.g.,  AII  cells,  sputum
collection and other procedure rooms, 
and intake areas) should be exhausted directly to the outdoors to ensure that it cannot
immediately reenter the building or pose 
a  hazard  to  persons  outside,  in  accordance  with  applicable  federal,  state,  and  local
regulations. If discharging air to the outside 
is  not  feasible,  HEPA  filters  should  be  used  to  clean  the  air  before  returning  to  the
general ventilation system. Such 
recirculation is acceptable only if the air is recirculated back into the same general area
from which it originated.
 For  general  population  areas  in  which  infectious  aerosols  are  not  anticipated  but
might be present (from persons 

with  undiagnosed  TB  disease),  total  exhaust  ventilation  should  be  considered  where
and when the outdoor 
environmental conditions (temperature and humidity) are compatible with a single-pass
system without undue energy or equipment 
costs.  When  recirculating  air  from  these  areas,  the  minimum  ASHRAE-recommended
level of filtration is a MERV-8 filter 
(78). However, CDC encourages selection and use of filters with higher MERV ratings to
provide an incremental improvement 
in the protection afforded by this mechanism. The filtration system should be designed
to prevent filter by-pass and to 
allow  filter  leakage  testing  and  safe  filter  changes.  A  combination  of  air  cleaning
methods (e.g., MERV-rated filters and 
supplemental UVGI) may be used to increase effective air cleaning.
 When used, UVGI should be applied in-duct (i.e., inside the ductwork of existing HVAC
systems) or in the upper room 
of the area to be treated to ensure that organisms are inactivated. Upper-air systems
should be designed, installed, and 
monitored to ensure both sufficient irradiation in the upper room to inactivate 
M. tuberculosis and safe levels of UVGI in the 
occupied space.
  To be most effective, environmental controls should be 
installed, operated, and maintained correctly. Ongoing 
maintenance should be part of any written TB infection-control plan. The plan should
outline the responsibility and authority 
for maintenance and address staff training needs.
 Failure to maintain environmental control systems properly has adversely impacted TB
control and prevention efforts 

at facilities throughout the United States. At one hospital, 
improperly functioning ventilation controls were believed to be 
a factor in the transmission of MDR TB disease to four persons (three patients and a
correctional officer), three of whom 
died (80). In three other multihospital studies evaluating the performance of AII rooms,
failure to routinely monitor 
air-pressure  differentials  (whether  manually  or  through  use  of  continuous  monitoring
devices) resulted in a substantial percentage of 
the rooms being under positive pressure 
(81--84).
 Correctional facilities should schedule routine preventive maintenance that covers all
components of the ventilation 
systems  (e.g.,  fans,  filters,  ducts,  supply  diffusers,  and  exhaust  grilles)  and  any
air-cleaning devices in use. Performance 
monitoring 
should be conducted to verify that environmental controls are operating as designed.
Performance monitoring should 
include  1)  directional  airflow  assessments  using  smoke  tubes  and  use  of  pressure
monitoring devices sensitive to pressures at 
0.001  inch  of  water  gauge  and  2)  measurement  of  supply  and  exhaust  airflows  to
compare with recommended air change rates 
for  the  respective  areas  of  the  facility.  Records  should  be  kept  to  document  all
preventive maintenance and repairs.
 Standard procedures should be established to ensure that 
1) maintenance staff notify infection-control 
personnel before performing maintenance on ventilation systems servicing 

inmate-care areas and 2) infection-control staff 
request assistance from maintenance personnel in checking the 
operational status of AII cells and local exhaust devices (e.g., 
booths, hoods, and tents) before use. A protocol that is well written and followed will
help to prevent unnecessary exposures 
of  correctional  facility  staff  and  inmates  to  infectious  aerosols.  Proper  labeling  of
ventilation system components (e.g., 
ducts,  fans,  and  filters)  will  help  identify  air-flow  paths.  Clearly  labeling  which  fan
services a given area will help prevent 
accidental shutdowns (85). In addition, provisions should be made for emergency power
to avoid interruptions in the performance 
of essential environmental controls during a power failure.
  Respiratory protection is used when administrative (i.e., identification and isolation of
infectious TB patients) 
and environmental controls alone have not reduced the risk for infection with 
M. tuberculosis to an acceptable level. The use 
of  respiratory  protection  is  most  appropriate  in  specific  settings  and  situations  within
correctional facilities. For 
example,  protection  is  warranted  for  inmates  and  facility  staff  when  they  enter  AII
rooms, transport infectious inmates, and 
participate in cough-inducing procedures.
 Respirators  should  be  selected  from  those  approved  by  CDC/National  Institute  for
Occupational Safety and 
Health  (NIOSH)  under  the  provisions  of  Title  42,  Part  84  of  the  Code  of  Federal
Regulations 
(86). Decisions regarding which respirator is appropriate for a particular situation and
setting should be made on the basis of a risk assessment of the 

likelihood for TB transmission.** For correctional facilities, a CDC/NIOSH-approved N95
air-purifying respirator will provide 
adequate  respiratory  protection  in  the  majority  of  situations  that  require  the  use  of
respirators. If a higher level of respiratory 
protection  is  warranted,  additional  information  on  other  classes  of  air-purifying
respirators and powered air-purifying respirators 
(PAPRs) is available (71). The overall effectiveness of respiratory protection is affected
by 1) the level of respiratory protection 
selected  (i.e.,  the  assigned  protection  factor),  2)  the  fitting  characteristics  of  the
respirator model, 3) the care taken in donning 
the respirator, and 4) the effectiveness of the respiratory protection program, including
fit testing and worker training.
  All  facilities  should  develop,  implement,  and  maintain  a  respiratory-protection
program for health-care workers or 
other  staff  who  use  respiratory  protection.  Respiratory-protection  programs  are
required for facilities covered by the 
U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
(71,87--89). The key elements of a respiratory protection 
program include 1) assignment of responsibility, 2) training, and 3) fit testing 
(71,87,90,91). All correctional facility staff who 
use respirators for protection against infection with 
M. tuberculosis must participate in the facility's respiratory protection 
program  (e.g.,  understand  their  responsibilities,  receive  training,  receive  medical
clearance, and engage in fit testing) 
(71). In addition to staff members, visitors to inmates with TB disease should be offered
respirators to wear while in AII rooms and instructed 
on proper use. Certain regular visitors (e.g., law enforcement officials, social workers,

ministers and other religious 
representatives, and attorneys and other legal staff) might be there in an occupational
capacity. Each facility, regardless of TB risk 
classification  (i.e.,  minimal  or  nonminimal),  should  develop  a  policy  on  the  use  of
respirators by visitors of 
patients.
  Recommended precautions to take when transporting 
patients between facilities have been published 
(71). Patients with suspected or confirmed infectious TB disease should be transported
in an ambulance whenever possible. The 
ambulance ventilation system should be operated in the nonrecirculating mode and the
maximum amount of outdoor air be provided 
to 
facilitate  dilution.  If  the  vehicle  has  a  rear  exhaust  fan,  it  should  be  used  during
transport. If the vehicle is equipped with 
a supplemental recirculating ventilation unit that passes air through HEPA filters before
returning it to the vehicle, this 
unit should be used to increase the number of ACH. Airflow should be from the cab (i.e.,
front of vehicle) over the patient and 
out the rear exhaust fan. If an ambulance is not used, the ventilation system for the
vehicle should bring in as much outdoor air 
as  possible,  and  the  system  should  be  set  to  nonrecirculating.  If  possible,  the  cab
should be physically isolated from the rest of 
the vehicle, and the patient should be placed in the rear seat. Drivers or other persons
who are transporting patients 
with suspected or confirmed infectious TB disease in an enclosed vehicle should wear at

least an N95 disposable respirator. If 
the  patient  has  signs  or  symptoms  of  infectious  TB  disease  (i.e.,  positive  AFB
sputum-smear 
result), consideration might be given to having the patient wear a surgical or procedure
mask, if possible, during transport, in waiting areas, or when others 
are present.
  The  principles  of  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  LTBI  and  TB  disease  discussed  in  this
section are guidelines and not meant 
to substitute for clinical experience and judgment. Medical providers not familiar with
the management of LTBI and TB 
disease should consult a person with expertise. All facilities' local operations procedures
should include plans for consultation 
with and referral to persons with expertise in TB and should include criteria delineating
when consultation and 
referral are indicated.
 Although  the  index  of  suspicion  for  TB  disease  varies  by  individual  risk  factors  and
prevalence of TB in the 
population  served  by  the  correctional  facility,  correctional  facilities  typically  are
considered higher-risk settings (see 
Screening). A diagnosis of TB disease should be considered for any 
patient who has a persistent cough (i.e., one lasting 
>3 weeks) or other signs or symptoms compatible with TB disease (e.g., hemoptysis,
night sweats, weight loss, anorexia, and fever). 
Diagnostic  tests  for  TB  include  the  TST,  QFT-G,  chest  radiography,  and  laboratory
examination of sputum samples or other body 
tissues and fluids.  Persons exposed to inmates with TB disease might become latently
infected with 

M.  tuberculosis  depending  on  host  immunity  and  the  degree  and  duration  of
exposure. Therefore, the treatment of persons with TB disease plays a key role in 
TB control by stopping transmission and preventing 
potentially infectious cases from occurring 
(92). LTBI is an asymptomatic condition that can be diagnosed by the TST or QFT-G.
  A baseline screening TST result of >10 mm induration is considered positive for the
majority of correctional facility 
staff  and  inmates,  and  these  persons  should  be  referred  for  medical  and  diagnostic
evaluation. However, for correctional 
facility staff and inmates who have had a known exposure in a correctional facility (i.e.,
close contact with an inmate or staff 
member with infectious TB disease) after having a previous (baseline) TST value of 0
mm, TST results of 
>5  mm  should  be  considered  positive  and  interpreted  as  a  new  infection.
Correctional facility staff and inmates with a screening baseline TST result of 
>1  mm,  but  <10  mm,  who  are  subsequently  exposed  to  TB  disease,  should  be
considered newly infected if they have TST 
values increase by >10 mm on retest 
(Table 3). For example, a baseline TST result with 8 mm induration and a repeat TST
result 
1 year later with 18 mm induration would indicate a new infection. However, a repeat
TST result with 12 mm 
induration would not indicate a new infection.
 When  decisions  are  made  for  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  LTBI  and  choosing  the
cut-off value for a positive 
reaction, certain risk factors (e.g., immunocompromising conditions and known contact
with a TB patient) should be 

assessed. Correctional facility staff and inmates who have TST indurations of 5--9 mm
should be advised that their results might be 
an indication for treatment under certain conditions. 
  Interpretation  of  the  TST  might  be  complicated  by  previous  vaccination  with  BCG,
anergy, and the "boosting" 
effect.  Detailed  recommendations  describing  how  the  TST  should  be  interpreted  in
relation to these possible confounders have 
been published (64,93).
  A correctional facility staff member or inmate who refuses testing for 
M. tuberculosis infection should first be 
educated regarding the importance of routine screening of correctional facility staff and
inmates. If the person continues to refuse 
to have a TST, the option may be offered for the person to be tested using the QFT-G
test (and vice versa). The decision to 
offer  an  alternative  test  depends  on  the  reason  for  refusal  and  should  be  consistent
with the patient's underlying wishes 
(e.g.,  offering  QFT-G  in  place  of  TST  is  acceptable  if  the  patient  objects  to  having
injection of a substance but agrees to 
having blood drawn).
  Interpretation  of  QFT-G  data  is  initially  performed  electronically;  an  approved
interpretation method is 
automatically performed by the software supplied by the manufacturer 
(Table 4) (58). A complete description of the test's interpretation 
is included in the product insert.
 Persons who have a positive QFT-G result should be 
referred for a medical and diagnostic evaluation. On serial testing, 
a person with QFT-G results changing from negative to positive should be referred for

medical and diagnostic evaluation 
and considered to be a QFT-G converter. Risk factors (e.g., the facility's prevalence of
TB disease and personal risk factors) 
should be assessed when making decisions about the diagnosis and treatment of LTBI.
  Persons  with  Suspected  Pulmonary  TB   Multiple  types  of  abnormalities
demonstrated on chest 
radiographs are strongly suggestive of pulmonary TB 
disease, including upper-lobe infiltration, cavitation, and pleural 
effusion. Infiltrates can be patchy or nodular and observed in 
the apical or subapical posterior upper lobes or superior segment of the lower lobes. If
radiographic or clinical findings 
are
 consistent
 with
 TB
 disease,
 further
 studies
 (e.g.,
 medical
 evaluation,
mycobacteriologic examinations of sputa or tissue, 
and comparison of current and prior chest radiographs) should be performed 
(65). Persons with TB pleural effusions might 
have concurrent unsuspected pulmonary or laryngeal TB disease 
(94). These patients should be considered infectious 
until  pulmonary  and  laryngeal  TB  disease  is  excluded.  Patients  with  suspected
extrapulmonary TB disease also should be 
suspected of having pulmonary TB until concomitant pulmonary disease is excluded.
 The  radiographic  presentation  of  pulmonary  TB  in  HIV-infected  persons  might  be
atypical. Apical cavitary disease is 
less common among such patients than HIV-negative patients. More common findings
among HIV-infected persons 
are  infiltrates  in  any  lung  zone,  mediastinal  or  hilar  adenopathy,  or,  in  rare  cases,  a
normal chest radiograph 
(65,95--97).

 Persons with LTBI  To exclude pulmonary TB disease, a chest radiograph is 
indicated for all persons in whom LTBI is diagnosed. If 
chest radiographs do not indicate pulmonary TB, and no symptoms consistent with TB
disease are present, persons with 
positive  test  results  for  TB  infection  should  be  considered  for  treatment  for  LTBI.
Persons with LTBI typically have normal 
chest radiographs, although they might have abnormalities suggestive of previous TB
disease or other pulmonary conditions. 
In certain patients with TB symptoms, pulmonary infiltrates might be apparent on chest
computed tomography scan 
or magnetic resonance imaging study but not on chest radiograph. Previous, healed TB
disease typically produces 
radiographic findings that differ from those associated with current TB disease. These
findings include nodules, fibrotic scars, 
calcified granulomas, and apical pleural thickening. Nevertheless, a chest radiograph by
itself cannot be used to distinguish 
between current and healed TB. Nodules and fibrotic 
scars might contain slowly multiplying tubercle bacilli and pose substantial risk 
for 
progression  to  TB  disease.  Calcified  nodular  lesions  (i.e.,  calcified  granulomas)  and
apical pleural thickening indicate lower 
risk for progression to TB disease (65).
 Pregnant Women  Because TB disease is dangerous to both the mother and the fetus,
a pregnant woman who has a positive TST 
or  QFT-G  result  or  who  is  suspected  of  having  TB  disease  should  receive  a  chest
radiograph (with shielding consistent with 

safety guidelines) as soon as feasible. If symptoms or other high-risk conditions (e.g.,
HIV infection) are identified, a 
chest radiograph might have to be performed during the first trimester of pregnancy 
(64,65,98).
  Sputum examination is a key diagnostic procedure for pulmonary TB disease 
(93) and is indicated for the following 
inmates and correctional facility staff:
 Specimen  Collection    Persons  requiring  smear-  and  culture-sputum  examination
should submit at least three sputum specimens 
(collected 8--24 hours apart, with at least one specimen collected in the early morning) 
(71,99). Specimens should be collected in a sputum induction booth or in an AII room.
In 
resource-limited settings without environmental containment, collection 
is  safer  when  performed  outdoors.  Patients  should  be  instructed  how  to  produce  an
adequate sputum specimen, and a 
health-care  professional  should  supervise  and  observe  the  collection  of  sputum,  if
possible 
(93).  For  patients  who  are  unable  to  produce  an  adequate  sputum  specimen,
expectoration might be induced by inhalation of an aerosol of warm, 
hypertonic saline (71).
  Detection  of  AFB  in  stained  smears  by  microscopy  can  provide  the  first
mycobacteriologic indication of TB disease. 
A positive result for AFB in a sputum smear is predictive of 
increased infectiousness; however, negative AFB 
sputum-smear results do not exclude a diagnosis of TB disease if clinical suspicion is
high. In 2002, only 63% of U.S. patients 
with reported positive sputum cultures had positive AFB sputum smears 

(100).
 Although  smears  allow  for  the  detection  of  mycobacteria,  definitive  identification,
strain typing, and 
drug-susceptibility testing of M. 
tuberculosis can be performed only via culture 
(93). A culture of sputum or other clinical specimen that contains 
M. tuberculosis provides a definitive diagnosis of TB disease. In the majority of cases,
identification of 
M.  tuberculosis  and  drug-susceptibility  results  are  available  within  28  days  using
recommended rapid methods (e.g., liquid culture and DNA probes). 
A negative culture result is obtained in approximately 14% of patients with confirmed
pulmonary TB disease 
(100) . Testing sputum with certain techniques (e.g., nucleic acid amplification [NAA])
facilitates the rapid detection and identification of
M.  tuberculosis,  but  should  not  replace  culture  and  drug-susceptibility  testing  in
patients with suspected TB disease 
(88,101,102).  Recommendations  for  use  and  interpretation  of  NAA  tests  in  the
diagnosis of TB disease have been published 
previously (101,102).
 Laboratories should report positive smear results within 
24 hours of collection and positive cultures within 24 hours of 
the  notation  of  the  positive  culture.  Drug-susceptibility  tests  should  be  performed  on
initial isolates from all patients to assist 
in the identification of an effective anti-TB regimen. Drug-susceptibility tests should be
repeated if 1) sputum 
specimens continue to be culture-positive 3 months after initiation of treatment or if 2)
persons whose cultures had converted to 

negative subsequently revert to positive 
(65,93).
  Treatment for LTBI is essential to controlling and eliminating TB disease in the United
States because it 
substantially reduces the risk that TB infection will progress to TB disease 
(23). Certain persons are at high risk for developing TB 
disease  once  infected,  and  every  effort  should  be  made  to  begin  these  persons  on  a
standard LTBI treatment regimen and to 
ensure that they complete the entire course of treatment for LTBI . Before treatment for
LTBI is started, TB disease should be 
ruled  out  by  history,  medical  examination,  chest  radiography,  and  when  indicated,
mycobacteriologic studies.
  Correctional  facility  staff  and  inmates  in  the  following  high-risk  groups  should  be
given treatment for LTBI if their 
reaction to the TST is >5 mm, regardless of age 
(64,65):
 All other correctional facility staff and inmates should be considered for treatment of
LTBI if their TST results 
are  >10  mm  induration.  If  QFT-G  is  used,  any  correctional  facility  staff  member  or
inmate with a positive QFT-G result 
should  be  considered  for  LTBI  treatment.  Decisions  regarding  initiation  of  LTBI
treatment should include consideration of 
the  likelihood  of  the  patient  continuing  and  completing  LTBI  treatment  under
supervision if released from the facility 
before  the  treatment  regimen  is  completed.   Persons  with  previously  positive  TST
results who have previously completed treatment for LTBI (i.e.,
>6 months of isoniazid, 4 months of rifampin, or another regimen) do not need to be

treated again unless concern exists that reinfection 
has  occurred.  Other  persons  who  might  be  poor  candidates  for  treatment  of  LTBI
include those with a previous history of 
liver injury or a history of excessive alcohol consumption; 
active hepatitis and end-stage liver disease are relative 
contraindications to the use of isoniazid or pyrazinamide for treatment of LTBI 
(64,103). If the decision is made to treat such patients, 
baseline and follow-up monitoring of serum aminotransaminases are recommended.
  Standard regimens have been developed for the treatment of LTBI 
(Table 5). The preferred treatment for LTBI is 9 months 
of  daily  isoniazid  or  biweekly  dosing  administered  by  DOT.  Although  regimens  are
broadly 
applicable, modifications should be considered for certain populations (e.g., 
patients with HIV infection) and when drug resistance 
is suspected.  Reports of severe liver injury and death associated with the combination
of rifampin and pyrazinamide for treatment 
of  LTBI  prompted  ATS  and  CDC  to  revise  previous  recommendations.  These
recommendations now state that this 
regimen typically should not be offered for the treatment of LTBI 
(64,103--107). If the potential benefits substantially outweigh 
the  demonstrated  risk  for  severe  liver  injury  and  death  associated  with  this  regimen
and the patient has no contraindications 
this  regimen  may  be  considered;  a  physician  with  experience  treating  LTBI  and  TB
disease should be consulted before use of 
this  regimen  (103).  Clinicians  should  continue  the  appropriate  use  of  rifampin  and
pyrazinamide in standard multidrug 
anti-TB regimens for the treatment of TB disease 

(65).
 For  all  LTBI  treatment  regimens,  nonadherence  to  intermittent  dosing  results  in  a
larger proportion of total doses 
missed  than  daily  dosing;  therefore,  all  patients  on  intermittent  treatment  should
receive DOT. In addition, DOT should be 
used with daily dosing of LTBI treatment whenever feasible. Patients with the highest
priority for DOT are those at the highest 
risk for progression from LTBI to TB disease, including 
persons with HIV infection and persons who are recent contacts 
of infectious patients with pulmonary TB.   Contacts of patients with drug-susceptible TB
disease who once tested negative but subsequently have a positive TST 
result (i.e., >5 mm) should be evaluated for treatment of LTBI. The majority of persons
who are infected will have a positive 
TST  result  within  6  weeks  of  exposure;  therefore,  contacts  of  patients  with
drug-susceptible TB disease who have initial 
negative TSTs should be retested 8--10 weeks after the end of exposure to a patient
with suspected or confirmed TB disease 
(108). Persons with TB infection should be advised that they can be re-infected with 
M. tuberculosis if re-exposed 
(109--111). If they have not been treated previously, HIV-infected persons (regardless
of TST result or previous LTBI treatment history), 
persons  receiving  immunosuppressive  therapy  (regardless  of  TST  result  or  previous
LTBI treatment history), and persons with 
a known previous (to current exposure) positive TST also should be considered for LTBI
treatment.
 Treatment  of  LTBI  should  not  be  started  until  a  diagnosis  of  TB  disease  has  been
excluded. If the presence of TB disease 

is  uncertain  because  of  an  equivocal  chest  radiograph,  a  standard  multidrug  anti-TB
therapy might be started and adjusted 
as  necessary,  depending  on  the  results  of  sputum  cultures,  drug-susceptibility  tests,
and clinical response 
(65).  If  cultures  are  obtained  without  initiating  therapy  for  TB  disease,  treatment  for
LTBI should not be initiated until all cultures are reported 
as negative, which might take 6--8 weeks.
  Treatment for LTBI caused by drug-resistant M. 
tuberculosis organisms is complex and should be conducted in 
consultation  with  the  local  health  department's  TB  control  program  and  persons  with
expertise in the medical management of 
drug-resistant TB. Often this will require waiting for results of susceptibility testing of
the isolate from the presumed source 
patient.  Treatment  should  be  guided  by  in  vitro  susceptibility  test  results  from  the
isolate to which the patient was 
exposed (65,112,113).
  Routine laboratory monitoring during treatment of LTBI is indicated only for patients
with abnormal baseline tests and 
for persons at risk for hepatic disease. Baseline laboratory testing is indicated only for
persons infected with HIV, 
pregnant  women,  women  in  the  immediate  postpartum  period  (typically  within  3
months of delivery), persons with a history of 
liver disease, persons who use alcohol regularly, and persons who have or who are at
risk for chronic liver disease 
(64).
 All patients should undergo clinical monitoring at least monthly. This monitoring should
include 1) a brief 

clinical assessment regarding the signs of hepatitis (i.e., nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain, jaundice, and yellow or brown urine) 
and  2)  education  about  the  adverse  effects  of  the  drug(s)  and  the  need  for  prompt
cessation of treatment and clinical 
evaluation should adverse effects occur. All aspects of the clinical encounter should be
conducted in private and in the patient's 
primary  language.   Severe  adverse  events  associated  with  the  administration  of
tuberculin antigen or treatment of LTBI or TB disease 
(e.g.,  those  resulting  in  hospitalization  or  death)  should  be  reported  to  MedWatch,
FDA's Safety Information and Adverse 
Event Reporting Program at telephone 800-FDA-1088, by facsimile at 800-FDA-0178, or
via the Internet by sending Report 
Form  3500  (available  at  http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/safety/3500.pdf).  Instructions
regarding the types of adverse events 
that  should  be  reported  are  included  on  MedWatch  report  forms.  In  addition,  severe
adverse effects associated with LTBI 
treatment should be reported to CDC's Division of Tuberculosis Elimination at telephone
404-639-8118.
  A decision to initiate treatment (i.e., combination anti-TB chemotherapy) should be
made on the basis of 
epidemiologic  information;  clinical,  pathological,  and  radiographic  findings;  and  the
results of microscopic examination of 
AFB-stained sputum smears and cultures for mycobacteria. A positive AFB-smear result
provides strong inferential evidence for 
the diagnosis of TB, and combination chemotherapy should be initiated promptly unless
other strong evidence against 
the  diagnosis  of  TB  disease  is  present  (e.g.,  a  negative  NAA  test).  If  the  diagnosis  is

confirmed by isolation of 
M. tuberculosis or a positive NAA test, treatment should be continued until a standard
course of therapy is completed. Because as few as 50% 
of patients with positive sputum culture results for 
M. tuberculosis will have negative sputum AFB-smear results 
(93), when initial 
AFB-smear  results  are  negative,  empiric  therapy  for  TB  is  indicated  if  the  clinical
suspicion for TB disease is high. 
Regardless of the decision to begin anti-TB treatment, diagnoses other than TB should
be considered and appropriate 
evaluations  undertaken  in  patients  with  negative  AFB-smear  results.  A  diagnosis  of
culture-negative pulmonary TB can be made if 
sputum cultures are negative, the TST result is positive (in this circumstance, a reaction
of 
>5 mm induration is considered positive), 
a clinical or radiographic response is observed 2 months after the initiation of therapy,
and no other diagnosis has 
been established. An adequate regimen for culture-negative pulmonary TB includes an
additional 2 months of isoniazid 
and rifampin to complete 4 months of treatment 
(65). If no clinical or radiographic response is 
observed  by  2  months,  treatment  can  be  stopped,  and  other  diagnoses  (including
inactive TB) should be considered. If AFB-smear results are negative, 
and  suspicion  for  TB  disease  is  low,  treatment  can  be  deferred  until  the  results  of
mycobacterial cultures are known and 
a comparison chest radiograph is available (typically at 2 months). Among persons who

have not begun treatment and in 
whom suspicion of TB is low, treatment of LTBI should be considered if 1) cultures are
negative, 2) the TST result is positive 
(>5  mm  induration),  and  3)  the  chest  radiograph  is  unchanged  after  2  months.  A
person with TB expertise should be 
consulted for unusual or complex situations.
 Individualized case management should be provided for all patients with TB disease 
(114--116). In addition, patient management should be coordinated with officials of the
local or state health department; suspected or confirmed TB 
cases  should  be  reported  to  the  local  or  state  health  department  in  accordance  with
laws and regulations. Regimens for treating 
TB disease should contain multiple drugs to which the 
organisms are susceptible. For persons with TB disease, treatment with 
a  single  drug  can  lead  to  the  development  of  mycobacterial  resistance  to  that  drug.
Similarly, adding a single drug to a 
failing  anti-TB  regimen  is  not  recommended  because  it  can  lead  to  resistance  to  the
added drug 
(65).
 For the majority of patients, the preferred regimen for treating TB disease consists of
an initial 2-month phase of 
isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, followed by a continuation phase of
isoniazid and rifampin lasting 
>4 months, for a minimum total treatment period of 6 months 
(Tables 6 and 7). The decision to stop therapy should be made on the basis of 
the number of doses taken within a maximum period (not simply a 6-month period) 
(65).  Persons  with  cavitary  pulmonary  TB  disease  and  positive  cultures  of  sputum
specimens at the completion of 2 months of therapy should receive a longer, 

7-month continuation phase of therapy (total duration: 
9 months) because of the substantially higher rate of relapse among persons 
with this type of TB disease (65).
 If interruptions in TB therapy occur, the decision should be made whether to restart a
complete course of treatment 
or continue the regimen as originally intended. In the majority of instances, the earlier
the break in therapy and the longer 
its  duration,  the  more  serious  the  effect  and  the  greater  the  need  to  restart  the
treatment from the beginning. 
Continuous  treatment  is  more  important  in  the  initial  phase  of  therapy,  when  the
bacillary burden is highest and the chance of 
developing drug resistance is greatest. Although no evidence on which to base detailed
recommendations exists, examples of 
practical  algorithms  for  managing  interruptions  in  therapy  have  been  described
previously 
(65).
 For  HIV-infected  persons  who  are  receiving  antiretroviral  therapy,  TB  treatment
regimens might need to be 
altered. Whenever possible, the care of persons with concomitant TB and HIV should be
provided by or in consultation with 
persons with expertise in the management of both TB and HIV-related disease 
(65). To prevent the emergence of rifampin 
resistance, persons with TB, HIV, and CD4+ T-lymphocyte cell counts <100 
cells/mm3 should not be treated with highly 
intermittent (i.e., once- or twice-weekly) regimens. These 
patients should instead receive daily therapy during the 
intensive phase (i.e., first 2 months) and receive daily dosing or 3 doses per week by

DOT during the continuation phase 
(117).  Antiretroviral  therapy  should  not  be  withheld  because  the  patient  is  being
treated for TB if it is otherwise indicated. Nevertheless, beginning 
both  antiretroviral  therapy  and  combination  chemotherapy  for  TB  at  nearly  the  same
time is not advisable. Although data on 
which  to  base  recommendations  are  limited,  experience  in  the  fields  of  HIV  and  TB
suggests that treatment for TB should 
be initiated first. Delaying the initiation of antiretroviral therapy until 4--8 weeks after
starting anti-TB therapy is 
advantageous  because  it  1)  better  enables  providers  to  ascribe  a  specific  cause  to  a
drug side effect, 2) decreases the severity of 
paradoxical  reactions,  and  3)  decreases  adherence  challenges  for  the  patient.  Until
controlled studies have been conducted that evaluate 
the optimal time for starting antiretroviral therapy in patients with HIV infection and TB,
this decision should be 
individualized on the basis of 1) the patient's initial response to treatment for TB, 2) the
occurrence of side effects, and 3) the availability 
of  multidrug  antiretroviral  therapy.  Because  drug-drug  interactions  might  be  less
frequent with use of rifabutin, substitution 
of  rifabutin  for  rifampin  might  be  indicated  with  certain  antiretroviral  medications.
Detailed information on TB treatment 
in HIV-infected persons has been published 
(65,107). Updates are posted on the Internet as new findings become available 
(at 
http://www.dhfs.state.wi.us/aids-hiv/resources/overviews/aids_hiv.htm, 
http://www.hiv-druginteractions.org, and 

http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/tb/tb_hiv_drugs/toc.htm).
 
 Drug-susceptibility
 testing
should be performed on all initial isolates from patients with TB disease. When results 
from  drug-susceptibility  tests  become  available,  the  treatment  regimen  should  be
adjusted accordingly 
(65,113,114,118,119) (Tables 6 and 
7).  Medical  providers  treating  patients  with  drug-resistant  TB  disease  should  seek
expert consultation 
and collaborate with the local health department for treatment decisions 
(65).
 The  primary  determinant  of  treatment  outcome  is  patient  adherence  to  the  drug
regimen. Thus, careful attention should 
be paid to measures designed to enable and foster adherence 
(65,119,120). DOT is the preferred treatment strategy for 
all  persons  with  TB  disease  and  high-risk  (e.g.,  HIV  infected)  persons  with  LTBI.  DOT
should be used throughout 
the  entire  course  of  therapy  whenever  feasible.  Practitioners  providing  treatment  to
inmates should coordinate DOT with the 
local health department on an inmate's release. The local health department also may
be involved in monitoring therapy 
for correctional facility staff (65).
  Achieving completion of treatment for LTBI or TB disease often is difficult, particularly
in correctional facilities. Movement 
of inmates both within and outside of correctional systems interferes with continuity of
care and might lead to treatment default 
(121).  Comprehensive  case  management  that  includes  discharge  planning  and
coordination with other correctional facilities and 
health  departments  is  needed  to  ensure  completion  of  therapy  for  patients  with  TB

disease and LTBI 
(42).
 Multiple  studies  have  demonstrated  that  inmates  have  relatively  low  LTBI  treatment
completion rates, particularly those 
in jails who are likely to be released before their therapy has been completed 
(14,28,40,122). For a substantial proportion 
of  inmates,  referrals  for  follow-up  after  release  are  not  made;  of  inmates  whose
appointments are scheduled, 40%--60% will 
not attend their first clinic visit (36,40). Multiple interventions have been attempted to
improve LTBI treatment completion 
in this population, including patient education while in jail, use of incentives, and use of
DOT 
(61,122,123). None of these strategies has had substantial success, although 
patient education and use of DOT have increased completion rates modestly 
in  certain  situations  (61,122).  Active  case  management,  as  recommended  for  TB
disease, should be considered as a next step 
in improving the completion rates for LTBI treatment 
(14,42).
  Correctional facilities should plan for the discharge of 
inmates and other detainees who have confirmed or suspected 
TB disease and those with LTBI who are at high risk for TB disease. Such planning is
crucial to effective local TB control 
efforts within the community to which released inmates 
return. Facilities should ensure that their discharge plan is 
comprehensive  and  effective;  the  process  should  include  1)  collaborating  with  public
health and other community health-care 
professionals,  2)  ensuring  continuity  of  case-management,  and  3)  evaluating

discharge-planning procedures and modifying procedures 
as needed to improve outcomes.   Postconfinement follow-up is a necessary component
of 
TB-control efforts (35,124). Effective discharge 
planning requires collaboration between corrections and medical staff (both intra- and
inter-facility), and with public health 
and community-based service organizations 
(37). Correctional facilities and public health departments should overcome 
multiple obstacles associated with postdetention follow-up 
(125), including
 Collaboration is essential to ensure that TB-control efforts are undertaken in the most
cost-effective manner. 
Coordination  between  the  correctional  facility  and  the  public  health  department
maximizes the effectiveness of any efforts begun in 
a  correctional  facility  (126),  and  linking  released  detainees  to  the  public  health-care
system might improve 
post-release adherence (35) and reduce recidivism 
(127,128). The types of relationships forged will depend on the assessment of the 
TB risk in the facility and the community.
  Comprehensive discharge planning is an important component of case management
and is essential for ensuring 
the  continuity  of  TB  management  and  therapy  among  persons  with  TB  disease  and
LTBI. Following release, former inmates 
face  housing,  employment,  and  other  crises  concerning  basic  needs  that  often  take
priority over their health. Multiple 
reports from the United States and other countries support the use of comprehensive
discharge planning in TB control 

efforts  (42,129,130).  Comprehensive  discharge  planning  should  be  implemented  for
inmates with confirmed TB disease, 
suspected  TB  disease,  and  LTBI  who  also  are  at  high  risk  for  TB  disease.   Discharge
planning  for  persons  with  LTBI  who  are  considered  at  high  risk  for  developing  TB
disease is critical if treatment 
is  begun  in  the  correctional  facility.  Starting  all  inmates  at  high  risk  on  LTBI  therapy
might not be feasible while they are in 
the  correctional  facility,  and  the  policy  determining  which  risk  groups  to  start  on
treatment should be made in collaboration 
with public health personnel. Collaboration ensures 
appropriate communication and adequate resources for treatment after transfer 
to another facility or after release to the community. At minimum, all inmates who have
begun therapy for LTBI in a 
correctional  facility  should  be  given  community  contact  information  for  follow-up  and
continuity of care. Ideally, all inmates demonstrated 
to  be  infected  with  TB  should  be  considered  for  therapy,  and  discharge  planning  to
facilitate therapy should be 
comprehensive  (124).  Because  of  high  recidivism  rates,  discharge-planning  efforts
should begin in the detention phase and continue in the 
post-detention  phase  to  ensure  continuity  of  care  as  inmates  move  among  different
facilities and between correctional facilities and 
the community.
  Initiate  Discharge  Planning  Early   To  ensure  uninterrupted  treatment,  discharge
planning for inmates who receive a diagnosis of TB disease should begin 
as soon as possible after diagnosis (131). Corrections or health services administrators
(or their designees) should assign staff 
to notify the public health department of inmates receiving treatment for TB disease or

LTBI. Inmates with TB disease should 
be interviewed while still incarcerated (ideally by public health staff) to enable facility
administrators to assess and plan for 
the appropriate support and referrals that will be needed after discharge 
(131). Such personnel also should communicate 
with other facilities in the event of transfers of 
inmates.
 Provide  Case  Management   To  ensure  continuity  of  care,  all  correctional  facilities
should assign personnel (preferably health-care professionals) to 
serve  as  case  managers.  These  managers  should  be  responsible  for  conducting
discharge planning in the facility, which 
entails coordinating follow-up and communicating treatment histories with public health
department and other 
health-care counterparts within the community 
(42). In addition, case managers should employ strategies (e.g., mental-illness triage 
and referral, substance-abuse assessment and treatment, and prerelease appointments
for medical care) to help former inmates 
meet basic survival needs on release. The role of case manager should be assigned to a
facility staff member who is capable 
of establishing good rapport with inmates; an effective case manager might be capable
of persuading TB patients who are 
being  released  into  the  community  to  supply  accurate  information  needed  to  ensure
follow-up care.
 The following factors should be considered when planning community discharge of
an inmate receiving treatment for 
TB (132):
 Obtain  Detailed  Contact  Information   To  facilitate  the  process  of  locating  former

inmates, detailed information should be collected from all inmates with 
TB disease or LTBI for whom release is anticipated, including 
1) names, addresses, and telephone numbers of friends, 
relatives, and landlords; 2) anticipated place of residence; and 
3) areas typically frequented (e.g., restaurants, gyms, parks, 
and community centers) (61,133). Inmates also should complete a 
release form authorizing health department personnel 
to contact worksites, family members, corrections staff 
(parole officers), and public and private treatment centers. Inmates 
might give aliases or incorrect contact information because of fear of incrimination or
deportation. The use of an alias can be 
a barrier to continuity of care on reentry to a correctional facility.
 Assess  and  Plan  for  Substance  Abuse  and  Mental  Health  Treatment  and  for  Other
Social Services
 Substance abuse and other comorbid mental health conditions should be considered
when developing a 
comprehensive discharge plan. Addiction affects health care, medication 
adherence, housing opportunities, social relationships, 
and employment and might be the greatest barrier to continuity of care for TB 
(134). Mental illness can be a barrier when community service providers have not been
trained to interact with mentally ill patients. Persons who are mentally ill 
might  have  difficulties  keeping  medical  appointments.  Collaboration  between
corrections and health department personnel 
can  facilitate  the  placement  of  former  inmates  in  substance  abuse  or  mental-health
treatment programs to 
improve the likelihood of social stabilization and continuity of care 
(134,135).

 Other  social  issues  present  barriers  to  released  inmates.  Loss  of  health  insurance
benefits while incarcerated is common, 
and  former  inmates  might  be  required  to  wait  30--365  days  after  release  to  become
re-eligible for benefits 
(136,137).  Certain  correctional  facilities  have  agreements  with  local  Social  Security
Administration field offices to facilitate swift reactivation 
of  these  benefits  (138);  creation  of  and  training  in  the  use  of  such  agreements  are
encouraged. Ideally, on entry into 
the correctional system, public benefits would be suspended, rather than terminated,
and reactivated on release to eliminate 
gaps in coverage. Application for public benefits and 
insurance should be incorporated into the discharge planning phase 
whenever  possible.  If  the  inmate  is  likely  to  have  limited  access  to  care  because  of
inability to pay for services on release, 
documentation should be made and another treatment mechanism identified 
(139).
 Make Arrangements for Postrelease Follow-Up  Before release, the inmate should be
introduced (preferably face to face) to the employee from the community treatment 
agency who is responsible for community-based treatment and care 
(139). When release dates are known, setting 
post-release appointments has been demonstrated to improve compliance 
(128,134,140). Patients with TB disease should be given a supply 
of  medication  at  discharge  adequate  to  last  until  their  next  medical  appointment.
Discharge planners can work with 
advocacy groups or private or government-funded programs to 
facilitate a safe, supported transition into the community 
(61).

 Make Provisions for Unplanned Release and Unplanned Transfers
 Administrative  procedures  should  be  in  place  for  unscheduled  discharge  of  inmates
who are being managed or treated 
for TB (36,141). Reporting requirements for inmates with TB disease who are released
or transferred to another facility 
vary  among  states  and  jurisdictions.  Despite  mandatory  notification  policies,
notification of public health officials varies 
from 87%--92% for inmates with TB disease 
(37,126) to only 17% for inmates with LTBI 
(36,37). Correctional facility staff responsible for health department notification should
relay information about all scheduled and unscheduled releases as 
it becomes available. All TB information concerning persons who are being transferred
to other correctional settings should 
be  provided  to  the  receiving  facility.  In  addition,  inmates  should  be  given  a  written
summary or discharge card outlining 
their  treatment  plan  to  ensure  continuity  of  care  in  case  of  unplanned  and
unanticipated release 
(131,142). Inmates with TB disease who are eligible for release or transfer to another
medical or correctional facility but continue to be infectious should remain 
in airborne precautions during and after transfer until noninfectious 
(132).
 Provide Education and Counseling  Patient education and documentation of education
in the correctional facility is critical; multiple misconceptions 
persist among inmates and facility staff regarding means of transmission, differences
between infection and disease, and methods 
of  prevention  and  treatment  for  TB  (143).  Persons  receiving  treatment  should  be
counseled about the importance of adhering 

to the treatment plan (131) as a measure to 
improve postrelease follow-up (61). Education should be 
delivered in the inmate's first preferred language and should be culturally sensitive with
respect to ethnicity, sex, and age 
(135,144--147).  The  inmate  should  be  actively  involved  in  all  education  sessions  to
encourage communication regarding previous transition 
experiences  (e.g.,  the  inmate's  treatment  motivations  and  any  positive  or  negative
experiences with specific providers) 
(141). Inmates with LTBI who have not been started on therapy should be counseled on
their risk factors, encouraged to visit the public 
health department, and provided with information about access to care after release.
  DOT for TB disease or LTBI in the correctional setting provides an opportunity for
educating and counseling inmates 
and for establishing a routine of medication administration. The effect, if any, of DOT on
postrelease behavior has not 
been evaluated formally, but this practice might enhance 
adherence (122).
  Case-management strategies begun in the correctional 
facility should be continued after release for former inmates 
with confirmed or suspected TB disease and those with LTBI who are at high risk for
progression to TB disease. Incentives 
and enablers (see Glossary) have improved adherence in 
incarcerated (35,60,61) and nonincarcerated 
(148,149)  populations,  and  incentives  combined  with  education  and  counseling
optimize both short- and long-term adherence 
(40,60,61,150).  Case  management  that  takes  into  account  cultural  differences  and
addresses not only TB-control matters but patient-defined 

needs (particularly among foreign-born persons) results in improved completion rates
for LTBI therapy 
(145).  Case  management  by  health  department  personnel  after  release  is  critical  for
continuity of care in the event of reincarceration. The provision 
of  follow-up  information  from  local  health  departments  and  community-based
organizations back to corrections staff is 
helpful in determining whether discharge planning is effective.
  Background  Persons with TB disease detained by ICE officers are a 
potential public health threat because they typically are 
highly  mobile,  likely  to  leave  and  reenter  the  United  States  before  completion  of  TB
therapy, and at high risk for 
interrupting treatment (151). Therefore, ensuring treatment of such 
detainees is important to the national strategy to eliminate TB in 
the United States (32,152).
 In  March  2003,  the  detention  and  removal  functions  of  the  former  Immigration  and
Naturalization Service (INS) 
were transferred from the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) to the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security (DHS). ICE is 
a division of DHS and detains approximately 200,000 persons annually while enforcing
immigration law. ICE detainees 
are  screened  for  TB  disease  at  service  processing  centers,  staging  facilities,  contract
detention facilities, and local jails. 
Frequent transfers of ICE detainees between detention facilities are 
common.
 ICE  detention  provides  an  opportunity  to  identify  persons  with  confirmed  and
suspected TB disease and initiate 
treatment, if appropriate. ICE detainees with confirmed or suspected TB disease receive

treatment while they are in custody. 
Presently,  ICE  does  not  deport  detainees  with  known  infectious  TB,  but  such  persons
might be deported when noncontagious, even 
if treatment has not been completed or the final culture and susceptibility results are
pending.
 Discharge  Planning  for  ICE  Detainees   In  May  2004,  ICE  approved  a  policy  to
implement a short-term medical hold of persons with suspected or confirmed 
TB  disease  until  continuity  of  care  is  arranged,  which  affords  the  ICE  health  services
program the time needed to facilitate 
continuity of TB therapy arrangements before the patient's 
release or removal. The ICE health services program seeks to enroll all 
persons 
with confirmed or suspected TB disease in programs that facilitate the continuity of TB
therapy between countries. 
These programs (e.g., CureTB, TB Net, and the 
U.S.-Mexico Binational Tuberculosis Referral and Case Management Project) 
facilitate TB referrals and follow-up for patients 
who move between the United States and other 
countries.   ICE  field  office  directors  may  consider  a  stay  of  removal  for  persons  with
MDR TB or other complicated cases, so they 
can receive and complete treatment in the United States 
before removal. In detention settings in which ICE detainees are 
held,  facility  staff  who  are  responsible  for  TB  communication  should  notify  the  ICE
health services program of persons 
with confirmed or suspected TB disease. Collaboration with 
detention facilities and local and state health departments will 

facilitate  enrollment  in  the  appropriate  continuity  of  care  program  before  transfer,
release, or repatriation. Correctional 
facility staff should identify these patients as ICE detainees when reporting TB cases to
local and state health departments.
  Evaluation  of  a  discharge  planning  program  is  critical  and  should  begin  with  an
assessment of existing programs 
and activities. Program evaluation should be incorporated into the overall correctional
quality improvement/assurance 
program  (153).  Data  from  program  evaluation  studies  should  be  documented  and
published to ensure that correctional facility 
and public health department staff are informed regarding effective measures and the
effective translation of research findings 
into practice (123). Evaluation of discharge planning should include measurements of
  Multiple outbreaks of TB, including those involving MDR TB, have been reported in
prisons and jails, particularly 
among  HIV-infected  inmates  (17,22,45,154).  The  identification  of  a  potentially
infectious case of TB in a correctional facility 
should  always  provoke  a  rapid  response  because  of  the  potential  for  widespread  TB
transmission. A prompt public health response 
in a confined setting can prevent a TB outbreak or contain one that has already begun 
(16,21,155).
 The overall goal of a TB contact investigation is to interrupt transmission of 
M.  tuberculosis.  Ongoing  transmission  is  prevented  by  1)  identifying,  isolating,  and
treating persons with TB disease (source and secondary-case patients) and 
2)  identifying  infected  contacts  of  the  source  patient  and  secondary  patients  and
providing them with a complete course 
of treatment for LTBI. The contact investigation can serve to educate corrections staff

and inmates about the risk, treatment, 
and prevention of TB in correctional facilities; inform staff and inmates regarding the
importance of engaging in 
recommended TB-control practices and procedures within the correctional system; and
emphasize the importance of completion of 
therapy for persons with TB disease and LTBI.  Because decisions involved in planning
and prioritizing contact investigations in correctional facilities are seldom simple, 
a multidisciplinary team is preferable. Health departments 
often can help correctional facilities in planning, implementing, 
and evaluating a TB contact investigation.
 Data  collection  and  management  is  an  essential  component  of  a  successful
investigation 
(21,36). It requires a systematic approach to collecting, organizing, and analyzing 
TB-associated data. As part of the contact investigation, all staff 
and  investigation  personnel  should  adopt  a  uniform  approach.  Investigators  should
have a clear understanding of how a contact 
is defined and what constitutes an exposure 
(156--158).
 Two correctional information systems are critical to the 
efficient conduct of a contact investigation: 1) an inmate 
medical record system containing TST results and other relevant information and 2) an
inmate tracking system. The lack of 
either  system  can  lead  to  the  unnecessary  use  of  costly  personnel  time  and  medical
evaluation resources (e.g., TSTs and 
chest 
radiographs).  Without  these  information  systems,  facilities  also  might  be  forced  to

implement costly lockdowns and 
mass screenings.
  TB  transmission  is  determined  by  the  characteristics  of  the  source  patient  and
exposed contacts; the 
circumstances  surrounding  the  exposure  itself  also  determine  whether  ongoing
transmission will occur. The following variables should 
be accounted for when planning each contact investigation.
 Characteristics  of  the  Source  Patient   Source  patients  who  have  either  cavitation  on
chest radiograph or AFB smear-positive respiratory specimens are 
substantially more likely to transmit TB than persons who have neither characteristic 
(159--163) Delays in TB diagnosis in source 
patients have also been associated with an increased likelihood of transmission 
(164). Nonetheless, substantial variability exists 
among  the  infectiousness  of  a  given  TB  source  patient.  Although  AFB  smear  status,
cavitary disease, and 
delayed  diagnosis  increase  the  likelihood  of  transmission,  certain  persons  with  these
characteristics infect few persons, whereas others with none of 
these  characteristics  might  infect  multiple  persons.  The  best  measure  of  the
infectiousness of source patients is the 
documented infection rate among their contacts.  Characteristics of Persons Who Have
Been Identified as Contacts
 Immunosuppression. HIV infection is the greatest single risk factor for progression to
TB disease. Therefore, 
HIV-infected contacts should receive the highest priority for evaluation of TB infection,
even if these persons had shorter duration 
of  exposure  than  other  contacts.  Persons  receiving  prolonged  therapy  with
corticosteroids, chemotherapy for cancer, or 

other immunosuppressive agents (e.g., TNF-a 
antagonists) also should be considered high priority for investigation. In 
addition,  persons  with  end-stage  renal  disease  and  diabetes  mellitus  should  be
promptly evaluated, because these conditions are 
associated with compromised immune function.
 Age. Young children (i.e., those aged <4 years) are at high risk for rapid development
of TB disease, particularly 
TB meningitis. If an inmate with TB identifies a young child as a community contact, a
health department referral should 
be made immediately.
 Exposure Characteristics  Air volume. The volume of air shared between an infectious
TB patient and susceptible contacts is a major determinant 
of the likelihood of transmission. Infectious particles become more widely distributed as
air space increases, rendering them 
less likely to be inhaled.
 Ventilation.  Ventilation  is  another  key  factor  in  the  risk  for  airborne  transmission  of
disease. Airborne infectious 
particles disburse throughout an entire enclosed space; thus, if air is 
allowed to circulate from the room occupied by an infectious 
patient  into  other  rooms  or  central  corridors,  their  occupants  also  will  be  exposed.
Areas that have 1) confined air systems with little 
or no ventilation or 2) recirculated air without HEPA filtration have been associated with
increased TB transmission.
 Duration of exposure. Although transmission of TB has occurred after brief exposure,
the likelihood of infection 
after exposure to an infectious patient is associated with the frequency and duration of
exposure. However, defining 

what  constitutes  a  substantial  duration  of  exposure  for  any  given  contact  is  difficult.
When conducting a contact 
investigation, priority should be given first to inmates and employees who were most
exposed to the source patient 
(21,154,162).
  The decision to initiate a contact investigation for an 
inmate or detainee with possible TB is made on a case-by-case basis. 
Each  potential  source  patient's  clinical  presentation  and  opportunities  for  exposure
should be evaluated. Contact 
investigations should be conducted in the following circumstances:
 Contact investigations typically are not indicated for extrapulmonary TB cases (except
for laryngeal and pleural TB), 
unless  pulmonary  involvement  is  also  diagnosed.   The  decision  as  to  whether  the
facility should conduct a contact investigation should be guided by the probability that 
an  inmate  or  employee  has  pulmonary  TB.  Sputum  results  for  AFB  serve  as  a  major
determinant 
(165). However, in certain patients with pulmonary TB, collecting sputum samples is not
feasible. In this circumstance, other types of 
respiratory specimens (e.g., those from bronchoscopy) may be collected for AFB smear
and mycobacterial culture.
  No  simple  formula  has  been  devised  for  deciding  which  contacts  to  screen  in  a
correctional facility contact 
investigation.  However,  the  investigation  should  be  guided  by  the  following  basic
principles:
 Ideally,  decisions  about  structuring  the  contact  investigation  should  be  made
collaboratively with the contact 
investigation  team  that  includes  input  from  the  state  or  local  health  department.  For

certain investigations, screening a convenience 
sample before expanding the investigation is prudent. For 
example, in jail investigations, multiple contacts might already have 
been  released,  rendering  those  who  remain  incarcerated  the  only  available  group  for
screening. If a substantial number of 
high priority contacts cannot be evaluated fully, a wider contact investigation should be
considered.
 The  investigation  should  focus  on  identifying  the  contacts  at  highest  risk  for
transmission, screening them completely, 
and providing a full course of LTBI treatment for persons demonstrated to be infected.
In general, because 
wide-scale investigations divert attention away from the high priority 
activities necessary to interrupt transmission in the facility, 
mass screening of all persons who had any contact with the source patient should be
avoided 
(166).  Rarely  is  a  person  so  infectious  that  wide-scale  expansion  of  the  contact
investigation is necessary or beneficial.
  Appropriate medical evaluation depends on both the immunologic status (e.g., HIV
infection) of the contact and 
previous  TST  or  QFT-G  results.  Adequate  knowledge  of  these  data  is  possible  only
through use of a medical record system that 
is complete, up-to-date, and reliable with regard to TST or 
QFT-G status, testing date, and documentation of the reading 
in  millimeters  (for  TST).  Without  an  adequate  medical  record  system  (and  therefore
definitive information regarding prior TST 
or QFT-G results), the true infection and transmission rates cannot be determined. The
lack of such information is likely to lead 

to unnecessary expansion of the contact investigation.  All Contacts  All contacts should
be interviewed for symptoms of TB disease using a standard symptom questionnaire. 
Symptomatic  contacts  should  receive  a  chest  radiograph  and  a  complete  medical
evaluation by a physician, regardless of TST 
or  QFT-G  status;  they  also  should  be  isolated  appropriately  (i.e.,  inmates  should  be
placed in an AII room if infectious TB 
is 
suspected by chest radiograph or clinical findings; staff should not be permitted 
to work).†† HIV testing should be 
considered for all contacts whose HIV status is unknown.
 Inmates with Documented Previous Positive TST or QFT-G results
 Inmates who are asymptomatic, HIV-negative, and have previous positive TST or QFT-G
results need no further 
follow-up, other than consideration for "routine" treatment of LTBI, if not completed in
the past. However, if such an inmate has 
any signs or symptoms suggestive of TB, further evaluation should be conducted (e.g.,
a chest radiograph for persons 
with  respiratory  symptoms).   HIV-Infected  Inmates   HIV-infected  contacts  should  be
interviewed for symptoms, have a TST or QFT-G and chest radiograph performed, 
and initiate a complete course of treatment for LTBI (once TB disease has been ruled
out), regardless of the TST or QFT-G 
result.  Treatment  should  be  initiated  even  for  persons  with  a  history  of  previous
treatment for LTBI or TB disease because of 
the possibility of re-infection. Those with a history of a negative TST or QFT-G should
have a TST or QFT-G placed at 
baseline  and  again  in  8--10  weeks.  The  results  of  the  TST  or  QFT-G  will  not  affect

treatment decisions, but they will 
provide  important  information  for  the  contact  investigation.  Anergy  testing  is  not
recommended 
(52).
 Previous TST-Negative or QFT-G--Negative Inmates (HIV Negative)
 Mandatory  tuberculin  skin  or  QFT-G  testing  of  all  previously  TST-  or  QFT-G--negative
inmate contacts should 
be  conducted  at  baseline  (unless  previously  tested  within  1--3  months  of  exposure).
Testing should be repeated 8--10 weeks 
from the most recent contact with the source patient 
(58,167).
 TST and QFT-G Converters  Persons whose TSTs or QFT-Gs convert or those with newly
documented, positive TST or QFT-G results should 
be  offered  treatment  for  LTBI  unless  medically  contraindicated.  If  inmate  contacts
refuse medically indicated treatment for 
LTBI, they should be monitored regularly for symptoms. Certain facilities have chosen
to monitor HIV-infected contacts 
with  follow-up  chest  radiographs.    The  following  steps  are  involved  in  conducting  a
contact investigation and might overlap in time. As soon as a person 
is  confirmed  or  suspected  of  having  TB  disease,  the  case  should  be  reported  to  the
appropriate local health authorities 
and contacts promptly evaluated.
  TB training and education of correctional workers and other persons associated with
any correctional facility (e.g., 
volunteers  and  inmates)  can  help  lower  the  risk  for  TB  transmission  and  disease.  To
ensure the effectiveness of such training and 
education, multiple factors should be considered. First, correctional facilities and local

or state health departments should collaborate 
when providing TB training and education to correctional workers; specifically, facilities
should routinely work with health 
department staff to provide them with corrections-specific training. Second, routine TB
education should be provided for all persons 
who spend significant time in the facility, and additional training should be given to any 
employee who will interact with persons at risk for TB. The ideal amount of training time
and information varies by the local risk for TB transmission and by the 
job descriptions and characteristics of those needing training. Finally, TB training and
education 
efforts  and  other  TB-related  events  should  be  documented  to  ensure  that  these
programs can be evaluated and updated.
  Correctional workers, volunteers, inmates, and other persons spending significant
time in correctional facilities 
should receive training and education regarding 
M. tuberculosis as part of in-facility, preservice training or orientation. Training 
should  be  provided  at  least  annually  thereafter.   In-facility  training  and  education
efforts can build on existing sources of TB-related preservice education and 
training.  Regional  and  national  professional  associations  frequently  provide  ongoing
education regarding TB and infection control, 
and national correctional health-care conferences and courses for medical professionals
working in correctional 
facilities  regularly  include  TB  in  their  curricula.   TB-associated  training  should  be
designed to meet the needs of correctional workers with diverse job descriptions. 
In multiple facilities and for multiple categories of correctional workers, appropriate TB
training might be accomplished 
through  incorporation  of  the  topic  into  other  annual  employee  trainings  (e.g.,

bloodborne pathogen training); more extensive or 
topic-specific training should be developed for persons who are specifically involved in
TB control. Facilities that use inmates 
to provide peer-to-peer TB-education programs should provide similarly tailored training
to any participating 
inmates. Facilities located in areas with a high TB prevalence or whose inmates have
lived in such areas might need to increase the 
time and resources dedicated to TB training.  The correctional facility health services
director or designee (i.e., the staff member responsible for a facility's TB 
control program) should collaborate with the local public health 
department to establish TB education and training activities. 
In addition, these staff members routinely should evaluate and update the facility's TB
training and education program 
in collaboration with the public health sector. External changes in the prevalence of TB
in the community, changes in state 
or  local  public  health  policies,  or  changes  in  national  TB  control  guidelines  might
necessitate the conduct of regular 
educational updates for staff.
 Each facility should maintain training records to monitor correctional worker training
and education. Records 
of TB-related adverse events (e.g., documented in-facility transmission) also should be
monitored as a means of 
evaluating training and education outcomes. The circumstances of 
adverse events should be investigated, and the possibility of 
enhanced or altered training should be considered as an 
appropriate intervention.
  Although the level and detail of any employee's initial TB 

training and education session will vary according to staff members' 
job  responsibilities,  the  following  components  should  be  included  for  all  correctional
workers, regardless of job function:
 Required Training for Correctional Workers in Facilities with AII Rooms
  Correctional workers in facilities equipped with AII rooms also should be provided clear
guidelines regarding 
the  identification  and  containment  of  persons  with  TB  disease.  Education  efforts  for
these staff members should include 
1)  discussion  of  the  use  of  administrative  and  engineering  controls  and  personal
protective equipment and 2) a 
respiratory  protection  program  (including  annual  training)  as  mandated  by  OSHA
(Standard 29 CFR OSHA/DOL 
[87]).
  Correctional workers in facilities with a high risk for TB transmission should receive
enhanced and more frequent 
training and education concerning
 If  a  contact  investigation  is  being  conducted  because  of  suspected  or  confirmed
infectious TB, the health department 
or designated health provider should educate facility correctional workers in all aspects
of the investigation. Education 
should include information concerning
 Facility  staff  members  who  are  responsible  for  TB-control  activities  should  stay
informed regarding current TB trends 
and treatment options. Conference attendance, participation in professional programs,
and other off-site training are 
effective  supplemental  training  strategies  for  correctional  worker  trainers  and  facility
medical and infection-control staff.

  State and local health department staff providing consultation or direct services to a
correctional facility (including 
those who act as liaisons) should receive training and education 
regarding the unique aspects of health care and TB control in 
the 
correctional facility setting. Correctional facility administrators, contracted correctional
facility health-care professionals, 
and  health  department  staff  should  collaborate  to  develop  an  appropriate  training
program. The use of self-study and 
other educational materials should be encouraged as a supplement to training. Certain
TB training resources also can be accessed 
on the Internet (Appendix A). Education and training of health department staff should
cover (but not be limited to) 
the following topics:
 Training  and  Education  of  Inmates    Inmates  should  receive  education  from  facility
health-care professionals or other appropriately trained workers managing 
the  screening  or  treatment  process.  Education  and  training  should  be  appropriate  in
terms of the education level and language 
of the trainees. The following components should be incorporated into inmate training
and education programs:
  Six steps should be followed to ensure successful monitoring and evaluation of a
TB-prevention and -control program:
 The  purpose  of  program  evaluation  is  to  improve  accountability,  enable  ongoing
learning and problem-solving, and 
identify opportunities for improvement. The evaluation process should be designed to
provide information relevant to 

the  stakeholders.  Measures  should  be  simple  and  the  communication  of  results
meaningful.
  TB control requires the collaboration of correctional systems, health departments,
and other community agencies; 
effective  program  evaluation  also  involves  teamwork.  Early  engagement  of  program
staff and internal and external 
collaborators  (including  custody  staff)  helps  ensure  that  the  evaluation  will  yield  the
information that is most useful to stakeholders. 
Such engagement also promotes mutual cooperation for constructive change. Although
multiple parties might be involved, each 
TB program should have a single person designated to be responsible for data quality
and program evaluation. Designating 
staff for these activities helps ensure that continuity and accountability are maintained.
  Underlying a useful evaluation is an understanding of how the TB program currently
operates within the context of 
the facility. Evaluators should be knowledgeable about program goals and objectives,
strategies, expected 
program-associated  results,  and  the  way  in  which  the  program  fits  into  the  larger
organization and community. This information can typically 
be 
obtained by reviewing a facility's existing TB-control plan. In addition, all stakeholders
should agree on program goals 
before the evaluation is undertaken (169).
  Risk Assessment  Each facility should assess its level of TB risk at least annually 
(71). The TB risk assessment (see Screening) determines 
the types and levels of administrative and environmental controls needed. Assessment

of a facility's risk level includes analysis 
of disease burden and facility transmission, which can be conducted by examining the
following indicators:
 Conversion rates (as determined by annual testing) for staff and inmates should be
determined and tracked over time 
to  monitor  for  unsuspected  transmission  in  the  facility.  In  larger  facilities,  conversion
rates for staff assigned to areas that 
might  place  them  at  higher  risk  for  TB  (e.g.,  booking  and  holding  areas,  day  rooms,
libraries, enclosed recreation areas, medical 
and dental areas, and transport vehicles) should be calculated and tracked. Staff should
analyze contributing factors to TB 
exposure  and  transmission  and  plan  for  corrective  intervention,  as  appropriate.  The
following performance measures should 
be  considered  when  determining  risk  within  all  correctional  facilities,  including  those
that function as a contract facility within 
a larger correctional system:
 Performance Measurement for Improving Quality  The risk-assessment process enables
the monitoring of risk for TB transmission (the key program indicator) and helps 
guide  the  focus  and  intensity  of  ongoing  performance  measurement  and  monitoring.
Facilities at higher risk (e.g., those with cases 
of TB disease) benefit more from broader investigation of performance than facilities at
lower risk. 
Risk-assessment  findings  should  help  guide  the  development  of  simple  process
performance measures for each pertinent area of TB prevention 
and  control.  These  performance  measures  can  then  be  used  to  monitor  program
implementation and intermediate 
outcomes. Treatment completion and continuity of care are key performance indicators.

Each facility should have goals against which 
to  measure  performance  in  these  areas  (e.g.,  100%  of  patients  with  TB  disease  will
have documented treatment completion or, 
in the case of release or transfer, continuity of treatment on release). For LTBI, goals
might be that 100% of patients 
released during treatment will have a documented referral for continuity of care in the
community and that 90% of these patients 
will  follow-up  on  their  referral.  The  following  are  examples  of  possible  performance
measures that can be useful as part of a 
TB  program  evaluation,  depending  on  the  level  of  risk:   Other  pertinent  performance
measures for correctional 
facilities might include the adherence rates among inmates and 
staff who should undergo TB testing, the percentage of staff receiving TB education and
training annually, and the percentage 
of inmates receiving TB education.
 Assessment of Collaboration  On an annual basis, each program also should evaluate
its success in working collaboratively with local and state 
public health departments in each area of TB control (e.g., screening, containment, and
assessment). Correctional systems 
should meet with their respective public health departments each year to assess risk,
update TB policies and procedures, and 
assess  compliance  regarding  environmental  control  and  respiratory  protection
recommendations (see Environmental Controls 
and Respiratory Protection). Correctional systems also should assess collaboration with
other agencies to which the inmates 
are released.
  Data  Sources   As  part  of  quality  assessment,  all  facilities  that  house  persons  with

confirmed or suspected TB disease should 
conduct  periodic  reviews  of  medical  records  for  these  patients  and  for  a  sample  of
patients with LTBI. In collaboration with the 
public health department, the review should be conducted at least annually in facilities
with any confirmed or suspected cases of 
TB  (including  low-risk  facilities)  and  quarterly  in  higher-risk  facilities  with  numerous
cases. The record review should 
compare  actual  performance  against  time  standards,  protocols,  and  goals  for  TB
activities and outcomes (see Performance Measures 
for Improving Quality). Multiple tools are available for data collection (Appendix B) 
(131).
 Medical  records  should  contain  information  regarding  TB  history  and  risk  factors,
treatment, and all other 
interventions and dates to enable performance to be monitored. Other sources of data
include log books, interviews with staff, 
and observations. Quality controls for TST placement and reading should be checked at
least annually. The quality of the 
data used for calculating performance also should be verified.
 Information  Infrastructure   Effective  program  monitoring  and  evaluation  is  made
possible through the reliable collection of valid data and 
through analysis of these data. Health-care professionals responsible for the prevention
and control of TB within a correctional 
facility  should  have  access  to  complete  medical  records  and  a  database  of  essential
TB-related activity and 
measurements.  A  retrievable  aggregate  record  system  is  essential  for  tracking  all
inmates and for assessing the status of persons who have 
TB disease and LTBI, particularly in large jail and prison systems in which inmates are

transferred frequently from one facility 
or unit to another. This record system should maintain at minimum current information
about the location, screening 
results, treatment status, and degree of infectiousness of these persons. In addition to
facilitating case management, such a 
record system provides facilities with the information necessary for conducting annual
TB risk assessments, monitoring TB 
trends, measuring performance, and assessing the effectiveness of overall TB control
efforts. Information contained in health 
records 
should always be kept confidential; all staff members involved in program evaluation
should receive training to maintain 
the confidentiality of patient information.
 Although medical databases can be maintained manually, electronic databases provide
additional benefits by enabling 
a  facility  to  1)  better  track  inmates  for  testing  and  case  management,  2)  access
information regarding tests for TB infection, 
3) share medical information regarding transferred inmates with other facilities, 4) link
with the local health department, and 
5) measure the effectiveness of TB-control efforts.
  In  a  multifacility  correctional  system,  evaluation  data  should  be  compiled  for  each
facility separately and in aggregate. 
Data should be analyzed against standards, which can be defined externally (e.g., by
national organizations or 
CDC-defined standards) or internally as established by the program collaborators 
(170). Once analyzed, conclusions should be drawn 

from  the  data  and  recommendations  for  program  improvement  developed.  The
evaluation and recommendations should be 
shared  with  program  staff,  administrators,  and  partners,  including  the  local  public
health department.
  The final step in the evaluation process is to implement the recommendations to
improve the TB program. Program 
staff  should  use  data  to  identify  and  remove  barriers  to  improving  performance,  and
administrators should make necessary 
revisions to policies or procedures.
 Because the evaluation process is cyclical, assessing whether recommendations have
been implemented and 
whether  outcomes  are  improved  is  crucial.  Existing  data  can  be  used  to  clearly
demonstrate the effects of implemented interventions.
  The management of TB from the time an inmate is suspected of having the disease
until treatment is complete 
presents multiple opportunities for collaboration between correctional facilities and the
public health department. For example, 
public  health  agencies  can  partner  with  correctional  facilities  in  TB  screening  and
treatment activities. In a study of 20 urban 
jail systems and their respective public health departments, only 35% reported having
collaborated effectively when 
conducting TB-prevention and -control activities 
(38). Formal organizational mechanisms (e.g., designated 
liaisons,  regular  meetings,  health  department  TB  program  staff  providing  on-site
services, and written agreements) are associated with more 
effective collaboration between correctional facilities and health departments 
(37).

 Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  each  designate  liaisons  for
TB-associated efforts. Liaisons should 
serve as a familiar and accessible communication link between collaborating entities.
The duty of liaison at the correctional 
facility should be assigned to the person responsible for TB control or to another staff
member familiar with TB control and 
patient management at the facility. Regular meetings 
between correctional facilities and health departments are 
important to establish communication and collaboration on TB-related issues 
(37,171). Jurisdictions with regularly scheduled meetings between 
jails and public health staff are 13 times more likely to report having highly effective
collaboration than jurisdictions that have 
not  established  such  meetings  (37).  For  example,  in  Florida,  the  state  TB-control
program and corrections health officials 
hold  quarterly  coordination  meetings  on  TB  issues  and  regularly  scheduled
collaborative TB 
case-review  conferences  (171),  activities  that  have  encouraged  communication
between facilities and local health departments.
 The presence of health department staff in correctional 
facilities can help promote more effective collaboration 
(37,171). Functions provided by such personnel within the correctional facility setting
include screening, surveillance, education 
and training, contact investigation, and follow-up after release 
(171). For example, New York City Department of Health 
and  Mental  Hygiene  personnel  assigned  to  the  Rikers  Island  jail  interview  inmates,
monitor their care, suggest 
interventions or changes, and work with the jail to determine discharge planning needs

for continuity of care in the community. Data 
access links are available on site that enable health department personnel to promptly
inform corrections staff regarding 
previous  completed  therapy,  incomplete  work-up  or  therapy,  sputum-smear  results,
culture and 
drug-susceptibility  data,  and  ongoing  treatment  for  TB  cases  and  suspects.  These
on-site access links diminish the time spent in AII rooms and decrease the 
time required for patient work-up by providing confirmatory historical documentation.
 Correctional facilities and health departments should work together to agree on and
delineate their respective roles 
and responsibilities. Establishing clear roles and responsibilities helps avoid duplication,
confusion, the potential for 
breaching patient confidentiality, excess expenditures, and missed opportunities.
 Roles and responsibilities should be clearly defined for all TB-control activities that
might require collaboration 
between correctional facilities and health departments, including
 Agreements about roles and responsibilities may be formal or informal, but they should
be recorded in writing. 
Formal agreements include memoranda of understanding and written policies or plans.
Informal agreements may be as simple as an 
e-mail  summary  of  a  verbal  discussion  or  meeting.  The  format  for  recording  and
communicating agreements (e.g., 
checklists, flow charts, algorithms, and lists of steps) may vary depending on the need.
Once agreements are made, they should 
be reassessed periodically (see Program Evaluation).
 Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  work  together  to  formulate
agreements that specify the information 

to be shared in a particular time frame, who will have access to specific information or
databases, and how patient 
confidentiality  will  be  protected.  Information  systems  provide  the  framework  for
recording and accessing pertinent 
information (see Program Evaluation). Health departments should provide correctional
facilities with pertinent TB surveillance information (e.g., 
local rates of drug resistance, the number of TB cases occurring in correctional facilities
relative to the community, and the 
number of TB cases identified in the community among recently incarcerated persons),
which can bolster support for 
TB-screening activities within these facilities.
 Legislation or policy statements can effectively encourage or mandate collaboration on
issues (e.g., disease reporting, 
contact  investigation,  and  discharge  planning)  when  institutional  barriers  (e.g.,  time
and resources) inhibit collaboration. For 
example,  California  has  improved  discharge  planning  by  prohibiting  the  release  or
transfer of inmates with confirmed or suspected 
TB unless a written treatment plan has been received and accepted by the local health
officer 
(172).
 Arizona's
 state
 administrative
 code
 places
 responsibility
 for
 contact
investigations of TB exposures in correctional facilities on the correctional facility 
but requires consultation with (and reporting to) the local health department. ICE also
has developed a policy 
memorandum requesting that ICE field office directors grant a short-term hold on the
deportation of patients with TB disease to allow 
time for the ICE health services program to facilitate continuity of care.
  Early identification and successful treatment of persons with TB disease remains the

most effective means of 
preventing disease transmission. Inmates who are likely to have infectious TB should be
identified and begin treatment before they 
are released into the general population. Screening programs in the correctional setting
also allow for the detection of 
substantial numbers of persons with LTBI who are at high risk for TB disease and would
likely benefit from a course of treatment.
 The  type  of  screening  recommended  for  a  particular  correctional  facility  is
determined by an assessment of the risk for 
TB transmission within that facility. The risk assessment should be performed annually
and should be conducted in 
collaboration with the local or state health department. A facility's TB risk level can be
defined as minimal or nonminimal. 
A facility should be classified as having minimal TB risk on the basis of four criteria:
 Any facility that does not meet all of these criteria should be categorized as being a
nonminimal TB risk facility.
 Inmates  in  all  minimal  TB  risk  correctional  and  detention  facilities  require  an
evaluation at entry for symptoms of 
TB.  Persons  with  symptoms  of  TB  require  an  immediate  evaluation  to  rule  out  the
presence of infectious disease and must be 
kept in an AII room until they are evaluated. All newly 
arrived inmates should be evaluated for clinical conditions and other 
factors that increase the risk for TB disease. Persons who have any of these conditions
require further screening with a TST, a 
QFT-G, or a chest radiograph within 7 days of arrival. Regardless of TST or QFT-G result,
inmates known to have HIV infection 
or other severe immunosuppression, as well as inmates who are at risk for HIV infection

but whose HIV status is 
unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as part of the initial screening. Persons
who have an abnormal chest radiograph 
should  be  evaluated  further  to  rule  out  TB  disease;  if  TB  disease  is  excluded  as  a
diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if 
the TST or QFT-G is positive.
 In  nonminimal  TB  risk  prisons,  symptom  screening  assessment  should  be  performed
immediately for all new inmates. 
Any inmate who has symptoms suggestive of TB should be placed in an AII room and
evaluated promptly for TB disease. 
Inmates  who  have  no  symptoms  require  further  screening  with  a  TST,  a  QFT-G,  or  a
chest radiograph within 7 days of 
arrival. Regardless of their TST or QFT-G status, inmates known to have HIV infection or
other severe immunosuppression, 
and inmates who are at risk for HIV infection but whose HIV status is unknown, should
have a chest radiograph taken as part 
of  the  initial  screening.  Persons  who  have  an  abnormal  chest  radiograph  should  be
evaluated further to rule out TB disease; if 
TB disease is excluded as a diagnosis, LTBI therapy should be considered if the TST or
QFT-G result is positive.
 Symptom screening should be performed immediately on entry for all new detainees
in nonminimal TB risk jails. 
Any detainee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should be placed in an AII room and
promptly evaluated for TB 
disease. Detainees who are without symptoms require further screening with a TST, a
QFT-G, or a chest radiograph within 7 days 
of  arrival.  Regardless  of  TST  or  QFT-G  result,  detainees  known  to  have  HIV  infection,

and detainees who are at risk for 
HIV infection but whose HIV status is unknown, should have a chest radiograph taken as
part of the initial 
screening. Persons who have a positive result should be further evaluated to rule out TB
disease. Screening in jails with the TST or QFT-G 
for purposes of initiating LTBI therapy often is not practical 
because of the high rate of turnover and short lengths of stay.
 A  medical  history  relating  to  TB  should  be  obtained  from  and  recorded  for  all  new
employees at the time of hiring, and 
a  physical  examination  for  TB  disease  should  be  required.  In  addition,  TST  or  QFT-G
screening should be mandatory for 
all  employees  who  do  not  have  a  documented  positive  result.  Persons  who  have  a
positive TST or QFT-G result should have 
a chest radiograph taken and interpreted and should be 
required to have a thorough medical evaluation; if TB disease 
is  excluded  as  a  diagnosis,  such  persons  should  be  considered  for  LTBI  therapy.  All
employees should be informed 
and  instructed  to  seek  appropriate  follow-up  and  screening  for  TB  if  they  are
immunosuppressed for any reason (e.g., 
HIV  infection,  organ  transplant  recipient  receiving  immunosuppressive  therapy,  and
treatment with 
TNF-a antagonist). Any employee who has symptoms suggestive of TB should not 
return to the workplace until a clinician has excluded a diagnosis 
of contagious TB disease.
 In general, long-term inmates and all employees who have a negative baseline TST or
QFT-G result should have 
follow-up testing at least annually. Persons who have a history of a positive test result

should be screened annually for symptoms of 
TB disease. Annual chest radiographs are unnecessary for the follow-up evaluation of
infected persons. Test results should 
be recorded in medical records and in a retrievable aggregate database of all TST or
QFT-G results.
  Correctional facility medical staff must report any suspected or confirmed TB cases
among inmates or employees to 
the appropriate health agency in accordance with state and local laws and regulations,
even if the inmate or detainee has 
already been released or transferred from the 
facility.  Reporting  cases  to  health  departments  benefits  the  correctional  facility  by
allowing it 
to obtain health department resources for case management and contact investigation
in both the facility and the community. 
In  addition,  drug-susceptibility  results  should  be  used  to  inform  optimal  therapy  and
sent to the state or local health department 
for 
use  in  monitoring  the  rates  of  drug  resistance.  The  drug-susceptibility  reports  also
should be sent to all health 
departments managing contacts of the TB case because the choice of medication for
LTBI treatment is based on drug-susceptibility test 
results of the source case. Reports to local or state health departments should identify
the agency that has custodial responsibility for 
the inmate.
  TB  airborne  precautions  should  be  initiated  for  any  patient  who  1)  has  signs  or
symptoms of TB disease or 2) 

has documented TB disease and has not completed treatment or not previously been
determined to be non-infectious. For 
patients placed in an AII room because of suspected infectious TB disease of the lungs,
airways, or larynx, airborne precautions can 
be discontinued when infectious TB disease is considered unlikely and either 1) another
diagnosis is made that explains 
the clinical syndrome or 2) the patient has three negative AFB sputum-smear results.
Incarcerated patients in whom the 
suspicion  of  TB  disease  remains  after  the  collection  of  three  negative  AFB
sputum-smear results should not be released from an 
AII  room  until  they  are  on  standard  multidrug  anti-TB  treatment  and  are  clinically
improving. A patient who has 
drug-susceptible  TB  of  the  lung,  airways,  or  larynx;  who  is  on  standard  multidrug
anti-TB treatment; and who has had a clinical 
and  bacteriologic  response  to  therapy  is  probably  no  longer  infectious.  However,
because culture and drug-susceptibility 
results typically are not known when the decision to discontinue airborne precautions is
made, all patients in whom the probability 
of TB disease is high should remain in an AII room while incarcerated until they have 1)
had three consecutive negative 
AFB  sputum  smear  results,  2)  received  standard  multidrug  anti-TB  treatment,  and  3)
demonstrated clinical improvement.
  Environmental controls should be implemented when the risk for TB transmission
persists despite efforts to screen and 
treat infected inmates. Environmental controls are used to remove, inactivate, or kill 
M. tuberculosis in areas in which the 
organism  could  be  transmitted.  Primary  environmental  controls  consist  of  controlling

the source of infection by using local 
exhaust  ventilation  (e.g.,  hoods,  tents,  or  booths)  and  diluting  and  removing
contaminated air using general ventilation. 
Secondary  environmental  controls  consist  of  controlling  the  airflow  to  prevent
contamination of air in areas adjacent to the source 
(AII  rooms)  and  cleaning  the  air  using  HEPA  filtration  and/or  UVGI.  The  efficiency  of
different primary or 
secondary environmental controls varies. A detailed 
discussion concerning the application of environmental controls has been 
published previously(71).
  Respiratory protection is used when administrative (i.e., identification and isolation of
infectious TB patients) 
and environmental controls alone have not reduced the risk for infection with 
M. tuberculosis to an acceptable level. The use 
of respiratory protection might be most appropriate in specific settings and situations
within correctional facilities; for 
example,  protection  is  warranted  for  inmates  and  facility  staff  when  they  enter  AII
rooms, transport infectious inmates in an 
enclosed vehicle, and perform or participate in 
cough-inducing procedures. In correctional facilities, a CDC/NIOSH-approved 
N95 air-purifying respirator will provide adequate respiratory protection in the majority
of situations that require the use 
of respirators.
 All  correctional  facility  staff  members  who  use  respirators  for  protection  against
infection with 
M. tuberculosis must participate in the facility's respiratory protection program (e.g.,
understand their responsibilities, receive training, 

receive  medical  clearance,  and  engage  in  fit  testing).  All  facilities  should  develop,
implement, and maintain a 
respiratory-protection  program  for  health-care  workers  or  other  staff  who  use
respiratory protection. (Respiratory-protection programs are 
required  for  facilities  covered  by  OSHA.)  In  addition  to  staff  members,  visitors  to
inmates with TB disease should be given 
respirators  to  wear  while  in  AII  rooms  and  instructed  how  to  ensure  their  own
respiratory protection by checking their respirator for 
a  proper  seal.  Each  facility,  regardless  of  TB  risk  classification  (i.e.,  minimal  or
nonminimal), should develop a policy on the 
use of respirators by visitors of patients.
  A diagnosis of TB disease should be considered for any 
patient who has a persistent cough (>3 weeks) or other signs 
or  symptoms  compatible  with  TB  disease  (e.g.,  bloody  sputum  [hemoptysis],  night
sweats, weight loss, anorexia, and 
fever).  Diagnostic  tests  for  TB  include  the  TST,  QFT-G,  chest  radiography,  and
laboratory examination of sputum samples or 
other  body  tissues  and  fluids.  Persons  exposed  to  inmates  with  TB  disease  might
become infected with LTBI, depending on 
host immunity and the degree and duration of exposure. Therefore, the treatment of
persons with TB disease plays a key role in 
TB  control  by  stopping  transmission  and  preventing  potentially  infectious  cases  from
developing. LTBI is an 
asymptomatic condition that can be diagnosed by the TST or QFT-G.
 Regardless  of  age,  correctional  facility  staff  and  inmates  in  the  following  high-risk
groups should be given treatment 
for LTBI if their reaction to the TST is 

>5 mm:
 All other correctional facility staff and inmates should be considered for treatment of
LTBI if their TST result is 
>10 mm induration. The preferred treatment for LTBI is 9 months of daily isoniazid or
biweekly dosing administered by 
DOT. Although LTBI treatment regimens are broadly applicable, modifications should be
considered for certain populations 
(e.g., patients with HIV infection) and when drug resistance is suspected.
 Individualized case management should be provided for all patients with TB disease. In
addition, patient 
management  should  be  coordinated  with  officials  of  the  local  or  state  health
department. Regimens for treating TB disease must 
contain  multiple  drugs  to  which  the  organisms  are  susceptible.  For  the  majority  of
patients, the preferred regimen for treating 
TB disease consists of an initial 2-month phase of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and
ethambutol, followed by a 
continuation phase of isoniazid and rifampin lasting 
>4 months, for a minimum total treatment period of 6 months. The decision to 
stop therapy should be based on the number of doses taken within a maximum period
(not simply a 6-month 
period).  Persons  with  cavitary  pulmonary  TB  disease  and  positive  cultures  of  sputum
specimens at the completion of 
2  months  of  therapy  should  receive  a  longer,  7-month  continuation  phase  of  therapy
(total duration: 9 months) because of the substantially higher rate 
of relapse among persons with this type of TB disease.
 Drug-susceptibility testing should be performed on all initial 
M. tuberculosis isolates from patients with TB disease. 

When  results  from  drug-susceptibility  tests  become  available,  the  treatment  regimen
should be adjusted accordingly. 
Medical providers treating patients with drug-resistant TB disease should seek expert
consultation and collaborate with the local 
health department for treatment decisions.
 TB  treatment  regimens  might  need  to  be  altered  for  HIV-infected  persons  who  are
receiving antiretroviral 
therapy. Whenever possible, the care of persons with concomitant TB and HIV should
be provided by or in consultation 
with experts in the management of both TB and HIV-related disease.
 The primary determinant of treatment outcome is patient adherence to the drug 
regimen.  Thus,  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to  measures  designed  to  enable  and
foster adherence. DOT is the preferred treatment strategy for all persons with 
TB  disease  and  high-risk  (e.g.,  HIV  infected)  persons  with  LTBI.  DOT  should  be  used
throughout the entire course of 
therapy  whenever  feasible.  Practitioners  providing  treatment  to  inmates  should
coordinate DOT with the local health 
department on an inmate's release. The local health department also may be involved
in monitoring therapy for correctional facility staff.
  Postrelease  follow-up  is  a  necessary  component  of  TB  control  efforts.  Effective
discharge planning requires 
collaboration  between  corrections  and  medical  staff  (both  intra-  and  interfacility),  as
well as with public health and 
community-based service organizations.
 To  ensure  uninterrupted  treatment,  discharge  planning  for  inmates  in  whom  TB
disease is diagnosed must begin as soon 
as possible after diagnosis. Corrections or health service 

administrators (or their designees) should assign staff to 
notify  the  public  health  department  of  inmates  receiving  treatment  for  TB  disease  or
LTBI. Inmates with TB disease should be 
interviewed 
while still incarcerated (ideally by public health staff) to enable facility administrators to
assess and plan for the 
appropriate support and referrals that will be needed after discharge.
 All correctional facilities should assign personnel (preferably 
health-care professionals) to serve as case managers. 
These managers should be responsible for conducting discharge planning in the facility,
which entails coordinating follow-up 
and communicating treatment histories with public health department and other 
health-care counterparts within the community.
  The overall goal of a TB contact investigation is to interrupt transmission of 
M.  tuberculosis.  Ongoing  transmission  is  prevented  by  1)  identifying,  isolating,  and
treating other persons with TB disease (e.g., secondary patients) and 2) 
identifying infected contacts of the source and secondary patients and providing them
with a complete course of treatment for LTBI.
 Because  decisions  involved  in  planning  and  prioritizing  contact  investigations  in
correctional facilities are seldom simple, 
the process benefits from the input of a larger, 
multi-disciplinary team when possible. The best preparation for 
contact investigations in correctional facilities is ongoing, formal collaboration between
correctional and public health officials.
 The decision to initiate a contact investigation for an 
inmate or detainee with possible TB is made on a case-by-case basis. 

In general, contact investigations should be conducted in the following circumstances:
1) suspected or confirmed 
pulmonary, laryngeal, or pleural TB and cavitary disease on chest radiograph or positive
AFB smear results (sputum or other 
respiratory specimens) or 2) suspected or confirmed pulmonary (noncavitary) or pleural
TB and negative AFB smear results (sputum 
or other respiratory specimens) and a decision has been made to initiate TB treatment.
A more limited initial investigation 
may be conducted for smear-negative cases.
 Contact  investigation  should  be  conducted  in  a  stepwise  fashion  that  includes  1)
notifying correctional 
management  officials;  2)  conducting  a  chart  review  of  the  source  patient;  3)
interviewing the source patient; 4) defining the 
infectious period; 5) convening the contact investigation team; 6) 
updating correctional management officials about the strategy, 
process, and action steps involved in conducting the contact investigation; 7) obtaining
source case inmate traffic history (i.e., the 
dates and locations of the TB source patient's housing during the infectious period); 8)
touring exposure sites; 9) 
prioritizing contacts according to duration and intensity 
of exposure and risk factors for becoming infected with TB and progressing 
to TB disease; 10) developing contact lists; 11) conducting a medical record review on
each high-priority contact; 12) 
evaluating  HIV-infected  contacts  promptly;  13)  placing  and  reading  initial  TSTs  or
QFT-Gs on eligible contacts; 14) making referrals 
for  contact  evaluation  (e.g.,  referrals  to  the  local  health  department  for  contacts  of
inmates who have been released or 

transferred to another facility, family members, frequent visitors of the source 
patient); 15) calculating the infection rate and 
determining  the  need  to  expand  the  investigation;  16)  placing  and  reading  follow-up
TSTs or QFT-Gs; 17) determining the 
infection/transmission  rate  from  the  second  round  of  testing;  and  18)  writing  a
summary report.
  Although  the  level  and  detail  of  any  employee's  initial  TB  training  and  education
session will vary according to 
staff members' job responsibilities, the following components should be included for all
correctional workers, regardless of 
job function: 1) communication regarding the basic concepts of 
M. tuberculosis transmission, signs, symptoms, 
diagnosis  (including  the  difference  between  LTBI  and  TB  disease),  and  prevention;  2)
provision of basic information regarding 
the importance of following up on inmates or correctional workers demonstrating signs
or symptoms of TB disease; 
3) explanation of the need for initiation of AII of inmates with suspected or confirmed
TB disease; 4) review of the policies 
and  indications  for  discontinuing  AII  precautions;  5)  discussion  of  basic  principles  of
treatment for TB disease and LTBI; and 
6) discussion regarding TB disease in immunocompromised persons.
 Correctional  workers  in  facilities  with  a  high  risk  of  TB  transmission  should  receive
enhanced and more frequent 
training  and  education  regarding  1)  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  TB  disease,  2)
transmission of TB disease, and 3) 
infection-control
 policies
 (including
 instruction
 on
 and
 location
 of
 written
infection-control policies and procedures, the facility's 

exposure control plan, and the respiratory protection program).
 State and local health department staff providing consultation or direct services to a
correctional facility (including 
those who act as liaisons) should receive training and education 
regarding the unique aspects of health care and TB control in 
the  correctional  facility  setting.  Correctional  facility  administrators,  contracted
correctional facility health-care professionals, 
and 
health department staff should collaborate to develop an appropriate training program.
Inmates should receive education 
from facility health-care professionals or other appropriately trained workers managing
the screening or treatment 
process. Education and training should be appropriate in terms of the education level
and language of the trainees.
  Program evaluation should be performed based on the CDC framework. Successful
monitoring and evaluation of 
a TB-prevention and -control program includes identifying collaborators, describing the
TB-control program, focusing 
the  evaluation  to  assess  TB  risk  and  performance,  collecting  and  organizing  data,
analyzing data and forming conclusions, 
and using the information to improve the TB program.
  The management of TB from the time an inmate is suspected of having the disease
until treatment is complete 
presents multiple opportunities for collaboration between correctional facilities and the
public health department. 
Formal organizational mechanisms (e.g., designated liaisons, regular meetings, health

department TB-program staff providing 
on-site  services,  and  written  agreements)  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  associated
with more effective 
collaboration between correctional facilities and health departments.
 Correctional  facilities  and  health  departments  should  each  designate  liaisons  for
TB-associated efforts. Liaisons should 
serve as a familiar and accessible communication link between collaborating entities.
The duty of liaison at the correctional 
facility should be assigned to the person responsible for TB control or to another staff
member familiar with TB control and 
patient management at the facility.
 Correctional facilities and health departments should work together to agree on and
delineate their respective roles 
and responsibilities. Establishing clear roles and responsibilities helps avoid duplication,
confusion, the potential for 
breaching  patient  confidentiality,  excess  expenditures,  and  missed  opportunities.
Agreements about roles and responsibilities may 
be  formal  or  informal,  but  they  should  be  recorded  in  writing  to  avoid
misunderstandings and to give the agreement 
longevity beyond personal relationships.
 Acknowledgments  The following persons contributed to this report: G. Scott Earnest,
PhD, Michael G. Gressel, PhD, Kenneth R. Mead, MS, Division 
of  Applied  Research  and  Technology;  Teresa  A.  Seitz,  MPH,  Douglas  B.  Trout,  MD,
Division of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations, and 
Field Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, CDC.
  

* The epidemiology of TB in the United States has changed dramatically since the early
1990s. Immigration from countries with a high prevalence of 
TB  contributes  substantially  to  the  continued  high  rates  of  disease  and  transmission
among foreign-born persons. In 2003, the rate of TB among 
foreign-born persons in the Untied States was 8.7 times higher than the rate for persons
born in the United States. More than half of new TB cases in 2003 occurred 
in foreign-born persons, particularly those from Mexico, the Philippines, and Vietnam. Of
114 patients in whom multi-drug resistant TB (MDR TB) 
were diagnosed, foreign-born persons accounted for 
95  (83%)  cases  (6).  Detention  facilities  and  local  jails  frequently  contract  with  U.S.
Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) to house detainees, a practice that should be accounted for
in assessing a facility's risk status.
† Therapy that involves providing the anti-TB drugs directly to the patient and watching
as the patient swallows the medications. DOT is the preferred 
core  management  strategy  for  all  patients  with  TB.  DOT  for  LTBI  is  referred  to
sometimes as directly observed preventive therapy.
§ Formerly called a negative pressure isolation room, an AII room is a single-occupancy
patient-care room used to isolate persons with suspected or 
confirmed 
infectious TB disease. Environmental factors are controlled in AII rooms to minimize the

transmission of infectious agents that are usually spread from 
person  to  person  by  droplet  nuclei  associated  with  coughing  or  aerosolization  of
contaminated fluids. AII rooms should provide negative pressure in the room so 
clean air flows under the door gap into the room, an air flow rate of 6--12 air changes
per hour (ACH), and direct exhaust of air from the room to the outside of 
the building or recirculation of air through a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter.
¶  ACH  is  the  ratio  of  the  volume  of  air  entering  the  room  or  booth  per  hour  to  the
volume of that room or booth. It equals the exhaust airflow (Q) in cubic 
feet per minute (cfm) divided by the volume of the room or booth (V) in cubic feet 
(ft3) multiplied by 60 minutes per hour, as expressed thus: 
** Surgical masks should never be worn in place of a respirator. Surgical masks often fit
so poorly that they provide only minimal protection from 
any airborne hazard, including M. 
tuberculosis. Surgical masks are designed to protect others from the wearer; they are
not designed or tested to provide 
respiratory protection to the wearer.
††  Asymptomatic  contacts  with  normal  chest  radiographs  typically  do  not  require
isolation.
§§  Because  being  immunocompromised  (having  pathologic  or  iatrogenic  immune
suppression, e.g., HIV infection or chemotherapy) is a risk factor 
for TB disease, correctional workers should be educated on the relation between TB and

medical conditions associated with being 
immunocompromised. Correctional workers should be encouraged to discuss known or
possible immunocompromising conditions with their private physicians or 
health-care professionals. 
¶¶  Public  health  departments  typically  track  treatment  completion  rates  for  patients
referred to their care.
  * The epidemiology of TB in the United States has changed dramatically since the
early 1990s. Immigration from countries with a high prevalence of 
TB  contributes  substantially  to  the  continued  high  rates  of  disease  and  transmission
among foreign-born persons. In 2003, the rate of TB among 
foreign-born persons in the Untied States was 8.7 times higher than the rate for persons
born in the United States. More than half of new TB cases in 2003 occurred 
in foreign-born persons, particularly those from Mexico, the Philippines, and Vietnam. Of
114 patients in whom multi-drug resistant TB (MDR TB) 
were diagnosed, foreign-born persons accounted for 
95  (83%)  cases  (6).  Detention  facilities  and  local  jails  frequently  contract  with  U.S.
Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) to house detainees, a practice that should be accounted for
in assessing a facility's risk status.
 †  Therapy  that  involves  providing  the  anti-TB  drugs  directly  to  the  patient  and
watching as the patient swallows the medications. DOT is the preferred 
core  management  strategy  for  all  patients  with  TB.  DOT  for  LTBI  is  referred  to
sometimes as directly observed preventive therapy.
 §  Formerly  called  a  negative  pressure  isolation  room,  an  AII  room  is  a
single-occupancy patient-care room used to isolate persons with suspected or 

confirmed 
infectious TB disease. Environmental factors are controlled in AII rooms to minimize the
transmission of infectious agents that are usually spread from 
person  to  person  by  droplet  nuclei  associated  with  coughing  or  aerosolization  of
contaminated fluids. AII rooms should provide negative pressure in the room so 
clean air flows under the door gap into the room, an air flow rate of 6--12 air changes
per hour (ACH), and direct exhaust of air from the room to the outside of 
the building or recirculation of air through a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter.
 ¶ ACH is the ratio of the volume of air entering the room or booth per hour to the
volume of that room or booth. It equals the exhaust airflow (Q) in cubic 
feet per minute (cfm) divided by the volume of the room or booth (V) in cubic feet 
(ft3) multiplied by 60 minutes per hour, as expressed thus:  
 ** Surgical masks should never be worn in place of a respirator. Surgical masks often
fit so poorly that they provide only minimal protection from 
any airborne hazard, including M. 
tuberculosis. Surgical masks are designed to protect others from the wearer; they are
not designed or tested to provide 
respiratory protection to the wearer.
 ††  Asymptomatic  contacts  with  normal  chest  radiographs  typically  do  not  require
isolation.
 §§  Because  being  immunocompromised  (having  pathologic  or  iatrogenic  immune
suppression, e.g., HIV infection or chemotherapy) is a risk factor 
for TB disease, correctional workers should be educated on the relation between TB and
medical conditions associated with being 
immunocompromised. Correctional workers should be encouraged to discuss known or

possible immunocompromising conditions with their private physicians or 
health-care  professionals.   ¶¶  Public  health  departments  typically  track  treatment
completion rates for patients referred to their care.
 Table 1
Return to top.
Table 2
Return to top.
Table 3
Return to top.
Table 4
Return to top.
Table 5
Return to top.
Table 6
Return to top.
Table 7
Return to top.
  Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer

  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. **Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting
should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.   Date last reviewed: 6/22/2006
 
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  

    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5509a1.htm
