Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Recommendations and Reports / April 27, 2018 / 67(2);1–44
Jennifer L. Liang, DVM1; Tejpratap Tiwari, MD1; Pedro Moro, MD2; Nancy E. Messonnier,
MD3;  Arthur  Reingold,  MD4;  Mark  Sawyer,  MD5;  Thomas  A.  Clark,  MD6  (View  author
affiliations)  Views  equals  page  views  plus  PDF  downloads  Figure  1  Figure  2  Figure  3
Figure 4 Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 Table 5 Table 6   This report compiles and
summarizes  all  recommendations  from  CDC’s  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices (ACIP) regarding prevention and control of tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis
in  the  United  States.  As  a  comprehensive  summary  of  previously  published
recommendations, this report does not contain any new recommendations and replaces
all previously published reports and policy notes; it is intended for use by clinicians and
public  health  providers  as  a  resource.  ACIP  recommends  routine  vaccination  for
tetanus,  diphtheria,  and  pertussis.  Infants  and  young  children  are  recommended  to
receive a 5-dose series of diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP)
vaccines,  with  one  adolescent  booster  dose  of  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria
toxoid,  and  acellular  pertussis  (Tdap)  vaccine.  Adults  who  have  never  received  Tdap
also are recommended to receive a booster dose of Tdap. Women are recommended to
receive a dose of Tdap during each pregnancy, which should be administered from 27
through  36  weeks’  gestation,  regardless  of  previous  receipt  of  Tdap.  After  receipt  of
Tdap,  adolescents  and  adults  are  recommended  to  receive  a  booster  tetanus  and
diphtheria  toxoids  (Td)  vaccine  every  10  years  to  assure  ongoing  protection  against
tetanus  and  diphtheria.  Top  This  report  compiles  and  summarizes  all  previously
published recommendations from CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP)  regarding  prevention  and  control  of  pertussis,  tetanus,  and  diphtheria  in  the
United  States,  specifically  after  the  introduction  of  acellular  pertussis  vaccines,  and

does not contain any new recommendations. A timeline of ACIP recommendations for
DTaP and Tdap during 1991–2015 is available at https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/52821.
This report describes the process undertaken and the rationale used in support of these
recommendations and is intended for use by clinicians and public health providers as a
resource.  From  the  late  1940s  through  the  1990s,  vaccination  against  pertussis,
diphtheria, and tetanus with a combined diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and whole-cell
pertussis  (DTP)  vaccine  was  recommended  for  infants  and  young  children.  Receipt  of
DTP was commonly associated with local adverse events (e.g., redness, swelling, and
pain  at  the  injection  site)  and  less  commonly  with  serious  adverse  events  (1,2).
Because  of  safety  concerns  about  the  whole-cell  pertussis  component  of  DTP,
diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccines were developed
and subsequently replaced doses of DTP in the 1990s. Since 1997, infants and young
children have been recommended to receive a 5-dose series of DTaP (3). In 2005, ACIP
recommended  that  adolescents  and  adults  receive  a  single  dose  of  a  tetanus  toxoid,
reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine (4,5). After receipt of
Tdap, adolescents and adults are recommended to receive a booster dose of tetanus
and  diphtheria  toxoids  (Td)  vaccine  every  10  years  or  when  indicated  for  wound
management (4,5). In 2012, in an effort to reduce the burden of pertussis in infants,
ACIP  recommended  a  dose  of  Tdap  for  women  during  each  pregnancy  (6).  For  the
purposes of this report, DTaP and Tdap are used as general terms for diphtheria toxoid,
tetanus toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccines, and DT and Td are used for diphtheria
and tetanus toxoid–containing vaccines. Any of the vaccine formulations licensed in the
United  States  can  be  used  in  an  age-appropriate  manner  to  implement  these
vaccination recommendations. Both DTP and monovalent tetanus toxoid (TT) vaccines
are discussed for historical purposes and no longer are manufactured or available in the
United  States.  ACIP  recommendations  for  vaccination  for  pertussis,  tetanus,  and
diphtheria  and  guidance  for  use  are  described  elsewhere  in  this  report  (see

Recommendations  for  Use  of  Pertussis,  Tetanus,  and  Diphtheria  Vaccines)  (Table  1).
Details  regarding  contraindications,  precautions,  and  special  circumstances  are
described elsewhere in this report (see Recommendations for Use of Pertussis, Tetanus,
and Diphtheria Vaccines) (Tables 2 and 3). In 2013, after review of available data, ACIP
did not support a universal recommendation for a second dose of Tdap for the general
population (see No Additional Doses of Tdap For the General Population). In 2014 and
2015, ACIP did not support a second dose of Tdap for health care personnel or close
contacts  of  infants.  Top  Periodically,  ACIP  reviews  available  information  to  inform  the
development  or  revision  of  its  vaccine  recommendations.  In  February  2009,  the  ACIP
Pertussis Vaccines Work Group was formed to review and revise previously published
vaccine recommendations for DTaP, DT, Td, TT, and Tdap because of 1) the availability
of  new  licensed  DTaP  vaccine  products  since  1997;  2)  multiple  ACIP  updates  to  the
adolescent  and  adult  Tdap  recommendations;  3)  new  U.S.  Food  and  Drug
Administration  (FDA)  age  indications  for  both  Tdap  vaccine  products;  4)  the  need  to
incorporate  pertussis,  tetanus,  and  diphtheria  vaccine  recommendations  into  a  single
document; 5) new data on Tdap coverage, impact, and vaccine effectiveness; and 6)
the discontinuation of TT vaccine manufacturing and availability in the United States.
The  work  group  held  teleconference  meetings  monthly  from  April  2009  through  April
2015.  In  addition  to  ACIP  members,  the  work  group  included  participants  from  the
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP),
American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists  (ACOG),  the  Association  of
Immunization Managers, CDC, the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, FDA,
the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the National Institute of Health, and other
infectious  disease  experts  (7).*  Issues  reviewed  and  considered  by  the  work  group
included epidemiology of pertussis, tetanus, and diphtheria in the United States; use of
Tdap  vaccine  among  persons  aged  ≥65  years,  children  aged  7–10  years,  health  care
personnel, and women during pregnancy; minimum interval between the last tetanus

toxoid–containing  vaccine  and  receipt  of  Tdap;  effectiveness  of  Tdap  vaccine;  and
vaccine  safety.  Recommendation  options  were  developed  and  discussed  by  the  work
group.  The  work  group  evaluated  the  available  published  and  unpublished  data  and
evidence  regarding  pertussis  disease  epidemiology  in  the  United  States,  decision
analyses,  cost-effectiveness,  programmatic  considerations,  vaccine  immunogenicity,
vaccine  safety,  and  postlicensure  Tdap  vaccine  effectiveness.  When  evidence  was
lacking, the recommendations incorporated expert opinion of the work group members
(6,8–10). From June 2010 through June 2015 at 11 ACIP meetings, a summary of the
data  reviewed,  work  group  discussions,  and  proposed  changes  to  recommendations
were  presented.  During  these  11  meetings,  changes  to  recommendations,  if  made,
were approved either as submitted or as amended by ACIP and then published as policy
notes
 in
 MMWR.
 A
 summary
 of
 these
 recommendations
 is
 available
 at
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/52821. During the preparation of this summary report,
nonsystematic  literature  searches  for  specific  topics  were  conducted  in  PubMed  and
Google Scholar for published literature in English available in print or online to provide
more  updated  data  and  information  since  publication  of  any  ACIP  vaccine
recommendations  for  DTaP,  DT,  Td,  TT,  and  Tdap  published  in  MMWR;  a  document
containing  the  literature  search  topics,  search  terms,  search  period,  and  references
selected  is  available  at  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/52823.  The  contents  of  this
summary  report  were  presented  to  ACIP  and  approved  at  the  October  2016  ACIP
meeting. During the review process, CDC modified the summary to update and clarify
wording.  ACIP  meeting  minutes,  including  declaration  of  ACIP  member  conflicts  of
interest,
 are
 available
 at
 https://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/acip/meetings/meetings-info.html.  One  ACIP  member  abstained  from  voting
because of a conflict of interest. Top Pertussis is an acute respiratory disease caused by
the  bacterium  Bordetella  pertussis  (11).  Classic  pertussis  disease  is  characterized  by
three  phases  of  illness:  catarrhal,  paroxysmal,  and  convalescent  (11–13).  During  the

catarrhal  phase,  infected  persons  experience  coryza  (inflammation  of  the  mucous
membranes  of  the  nasal  cavities),  mild  occasional  cough,  and  low-grade  fever.  The
paroxysmal  phase  is  characterized  by  spasmodic  cough,  posttussive  vomiting,  and
inspiratory  whoop.  Symptoms  slowly  improve  during  the  convalescent  phase,  which
generally  lasts  7–10  days,  but  can  last  for  months.  Factors  that  affect  the  clinical
presentation of pertussis include age, the level of immunity, history of vaccination, and
use  of  antimicrobials  early  during  the  course  of  the  illness  (11).  B.  pertussis  is
transmitted  primarily  from  person  to  person  through  aerosolized  respiratory  droplets
generated by coughing or sneezing. Persons with pertussis are most infectious during
the catarrhal and early paroxysmal phases of illness (12). Pertussis generally is treated
with  antibiotics,  which  are  used  to  control  the  signs  and  symptoms  and  to  prevent
infected persons from spreading the infection to others. Recommended antibiotics for
pertussis
 include
 azithromycin,
 clarithroymycin,
 erythromycin,
 or
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). Guidance for the treatment of pertussis has
been published previously (14). Guidance on postexposure prophylaxis of pertussis is
available  at  https://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/outbreaks/pep.html.  In  the  United  States,
pertussis  is  a  nationally  notifiable  disease  (15).  During  1934–1943,  before  the
introduction of childhood pertussis vaccination in the United States, an annual average
of 200,752 pertussis cases and 4,034 pertussis-related deaths were reported (16). After
introduction of whole-cell pertussis vaccine during the 1940s, the number of reported
pertussis cases declined dramatically, reaching an historic low of 1,010 in 1976 (Figure
1)  (3).  Since  the  1980s,  there  has  been  an  overall  trend  of  an  increase  in  reported
pertussis cases, especially among adolescents and adults (17–19). Although pertussis is
cyclic in nature, with peaks in disease every 3 to 5 years, the peaks have gotten higher,
notably in 2004 (25,827 cases), 2005 (25,616 cases), 2010 (27,500 cases), and 2012
(48,277 cases) (20–24). The increase in reported pertussis cases is likely attributable to
an actual increase in the burden of disease; however, other factors have contributed to

the  estimates  of  disease  burden.  These  include  improvements  in  diagnostic  testing,
increased health care personnel and public awareness of pertussis, and better reporting
of cases (17,18,25–27). A growing body of evidence strongly suggests that the change
in vaccines in the late 1990s from whole-cell pertussis vaccines to acellular pertussis
vaccines  in  the  childhood  vaccine  series  has  caused  the  age-specific  increases  in
pertussis  incidence  among  children  aged  7–10  years  observed  in  the  mid-2000s
because  of  waning  immunity  (Figure  2)  (28–30).  In  the  United  States,  coverage  with
pertussis-containing  vaccines  varies  across  age  groups.  Vaccination  coverage  with
DTaP in children aged 19–35 months remains consistently high, at 95.0% for ≥3 DTaP
doses and 84.6% for ≥4 DTaP doses reported in 2015 (31). Coverage for ≥4 DTaP doses
is below the Healthy People 2020 target of 90% (32). Since the introduction of Tdap in
2005, coverage with Tdap in adolescents aged 13–17 years has increased substantially,
from 10.8% in 2006 to 86.4% in 2015 (33,34). Tdap coverage among adolescents has
met the Healthy People 2020 target of 80% (35). In 2015, for adults aged ≥19 years,
the  proportion  receiving  any  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  (e.g,  TT,  Td,  or  Tdap)
during  the  preceding  10  years  was  62.1%  (19–49  years),  64.1%  (50–64  years),  and
56.9%  (≥65  years);  Tdap  coverage  was  23.1%  (36).  Among  pregnant  women,  Tdap
coverage  during  the  2015–2016  influenza  season  was  48.8%  (37).  Although  pertussis
vaccination  has  resulted  in  a  markedly  reduced  incidence  of  pertussis  cases  and
deaths, pertussis still causes morbidity in persons of all ages. Compared with all other
age  groups,  infants  aged  <12  months  have  substantially  higher  rates  of  pertussis
disease,  complications,  hospitalizations,  and  pertussis-related  deaths  (38–40).  The
highest  percentage  of  pertussis-related  hospitalizations  and  deaths  occurs  among
infants  aged  <2  months  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016)  (38,41).  During  2004–2016,
among all infants hospitalized for pertussis, 54.4% were aged <2 months; of the infant
pertussis cases who died, 85.5% were aged <2 months and too young to have received
any doses of pertussis vaccines (CDC, unpublished data, 2016). Over the past decade,

with the changing pertussis epidemiology, a shift in the source of pertussis transmission
to  infants  has  been  observed,  with  siblings  rather  than  mothers  being  the  most
common  source  of  pertussis  infection  for  infants  (40,42,43).  Although  infants  have
substantially  higher  rates  of  reported  pertussis  compared  with  other  age  groups,  an
increase  in  the  number  of  reported  pertussis  cases  among  children  and  adolescents
since  the  mid-2000s  has  been  attributed  to  the  waning  of  acellular  pertussis
vaccine-induced immunity (Figure 2). This increase was first observed in children aged
7–10  years  who  were  among  the  first  birth  cohorts  to  exclusively  receive  5  doses  of
acellular pertussis (DTaP) vaccine following the switch from DTP in 1997 (28). As this
birth  cohort  aged,  an  increase  in  reported  pertussis  cases  also  was  observed  among
those aged 13–14 years in 2012 (29,44). Continued monitoring of national surveillance
data will permit further characterization of the impact of acellular pertussis vaccines on
the evolving epidemiology of pertussis that has been observed over the past decade.
Top Tetanus is a life-threatening but vaccine-preventable disease caused by a potent
neurotoxin produced by Clostridium tetani. The organism is a ubiquitous, spore-forming,
motile  Gram-positive  bacillus  found  in  high  concentrations  in  soil  and  animal
excrement.  C.  tetani  spores  enter  the  body  through  breaches  in  the  skin  or  mucous
membranes. Germination of C. tetani spores occurs under anaerobic conditions, such as
in necrotic tissue that can result from deep puncture wounds or blunt trauma. C. tetani
bacilli vegetate and produce tetanospasmin, a powerful exotoxin that binds irreversibly
with  neural  tissue  and  causes  spasms  and  rigidity  of  skeletal  muscles.  Direct
person-to-person transmission of C. tetani does not occur (45). The incubation period
from injury to symptom onset varies from 3 to 21 days (median: 7 days), with extremes
of 1 day to several months. The incubation period depends on the severity and site of
the wound. Shorter incubation periods are associated with more severe disease and a
poorer  prognosis;  longer  incubation  periods  are  associated  with  injuries  furthest  from
the central nervous system. The course of disease is variable but is usually intense for

≥4  weeks  before  subsiding.  The  convalescent  period  is  usually  protracted  and
long-term  neurologic  sequelae  and  intellectual  and  behavioral  abnormalities  might
follow recovery. The case-fatality ratio for tetanus is highest in infants and the elderly,
and  can  be  as  high  as  100%  without  high-quality  medical  care,  but  is  approximately
10%–20% even in modern health care facilities (46). Tetanus is a nationally notifiable
disease  in  the  United  States  (15).  After  the  introduction  of  universal  vaccination  with
tetanus  toxoid–containing  (TT)  vaccines  in  the  mid-1940s,  the  incidence  of  reported
tetanus  in  the  United  States  declined  by  >98%,  from  0.39  per  100,000  population  in
1947,  when  national  reporting  began,  to  0.01  per  100,000  population  by  2016  (CDC,
unpublished  data,  2016)  (Figure  3).  The  decline  in  incidence  occurred  across  all  age
groups. Deaths from tetanus also declined similarly during this period. The decline in
morbidity and mortality is attributable to widespread use of tetanus toxoid–containing
vaccines;  improved  wound  management,  including  use  of  tetanus  prophylaxis  in
emergency  departments;  improved  hygiene  during  childbirth;  increased  levels  of
maternal immunity; and expanded urbanization (45). Tetanus occurs primarily among
older  adults  (47).  During  2001–2016,  three  neonatal  tetanus  cases  and  459
non-neonatal  tetanus  cases  were  reported  to  the  National  Notifiable  Diseases
Surveillance System (NNDSS). The median age for non-neonatal cases was 44.0 years
(range:  2–95  years);  60%  of  cases  occurred  in  males  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016).
The risk for both tetanus disease and mortality was higher among persons aged ≥65
years  than  among  persons  aged  <65  years  (48).  Tetanus  occurs  almost  exclusively
among  persons  who  are  unvaccinated  or  inadequately  vaccinated  or  in  those  whose
vaccination  histories  are  unknown  or  uncertain.  The  case-fatality  ratio  for  reported
tetanus  in  the  United  States  declined  from  18%  (1998–2000)  to  8.0%  (2001–2016)
(CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016)  (48,49).  The  minimum  level  of  circulating  antitetanus
antibodies associated with protection against tetanus is assay-specific. The acceptable
level  of  circulating  antitetanus  antibodies  required  for  protection  is  0.01  IU/mL  as

measured  in  an  in  vivo  toxin  neutralization  assay.  When  in  vitro  methods,  such  as
standard  enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assays  (ELISA),  are  used,  antibody  level
readings of at least 0.1–0.2 IU/mL are considered protective (50). The National Health
and  Nutritional  Examination  Survey  (NHANES  III),  a  population-based  national
serosurvey conducted in the United States during 1988–1994, found that approximately
80%  of  adolescents  aged  12–19  years  and  >80%  of  adults  aged  20–39  years  had
seroprotective  concentrations  of  antitetanus  toxoid  antibodies  (51).  In  this  survey,  a
standard  ELISA  test  was  used  to  assess  antibody  levels  with  levels  >0.15  IU/mL
considered  as  protective.  The  proportions  of  persons  lacking  protective  levels  of
circulating antibodies against tetanus toxin increased with age, with a greater rate of
decline among women. By age 70 years, only 45% of men and 21% of women had a
protective level of antibodies to tetanus. Previous military service was associated with a
higher prevalence of protective antibodies to tetanus in men, presumably because of
routine vaccination during military service. The low prevalence of detectable antibodies
and  the  high  proportion  of  tetanus  cases  among  older  adults  reflects  the  high
proportion of older adults who possibly never received primary DTP vaccination or have
waning immunity if they never received subsequent tetanus toxoid–containing booster
doses (48,51). Immunity to tetanus toxin is rarely if ever acquired naturally, but tetanus
is  preventable  through  the  use  of  highly  effective  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccines
(i.e., DTaP, DT, Td, or Tdap) (50). Completing a 5-dose childhood vaccination series with
DTaP  before  age  7  years  is  necessary  for  developing  protective  levels  of  antitetanus
antibodies  that  persist  into  the  adolescent  years,  when  a  booster  dose  of  vaccine  is
needed; thereafter, decennial boosters with Td administered throughout adulthood are
recommended to maintain protection against tetanus (52). Top Respiratory diphtheria
is  an  acute,  communicable  infectious  illness  caused  by  toxigenic  strains  of
Corynebacterium  diphtheriae,  which  are  nonmotile,  nonencapsulated,  club-shaped,
Gram-positive bacilli. Although rare, toxin-producing Corynebacterium ulcerans can also

cause  a  diphtheria-like  illness  (53).  Vaccination  with  diphtheria  toxoid-containing
vaccines (i.e., DTaP, DT, Tdap, or Td) prevents diphtheria (54). Toxin-producing strains
of C. diphtheriae can cause disease in susceptible persons by multiplying and producing
diphtheria  toxin  in  either  nasopharyngeal  or  skin  lesions.  The  classic  feature  of
respiratory diphtheria is a gray-colored pseudomembrane that is firmly adherent to the
mucosa
 lining
 the
 nasopharynx,
 tonsils,
 or
 larynx.
 The
 extension
 of
 the
pseudomembrane  into  the  trachea-bronchial  tree  might  cause  life-threatening  airway
obstruction. In addition, systemic absorption and dissemination of diphtheria toxin can
cause toxin-mediated cardiac and neurologic complications (55). In the United States,
diphtheria  is  a  nationally  notifiable  disease  (15).  Reported  diphtheria  cases  from  all
anatomical  sites  declined  from  approximately  200,000  in  1921  to  15,536  in  1940
(Figure  4).  This  decline  continued  after  the  introduction  of  universal  childhood
vaccination in the late 1940s and, in 1980, only two cases of diphtheria were reported
(56).  Since  1980,  cutaneous  diphtheria  has  not  been  reportable  and  only  respiratory
cases are reportable to NNDSS. During 1996–2016, a total of 13 cases were reported
(CDC, unpublished data, 2016) (21–23,57–63). Although no cases were reported during
2004–2011,  a  probable  case  with  a  positive  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  test  for
the diphtheria toxin gene (“tox”) occurred in 2012, and a case positive by culture with
nontoxigenic  C.  diphtheriae  was  reported  in  2014  (24,47).  Although  childhood  DTaP
vaccination coverage is >80% in the United States, immunity acquired from childhood
vaccination wanes in the absence of decennial boosters, and older adults might not be
adequately  protected  (51).  An  analysis  of  NHANES  III  indicated  that  only  60%  of  the
overall  population  sample  had  immunity  to  diphtheria  (defined  as  an  antidiphtheria
toxoid  concentration  of  >0.1  IU/mL).  This  immunity  declined  progressively  with
increasing age from 91% at age 6–11 years and 80% among adolescents aged 12–19
years, to approximately 30% among those aged 60–69 years (54). Data from the 2015
National  Immunization  Survey  (NIS)  indicated  that  61.6%  of  adults  aged  19–49  years

received  any  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccination  during  the  preceding  10  years,
64.1%  (aged  50–64  years),  and  56.9%  (aged  ≥65  years)  (36).  Although  rare  in  the
United States, exposure to diphtheria remains possible during travel to countries with
endemic  disease†  or  from  imported  cases  (64).  Information  about  the  clinical
management of diphtheria, including use of diphtheria antitoxin, and the public health
response is available at https://www.cdc.gov/diphtheria/clinicians.html. Top Vaccines of
different compositions, formulations, and combinations are licensed and available in the
United  States  for  different  age  groups  to  prevent  pertussis,  tetanus,  and  diphtheria
(Tables 4 and 5). The indication and age for vaccination might differ by vaccine product
and  licensure.  In  certain  situations,  the  off-label  use  of  Tdap  vaccine  has  been
recommended, including the absence of a minimum interval between the last tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccine  and  receipt  of  Tdap,  catch-up  vaccination  for  those  aged
7–10 years, and vaccination of women during each pregnancy (6,8). TT vaccine became
commercially  available  in  the  United  States  in  1938.  After  the  1940s,  tetanus  toxoid
was available in combination with diphtheria toxoid with or without whole-cell pertussis
antigens in vaccines. Although single antigen TT was used predominantly before 1960,
use  of  Td  has  replaced  TT;  production  of  TT  was  discontinued  in  2013.  In  the  United
States, manufactured tetanus toxoid is adsorbed to aluminum salt adjuvants (aluminum
hydroxide,  aluminum  phosphate,  or  aluminum  sulfate),  thimerosal-free,  and  highly
purified, with <0.02% formaldehyde and <1.25 mg aluminum. Pediatric formulations of
tetanus toxoid–containing vaccines (DT and DTaP) contain 5–10 limit of flocculation (Lf)
units of the antigen (Table 4). Adolescent and adult formulations (Td and Tdap) contain
≤5  Lf  units  of  tetanus  toxoid  per  0.5  ml  dose  (Table  5).  More  than  a  single  dose  of
vaccine is required to induce immunologic protection, and booster doses are required to
maintain protection. Although no randomized controlled clinical trial of the efficacy of
tetanus  toxoid  in  preventing  disease  ever  has  been  conducted,  evidence  from
observational  studies  consistently  supports  the  effectiveness  of  vaccination.  The

incidence of tetanus among U.S. army personnel declined from 13.4 per 100,000 during
World War I (when personnel were unvaccinated) to 0.44 per 100,000 during World War
II (when personnel routinely were vaccinated with TT and also vaccinated following an
injury) (65). Similar observations were made among British army personnel during the
same  periods  during  the  two  world  wars  (66).  The  effectiveness  of  tetanus  toxoid  is
very  high,  although  not  100%.  Although  data  on  a  minimum  antitetanus  antibody
cut-off level for protection are sparse, it is generally accepted that levels at 0.01 IU/mL
and  above  by  in  vivo  toxin  neutralization  assay  are  protective  (46,54).  One  dose  of
tetanus  toxoid  vaccine  provides  little,  if  any,  immunity.  After  receiving  3  doses  of
tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine,  virtually  all  infants  and  adults  develop  protective
tetanus  antitoxin  titers  >0.1  IU/mL.  A  primary  immunization  series  with  3  doses  of
tetanus toxoid induced a mean antitetanus level of 0.2 IU/mL, and antibody levels from
primary  vaccination  provide  protection  from  tetanus  for  approximately  3–5  years
(67–69). Additional booster tetanus doses heighten the immune response and prolong
the  duration  of  protective  immunity.  Booster  doses  at  age  4–8  years  and  during
adolescence  provide  long-lasting  protective  immunity  and  a  duration  of  20–30  years
from  the  last  dose  has  been  suggested  (50).  Diphtheria  toxoid  was  shown  to  be
immunogenic  in  1923  and  has  since  been  used  as  the  immunizing  agent  against
diphtheria  (70).  The  immunogenicity  of  diphtheria  toxoid  is  improved  when  it  is
adsorbed  onto  an  adjuvant  (most  commonly  aluminum  hydroxide  or  aluminum
phosphate). By the mid-1940s, diphtheria toxoid was combined with tetanus toxoid and
pertussis  vaccine  as  DTP  and  later  adsorbed  onto  an  aluminum  salt  and  used  in  the
routine
 childhood
 vaccination
 program.
 Only
 vaccines
 containing
formaldehyde-inactivated  diphtheria  toxin  adsorbed  to  an  aluminum  salt  adjuvant
combined with tetanus toxoid with or without acellular pertussis vaccines are available
in the United States (Tables 4 and 5). More than a single dose of vaccine is required to
induce immunologic protection, and booster doses are required to maintain protection

(71). Although no randomized controlled clinical trial of the efficacy of diphtheria toxoid
in  preventing  disease  has  ever  been  conducted,  strong  evidence  from  observational
studies supports the effectiveness of vaccination (72). The effectiveness of diphtheria
toxoid  is  high,  although  not  100%.  After  receiving  3  doses  of  diphtheria
toxoid–containing vaccines, virtually all infants develop diphtheria antitoxin titers >0.01
IU/mL (71,73,74). Although some DTaP products produce lower geometric mean titers
than those observed after vaccination with DTP, these differences are not thought likely
to  be  clinically  significant.  For  primary  vaccination  of  adults  aged  ≥19  years,  data
suggest  that  virtually  all  adults  develop  diphtheria  antitoxin  titers  >0.01  IU/mL  after
receiving  3  doses  of  diphtheria  toxoid–containing  vaccines  (75,76).  A  diphtheria
antitoxin level of 0.01 to 0.09 IU/mL provides some degree of protection, whereas levels
≥0.1  IU/mL  are  considered  protective  and  levels  >1.0  IU/mL  are  associated  with
long-lasting protection (77). Although no level of circulating diphtheria antitoxin confers
absolute  protection,  most  reports  indicate  that  C.  diphtheriae  infection  in  previously
vaccinated  persons  is  milder  and  less  likely  to  be  fatal  (56,78,79).  The  failure  of  the
vaccine  to  protect  all  persons  exposed  to  C.  diphtheriae  highlights  the  importance  of
maintaining  high  vaccination  coverage  and  herd  immunity  to  prevent  or  limit
transmission and outbreaks, as evidenced by the disappearance of diphtheria cases in
industrialized  countries  with  established  vaccination  programs.  Although  various
schedules used worldwide for primary vaccination (3 doses during infancy or 4 doses by
age  15  months)  appear  to  provide  adequate  protection  from  diphtheria  in  the  early
years  of  life,  a  booster  dose  is  needed  at  age  4–6  years  to  maintain  protection
throughout  the  school-age  years  (71).  The  massive  epidemic  in  the  former  Union  of
Soviet  Socialist  Republics  in  the  1990s  strongly  suggests  that  sustaining  high
vaccination  coverage  with  a  primary  series  of  diphtheria  toxoid–containing  vaccine
among infants and administering booster doses at school entry and throughout life are
important  for  maintaining  population  immunity  (80).  In  developed  countries  where

diphtheria is well controlled, there is little to no opportunity for exposure and natural
boosting  of  immunity  from  infection  after  childhood.  The  World  Health  Organization
(WHO)  recommends  that  persons  living  in  areas  of  low  endemicity  or  areas  where
disease  is  not  endemic  should  receive  booster  doses  of  combined  diphtheria  and
tetanus  toxoids  approximately  10  years  after  completing  the  primary  series  and
subsequently every 10 years throughout life (70). As of 2016, one DT vaccine product
and  two  Td  vaccine  products  are  licensed  by  FDA  and  available  in  the  United  States
(Tables 4 and 5); production of TT vaccine was discontinued in 2013, and it is no longer
available in the United States. DT product (no trade name; Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater,
Pennsylvania) is licensed by FDA for active vaccination against diphtheria and tetanus
in  children  up  to  age  7  years  for  whom  the  pertussis  vaccine  component  is
contraindicated  or  in  situations  when  the  health  care  provider  decides  that  pertussis
vaccine should not be administered. The concentration of diphtheria toxoid is higher in
DT vaccine compared to Td vaccine. Additional information is available in the package
insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M142732.pdf). Tenivac (Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania) is licensed by FDA as
a  booster  vaccination  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  in  persons  aged  ≥7  years.
Additional
 information
 is
 available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M152826.pdf).  Td  product  (no  trade  name;  manufactured  by  MassBiologics,  Boston,
Massachusetts;  distributed  by  Grifols,  Los  Angeles,  California)  is  licensed  by  FDA  for
active  vaccination  for  the  prevention  of  tetanus  and  diphtheria  in  persons  aged  ≥7
years.
 Additional
 information
 is
 available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M164127.pdf). In the United States, all vaccines available for preventing pertussis are
acellular  pertussis  formulations  combined  with  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids.

Depending on the manufacturer, the pertussis antigens included in acellular pertussis
vaccines  are:  pertussis  toxin  (PT),  filamentous  haemagglutinin  (FHA),  pertactin  (PRN)
and/or fimbriae types 2 and 3 (FIM). The amount of pertussis antigens present differs
depending on the vaccine type and manufacturer (Tables 4 and 5). No “pertussis-only”
vaccines are licensed in the United States. Vaccine efficacy studies have demonstrated
a correlation between the presence of antipertussis antibodies and protection against
pertussis  disease,  but  there  are  no  well-accepted  definitive  serologic  or  laboratory
correlates  of  protection  against  pertussis  (81–85).  Antibody  studies  are  useful  for
comparing the immune responses elicited by a single vaccine under different conditions
or  in  different  studies,  whereas  efficacy  studies  are  important  to  measure  clinical
protection  conferred  by  each  pertussis  vaccine  (54).  Licensure  of  new  pertussis
vaccines  is  based  on  the  overall  safety  profile  and  the  demonstration  of
immunogenicity  not  inferior  to  U.S.-licensed  pediatric  DTaP  products  in  clinical  trials
(86).  In  a  noninferiority  trial,  immunogenicity,  efficacy,  or  safety  endpoints  are
demonstrated when a new product is at least as good as a comparator on the basis of a
predefined and narrow margin for a clinically acceptable difference between the study
groups  (87).  DTaP  vaccines  consist  of  pertussis  antigens  and  diphtheria  and  tetanus
toxoids (Table 4). Depending on vaccine type and manufacturer, the composition and
amount of pertussis antigen and amount of diphtheria and tetanus toxoids differs. The
FDA-approved  age  indication  for  use  of  DTaP  vaccines  differs,  depending  upon  the
specific DTaP product (Table 4). Data on immunogenicity and safety of DTaP vaccines
have been published (3,88–94). As of 2016, two DTaP vaccines are licensed by FDA and
available in the United States: Infanrix (GlaxoSmithKline [GSK], Rixensart, Belgium) and
Daptacel  (Sanofi  Pasteur,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania).  Immunogenicity  and  safety  data
for each of these vaccines have been published (3,88,89,91). Infanrix (GSK) is licensed
by  FDA  for  active  vaccination  against  diphtheria,  tetanus,  and  pertussis  as  a  5-dose
series in infants and children aged 6 weeks through 6 years. Additional information is

available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M124514.pdf).  Daptacel  (Sanofi  Pasteur)  is  licensed  by  FDA  for  active  vaccination
against  diphtheria,  tetanus,  and  pertussis  as  a  5-dose  series  in  infants  and  children
aged 6 weeks through 6 years. Additional information is available in the package insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M103037.pdf). As of 2016, four combination vaccines that contain the components of
DTaP vaccines are licensed by FDA and available in the United States: DTaP-IPV-HepB
(Pediarix,  GSK,  Rixensart,  Belgium),  DTaP-IPV  (Kinrix,  GSK,  Rixensart,  Belgium),
DTaP-IPV/Hib  (Pentacel,  Sanofi  Pasteur,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania),  and  DTaP-IPV
(Quadracel, Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania). Combination vaccines with DTaP
have  been  shown  to  be  both  safe  and  immunogenic,  and  have  similar  safety  profiles
and  antibody  responses  compared  with  DTaP  administered  by  itself  (95–97).
DTaP-IPV-HepB  (Pediarix)  contains  DTaP,  inactivated  poliovirus  (IPV),  and  Hepatitis  B
(recombinant) (HepB). Pediarix is approved by FDA for use as a 3-dose series in infants
born  to  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (HBsAg)-negative  mothers.  Pediarix  can  be
administered  as  early  as  age  6  weeks  through  6  years.  Additional  information  is
available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M241874.pdf).  DTaP-IPV  (Kinrix)  contains  DTaP  and  IPV.  Kinrix  is  licensed  by  FDA  for
use as the fifth dose of the DTaP vaccine series and the fourth dose of the IPV series in
children aged 4–6 years whose previous DTaP vaccine doses were DTaP (Infanrix, GSK)
and/or DTaP-HepB-IPV (Pediarix, GSK) for the first 3 doses and DTaP (Infanrix) for the
fourth
 dose.
 Additional
 information
 is
 available
 in
 the
 package
 insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M241453.pdf). DTaP-IPV/Hib (Pentacel) contains DTaP, IPV, and Haemophilus influenzae
type b (Hib) conjugate. Pentacel is licensed by FDA for use as a 4-dose series in children

aged 6 weeks through 4 years. Additional information is available in the package insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M109810.pdf).  DTaP-IPV  (Quadracel)  contains  DTaP  and  IPV.  Quadracel  is  licensed  by
FDA for use as the fifth dose of the DTaP vaccine series and the fourth or fifth dose of
the IPV series in children aged 4 through 6 years who have previously received 4 doses
of  Pentacel  and/or  Daptacel  vaccine.  Further  information  is  available  in  the  package
insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M439903.pdf). Infanrix (GSK): One month after receiving 3 doses of Infanrix at ages 2,
4, and 6 months, ≥83% of children had a fourfold or greater antibody response to PT,
FHA, and PRN (98). All children developed diphtheria antitoxin titers of ≥0.1 IU/mL and
tetanus  antitoxin  titers  of  ≥0.01  IU/mL  (i.e.,  indications  of  immunity  against  these
diseases) (3). Whether the first 3 doses were Infanrix or DTP, >80% of children aged
15–20 months had a fourfold or greater rise in serum antibody to each of the pertussis
vaccine antigens after a fourth dose of Infanrix (99). Immunogenicity data on the fifth
dose were not required for FDA approval (100). Daptacel (Sanofi Pasteur): After 4 doses
of Daptacel, the antibody response to pertussis antigens among U.S. infants was similar
to  that  achieved  among  Swedish  infants  in  whom  efficacy  was  demonstrated  after
receiving 3 doses of Daptacel (88,101). Diphtheria antitoxin levels of ≥1.0 IU/mL were
achieved by 98.5% of children, and 100% of children achieved tetanus antitoxin levels
of ≥1.0 IU/mL (101). Licensure for use of Daptacel as a fifth dose at age 4–6 years was
based on the assumption that children previously primed with this vaccine will have a
robust  immune  response  to  a  booster  dose  of  the  same  vaccine.  For  diphtheria  and
tetanus,  it  was  expected  that  most  children  will  have  protective  levels  of  antibody
following booster vaccination (102). Pediarix (GSK) (DTaP-HepB-IPV): The immunologic
response of all antigens in Pediarix (diphtheria and tetanus toxoids; pertussis antigens;
Hepatitis B virus; and inactivated poliovirus Types 1, 2, and 3) following 3 doses at age

2,  4,  and  6  months  was  generally  similar  to  those  following  3  doses  of  separately
administered Infanrix [DTaP (GSK)], ENGERIX-B (HepB), and oral poliovirus vaccine (89).
Kinrix  (GSK)  (DTaP-IPV):  The  immunogenicity  of  all  antigens  in  Kinrix  (diphtheria  and
tetanus toxoids; pertussis antigens; and inactivated poliovirus Types 1, 2, and 3) was
similar between groups (DTaP-IPV and separately administered DTaP and IPV vaccines)
with or without a co-administered second dose of measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR)
vaccine (92). Pentacel (Sanofi Pasteur) (DTaP-IPV/Hib): The immunologic response of all
antigens  in  Pentacel  (diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids;  pertussis  antigens;  inactivated
poliovirus types 1, 2, and 3; and Haemophilus influenzae Type b conjugate) following 3
or 4 doses generally was similar to those following separately administered component
vaccines  (86,103).  Immune  responses  following  the  first  and  second  doses  were  not
measured  (93).  Quadracel  (Sanofi  Pasteur)  (DTaP-IPV):  The  immunogenicity  of  all
antigens  in  Quadracel  (diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids;  pertussis  antigens;  and
inactivated poliovirus types 1, 2, and 3) was noninferior between groups (DTaP-IPV and
separately administered DTaP [Daptacel] and IPV [IPOL, Sanofi Pasteur] vaccines) with
or  without  a  co-administered  second  dose  of  MMR  and  varicella  vaccines  (94).  The
efficacy of both DTaP vaccine products (Infanrix [GSK] and Daptacel [Sanofi Pasteur])
was  evaluated  in  prelicensure  trials  in  which  participants  received  a  3-dose  series  at
ages 2, 4, and 6 months (104–106). The vaccine efficacy estimates for 3 doses of DTaP
against pertussis disease§ ranged from 79% to 89%, with a follow-up time up to 2 years
after  receipt  of  the  third  dose  (104–106).  Assessment  of  the  5-dose  DTaP  series
indicated that the estimated overall effectiveness of the pertussis vaccine was 88.7%
(95% confidence interval [CI] = 79.4%–93.8%); within the first year after the fifth DTaP
dose,  vaccine  effectiveness  was  98.1%  (95%  CI  =  96.1%–99.1%)  (28).  However,
vaccine effectiveness declined with increasing time since receipt of the fifth DTaP dose;
by ≥5 years since the fifth DTaP dose, vaccine effectiveness was estimated at 71.2%
(95%  CI  =  45.8%–84.8%)  (28).  Other  studies  support  the  findings  of  a  progressive

decrease in DTaP vaccine effectiveness and increased risk for pertussis over time after
receipt of the fifth dose (107,108). In contrast, an early assessment of DTaP indicated
100% vaccine effectiveness against pertussis for a limited period of time after receipt of
5 doses in children up to age 5 years, but this assessment was done shortly after ACIP
issued the 5-dose DTaP recommendation and the majority of participants had received
DTP  as  the  first  3  doses  (109).  Studies  conducted  since  the  introduction  of  acellular
pertussis vaccines in the United States have supported the safety of DTaP (110–123). A
summary  of  these  studies  is  available  at  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/52822.  Many
of  these  studies  were  performed  through  surveillance  for  adverse  events  following
vaccine  receipt  through  two  systems  in  the  United  States,  Vaccine  Adverse  Event
Reporting  System  (VAERS)  and  Vaccine  Safety  Datalink  (VSD).  VAERS  is  a  national
passive surveillance system operated jointly by CDC and FDA that receives reports of
adverse  events  following  vaccination  from  health  care  personnel,  manufacturers,
vaccine  recipients,  and  others  (124).  VSD  is  a  collaborative  effort  of  CDC  and  eight
managed  care  organizations  in  the  United  States  and  allows  for  planned  vaccination
safety studies and timely investigation of hypotheses that arise from the review of the
medical  literature,  reports  to  VAERS,  changes  in  the  vaccination  schedule,  or  the
introduction  of  new  vaccines  (125).  During  January  1,  1990–July  31,  2015,  VAERS
received  46,448  reports  involving  receipt  of  one  of  the  five  DTaP  vaccines  that  are
available  in  the  United  States  during  that  period  (Daptacel,  Infanrix,  Kinrix,  Pediarix,
and  Pentacel);  44,061  (95%)  of  the  reports  involved  children  aged  <6  years.  DTaP
vaccine  was  administered  concurrently  with  one  or  more  other  vaccines  in  40,868
(88%) case reports (CDC, unpublished data, 2016). The median time from vaccination
to onset of an adverse event was 1 day. The most frequently reported adverse events
were  injection-site  erythema  (11,879  [26%]),  pyrexia  (9,225  [20%]),  injection-site
swelling  (6,964  [15%]),  erythema  site  other  than  injection  site  or  site  not  specified
(5,339 [12%]), and injection-site warmth (4,468 [10%]). When VAERS DTaP reports for

each  vaccine  brand  were  compared  individually  with  those  for  all  other  inactivated
vaccines  in  the  VAERS  database,  no  concerning  patterns  of  adverse  events  were
observed. Among all DTaP vaccine-related reports, 5,205 (11%) were coded as serious
(i.e.,  one  of  the  following  outcomes  was  reported:  death,  life-threatening  illness,
hospitalization,  prolongation  of  hospitalization,  or  permanent  disability).  Among  those
reports  coded  as  serious,  the  most  frequent  adverse  events  were  pyrexia  (1,795
[35%]),  vomiting  (1,420  [27%]),  irritability  (1,101  [21%]),  seizure  (938  [18%]),  and
intussusception  (746  [14%]).  In  97%  of  the  728  intussusception  reports,  rotavirus
vaccine  was  administered  concomitantly.  Intussusception  has  been  associated  with
administration of both U.S.-licensed rotavirus vaccine products (126,127). A total of 793
deaths  following  receipt  of  DTaP  vaccines  were  reported  in  VAERS  during  the  study
period  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2016).  An  autopsy  report  or  other  type  of  medical
record was available for 682 (86%) reports and reviewed for cause of death. The most
frequent  reported  cause  of  death  was  sudden  infant  death  syndrome  (SIDS)  in  338
(49.6%) reports. Other categories of death included asphyxiation (47 [6.8%]); diseases
of the respiratory system (44 [6.5%]); diseases of the circulatory system (27 [3.9%]);
certain infections or parasitic diseases (27 [3.9%]); diseases of the nervous system (24
[3.5%]);  and  congenital  malformations,  deformations  and  chromosomal  abnormalities
(23 [3.4%]). In 90 (13.2%) death reports, the cause was undetermined and in 62 (9.1%)
death  reports  various  other  causes  were  reported  (e.g.,  blunt  force  trauma).  These
reported  frequencies  are  similar  to  those  observed  with  overall  U.S.  infant  mortality
data  and  among  recipients  of  other  recommended  childhood  vaccines  (128).  Two
recent VSD studies do not suggest a causal relation or increased risk for death following
vaccination  of  any  type  (129,130).  Because  of  concerns  about  the  possible  role  of
vaccines  with  acellular  pertussis  components  in  causing  neurologic  reactions  or
exacerbating  underlying  neurologic  conditions,  ACIP  recommendations  to  defer
pertussis  vaccines  in  infants  with  suspected  or  evolving  neurologic  disease,  including

seizures,  have  been  based  primarily  on  concerns  that  neurologic  events  after
vaccination  (with  whole-cell  preparations  in  particular)  might  interfere  with  the
subsequent  evaluation  of  the  infant’s  neurologic  status  (3,12,131).  During  the
whole-cell  pertussis  vaccine  era,  the  Institute  of  Medicine  (IOM)  concluded  that
evidence favored acceptance of a causal relation between pediatric DTP use and acute
encephalopathy (132). After the change to DTaP vaccines, IOM reviewed the evidence
for  a  causal  association  between  acellular  pertussis–containing  vaccines  and  several
neurologic outcomes (133). The evidence was inadequate to accept or reject a causal
relation  between  receipt  of  acellular  pertussis-containing  vaccine  and  encephalitis,
encephalopathy,  infantile  spasms,  seizures,  ataxia,  autism,  acute  disseminated
encephalomyelitis,  transverse  myelitis,  optic  neuritis,  onset  of  multiple  sclerosis  in
adults, relapse of multiple sclerosis in adults, relapse of multiple sclerosis in children,
Guillain-Barré
 syndrome,
 chronic
 inflammatory
 disseminated
 polyneuropathy,
opsoclonus
 myoclonus
 syndrome,
 or
 Bell’s
 palsy
 (133).
 Pediatric
 DTaP
 is
contraindicated in children with a history of encephalopathy not attributable to another
identifiable cause occurring within 7 days after pediatric DTP/DTaP vaccination (Table
2). Although active surveillance in Canada among a population of children administered
6.5 million doses of pertussis vaccines during 1993–2002 failed to ascertain any acute
encephalopathy  cases  causally  related  to  whole-cell  or  acellular  pertussis  vaccines,
postlicensure  surveillance  in  Japan  during  a  23  year  period  demonstrated  rates  of
encephalopathy/encephalitis  (death)  of  7.6  cases  within  7  days  of  vaccination  per  10
million  doses  during  1970–1974  when  DTP  was  administered,  and  0.5  cases  per  10
million doses during 1989–2000 when DTaP replaced DTP (113,134). ACIP recommends
that infants with evolving neurologic conditions not be vaccinated with pediatric DTaP
until a treatment regimen has been established and the condition has stabilized (Table
2)  (3).  A  history  of  seizures  (febrile  or  afebrile)  <3  days  after  a  previous  dose  of
DTP/DTaP,  a  history  of  well-controlled  seizures  in  the  vaccinee  or  a  family  history  of

seizures  or  other  neurologic  disorder  is  not  a  contraindication  or  precaution  to
vaccination  with  pertussis  components  (Table  3)  (3).  Hypotonic-hyporesponsive
episodes  (HHE)  and  prolonged  crying  are  adverse  events  that  are  less  commonly
reported  with  DTaP  than  were  historically  reported  with  DTP  (111,135,136).  Neither
HHE nor prolonged crying after receipt of DTP/DTaP are known to be associated with
serious sequelae, and both adverse events have been reported after receipt of vaccines
other  than  DTP/DTaP  (135,136).  Among  children  who  received  subsequent  DTP/DTaP
doses,  recurrent  HHE  occurrences  are  very  rarely  reported  (135,136).  A  single,
uncomplicated  occurrence  of  either  HHE  or  prolonged  crying  does  not  preclude
vaccination, and the benefits of vaccination outweigh the risks for additional episodes.
ACIP  recommends  that  vaccine  providers  and  parents  evaluate  the  risks  for  and
benefits of administering subsequent doses of vaccines with pertussis components to
young children who after receiving pediatric DTP/DTaP experienced any of the events
listed  in  the  table  for  contraindications  and  precautions  for  DTaP,  DT,  Td,  or  Tdap
vaccines  (Table  2).  All  of  these  events  were  documented  more  frequently  following
whole-cell pertussis vaccines than following acellular vaccines (3,110,111,136,137). As
with the recent conclusions regarding acellular pertussis–containing vaccines, IOM also
concluded  that  the  evidence  was  inadequate  to  accept  or  reject  a  causal  relation
between  receipt  of  diphtheria  toxoid  and  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  and
encephalitis,  encephalopathy,  infantile  spasms,  seizures,  ataxia,  autism,  acute
disseminated  encephalomyelitis,  transverse  myelitis,  optic  neuritis,  onset  of  multiple
sclerosis in adults, relapse of multiple sclerosis in adults, relapse of multiple sclerosis in
children, Guillain-Barré syndrome, chronic inflammatory disseminated polyneuropathy,
opsoclonus  myoclonus  syndrome,  or  Bell’s  palsy  (133).  ACIP  recommends  that
Guillain-Barré
 syndrome
 occurring
 <6
 weeks
 after
 receipt
 of
 a
 tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccine  is  a  precaution  for  subsequent  administration  of  tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccines  (52).  IOM  has  concluded  that  evidence  from  case  reports

and uncontrolled studies involving tetanus toxoid–containing vaccines favored a causal
relation  between  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccines  and  brachial  neuritis  (133).
Although brachial neuritis is considered to be a compensable event through the Vaccine
Injury Compensation Program (VICP), ACIP considers that occurrence of brachial neuritis
following vaccination with a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine does not preclude their
future  use  in  the  same  person;  brachial  neuritis  is  usually  self-limited  (52,132,138).
DTaP  and  Tdap  vaccines  might  include  residual  milk  allergens  from  ingredients  used
during  manufacturing  (139).  Because  of  reports  of  children  and  adolescents  with  a
documented history of severe milk allergy having an anaphylactic reaction to booster
doses  of  DTaP  or  Tdap  within  one  hour  of  administration  (139,140),  a  prospective
review  of  VAERS  data  was  conducted.  No  safety  signal  in  VAERS  for  anaphylaxis  in
patients  with  milk  protein  allergy  was  identified,  leading  to  the  conclusion  that  these
vaccines  are  tolerated  by  those  with  a  milk  allergy,  and  that  milk  allergy  is  not  a
contraindication  or  precaution  to  receipt  of  DTaP  or  Tdap  (140);  vaccine  providers
should continue to vaccinate persons with milk allergy as recommended and strongly
consider  monitoring  the  patient  for  anaphylaxis.  Simultaneous  administration  of
vaccines is defined as administering more than one vaccine on the same clinic day, at
different  anatomical  sites,  and  not  combined  in  the  same  syringe  (52).  Before  the
availability  of  DTaP-containing  combination  vaccines,  administration  of  DTaP  vaccine
was  recommended  with  other  vaccines  on  the  same  clinic  day.  Limited  historic  data
regarding simultaneous administration of the first 3 doses of DTaP with other childhood
vaccines indicate no interference with response to any of these antigens (3). A recent
safety  study  on  simultaneous  administration  of  DTaP  with  other  vaccines  indicated  a
small increased risk for febrile seizures during the 24 hours after a child receives the
inactivated  influenza  vaccine  (IIV)  at  the  same  time  as  the  pneumococcal  13-valent
conjugate (PCV13) vaccine or DTaP (123). Other studies have not shown an increased
risk for febrile seizures after DTaP, except when simultaneously administered with IIV

(114,115,121,122). The risk for febrile seizure with any combination of these vaccines is
small;  ACIP  recommends  simultaneous  administration  of  these  vaccines.  Two  Tdap
products  are  licensed  for  use  in  adolescents  and  adults  as  a  single-dose  booster
vaccination  against  tetanus,  diphtheria,  and  pertussis:  Boostrix  (GlaxoSmithKline,
Rixensart,  Belgium),  and  Adacel  (Sanofi  Pasteur,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania).  The  age
indication  for  approved  use  differs  depending  upon  the  specific  Tdap  product  and
licensure (Table 5). Both Tdap products consist of pertussis antigen and diphtheria and
tetanus toxoids (Table 5). The pertussis antigen composition and amount differ, as does
the  amount  of  diphtheria  toxoids  between  the  two  Tdap  products.  Summaries  of  the
data on the immunogenicity and safety of each of these vaccines have been published
(4,5). Adacel (Sanofi Pasteur) is licensed by FDA as a single dose in persons aged 10–64
years  (141).  Adacel  contains  the  same  tetanus  toxoid,  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  five
pertussis antigens (PT, PRN, FHA, and FIM) as those in Daptacel (pediatric DTaP), but is
formulated  with  reduced  quantities  of  the  toxoids  and  antigens  (Table  5).  Adacel
contains no thimerosal or other preservative. Additional information is available in the
package
 insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M142764.pdf). Boostrix (GSK) is licensed by FDA as a single dose in persons aged ≥10
years  (142).  Boostrix  contains  the  same  tetanus  toxoid,  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  three
pertussis  antigens  (PT,  PRN,  and  FHA)  as  those  in  Infanrix  (pediatric  DTaP),  but  is
formulated  with  reduced  quantities  of  the  toxoids  and  antigens  (Table  5).  Boostrix
contains no thimerosal or other preservative. Additional information is available in the
package
 insert
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/UCM152842.pdf).
 Both
 Tdap
products were licensed on the basis of clinical trials demonstrating immunogenicity not
inferior  to  U.S.-licensed  Td  or  pediatric  DTaP  products  and  an  overall  safety  profile
clinically comparable to U.S.-licensed Td products (143,144). Determining the efficacy

of the tetanus and diphtheria toxoid components for each Tdap product was based on
the  comparison  of  the  rates  of  protective  immune  response  to  these  antigens  as
compared  to  U.S.-licensed  Td  and  using  established  serologic  correlates of protection
(45,72). The percentage of persons achieving protective antitetanus and antidiphtheria
antibody  concentrations  (>0.1  IU/mL)  and  the  booster  response  to  each  of  these
antigens 1 month postvaccination were evaluated. Because no well-accepted serologic
or  laboratory  correlate  of  protection  against  pertussis  has  been  established,  clinical
endpoint  efficacy  studies  of  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  among  adolescents  or  adults
were not required for Tdap licensure. Instead, the efficacy of the pertussis components
of Tdap vaccines was inferred using a serologic bridge to infants vaccinated with DTaP
in efficacy trials with clinical endpoints (145). The immune response of adolescents and
adults to each pertussis vaccine antigen after a single dose of Tdap was compared with
the immune responses of infants who received 3 doses of pediatric DTaP that included
the same pertussis components as the Tdap being assessed (141,142). The percentage
of persons with an acceptable booster response to pertussis vaccine antigens according
to predefined criteria also was evaluated. The predefined lower limit was defined as the
lower limit of 95% CI for the GMC ratio of the Tdap/pediatric DTaP. Prelicensure Tdap
vaccine efficacy was inferred using a serologic bridge to infants vaccinated with 3 doses
of  DTaP  and  ranged  from  79%  to  89%  (105,106).  Following  the  2005  Tdap
recommendation
 for
 adolescents
 and
 adults,
 postlicensure
 pertussis
 vaccine
effectiveness estimates for Tdap in settings with similar vaccines and recommendation
schedules have ranged from 66% to 78% among adolescents who received both DTP
and  DTaP  as  children  (146–148).  Among  adolescents  who  received  only  DTaP  as
children, in a matched case-control study, the overall estimated vaccine effectiveness
of  Tdap  against  pertussis  was  63.9%  (95%  CI  =  50%–74%)  (29).  Initial  vaccine
effectiveness against pertussis within one year of Tdap vaccination was 73% (95% CI =
60%–82%),  but  after  2–4  years,  postvaccination  vaccine  effectiveness  decreased  to

34%  (95%  CI  =  -0.03%–58%)  (29).  Another  study  that  calculated  Tdap  vaccine
effectiveness  among  adolescents  found  that,  within  the  first  year  after  vaccination,
effectiveness  was  68.8%  (95%  CI  =  59.7%–75.9%);  by  ≥4  years  after  vaccination,
vaccine  effectiveness  was  8.9%  (95%  CI  =  -30.6%–36.4%)  (149).  As  observed  with
DTaP,  Tdap  vaccine  effectiveness  declines  substantially  with  increasing  time  since
vaccination  (29,149,150).  Although  there  are  no  studies  estimating  Tdap  vaccine
effectiveness in persons who received only DTP as infants, reported rates of pertussis
have  been  observed  to  be  significantly  lower  among  children  who  had  started  their
vaccination series with DTP than among those who had started with DTaP (151,152). At
the  time  Tdap  was  first  recommended,  it  was  anticipated  that  this  vaccine  would
prevent  pertussis  in  adolescents  and  adults  and  thereby  result  in  preventing
transmission  of  B.  pertussis  to  contacts  (e.g.,  infants).  Providing  indirect  protection
through  Tdap  vaccination  to  adults  was  the  premise  for  the  “cocooning”  strategy  to
prevent  pertussis  in  young  infants  at  highest  risk  for  severe  pertussis  morbidity  and
mortality.  A  limited  number  of  studies  have  evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  Tdap
vaccination in preventing transmission of pertussis in young infants, but the evidence
was inconclusive. Although one study found a modest decrease in the risk for pertussis
in infants whose mothers received postpartum Tdap, another study found that mother’s
postpartum  vaccination  and  cocooning  did  not  reduce  pertussis  in  infants  (153,154).
Studies in animal models have shown that acellular pertussis vaccines protect against
disease but not against infection or transmission of B. pertussis or the closely related
species, B. bronchiseptica (155–157). Although it is unclear if these animal models fully
represent  human  disease,  expert  opinion  is  that  persons  vaccinated  with  acellular
pertussis  vaccines  can  become  infected  with  and  transmit  B.  pertussis  (158,159).
Persons  up  to  date  with  pertussis  vaccines  are  less  likely  to  have  severe  disease
compared  with  those  not  up  to  date  (160).  Although  it  is  presumed  that  vaccinated
persons with less severe disease would be less likely to transmit B. pertussis because of

less frequent or severe coughing, more recent evidence suggests that vaccination with
acellular  pertussis  vaccines  does  not  prevent  transmission  and  therefore  does  not
afford  indirect  protection  against  pertussis  (155–157).  Since  2005,  when  both  Tdap
products were first licensed and recommended, both vaccine product label indications
have expanded and ACIP Tdap recommendations have been updated (6,8–10,161–163).
A
 summary
 of
 these
 recommendations
 is
 available
 at
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/52821. Routine VAERS surveillance for and VSD studies
on adverse events following receipt of Tdap vaccines in persons aged 10–64 years have
provided  reassuring  data  that  support  the  prelicensure  clinical  trial  safety  data  and
have not demonstrated any associations between Tdap and the following rare adverse
events: encephalopathy-encephalitis-meningitis; paralytic syndromes; seizures; cranial
nerve  disorders;  and  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  (164–166).  Medically  attended  local
reactions  were  uncommon  and  did  not  differ  with  concomitant  or  sequential
administration  of  diphtheria  toxoid–containing  vaccines  (Td/Tdap  and  MenACWY-D
[meningococcal  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y]  Menactra,  Sanofi  Pasteur)  (167).  No
increased  risk  for  medically  attended  neurologic  or  allergic  reactions  was  observed
following Tdap vaccination and, when compared with matched historical Td recipients,
no increase in the onset of new chronic illnesses was seen after Tdap (168). Although a
2016 study found an increased risk for acute disseminated encephalomyelitis following
Tdap vaccination, this finding was based on cases in two Tdap-vaccinated persons and
might  have  been  unrelated  to  vaccination  (169).  Safety  data  from  VAERS,  VSD,  and
other studies in populations not originally routinely recommended to receive Tdap (e.g.,
adults aged ≥65 years and pregnant women) have become available since 2009 and
were reviewed by ACIP (6,8–10). For adults aged ≥65 years, Tdap vaccine safety was
comparable  to  that  of  Td  vaccine  (170,171).  The  most  frequent  adverse  events
following receipt of Tdap in persons aged ≥65 years were local injection-site reactions,
and  no  unusual  or  unexpected  clusters  of  adverse  events  after  Tdap  were  identified

(170).  In  addition,  the  risks  for  the  following  prespecified  events  were  comparable
following  receipt  of  Tdap  and  Td  in  older  persons:  meningitis,  encephalitis  and
encephalopathy;  cranial  nerve  disorders,  including  Bell’s  palsy;  Guillain-Barré
syndrome; brachial neuritis; paralytic syndromes; medically attended inflammatory or
allergic  events;  and  anaphylaxis  and  generalized  reactions  (171).  When  Tdap  was
licensed in 2005, the safety of administering a dose of Tdap at intervals <5 years after
Td  or  pediatric  DTP/DTaP  had  not  been  studied.  Evaluations  of  the  safety  of
administering  Tdap  at  intervals  <5  years  after  Td,  including  as  short  as  18  months,
suggest that the safety of much shorter intervals is acceptable (172–174). Two studies
were  conducted  in  adults  who  received  a  Tdap  or  combined  Tdap-inactivated  polio
(Tdap-IPV)  vaccine  <2  years  following  a  previous  Td-containing  vaccine  (173,174).
Observed  adverse  events  were  limited  to  local  reactions,  including  pain  (68%–83%),
erythema  (20%–25%),  and  swelling  (19%–38%)  (173,174).  Although  serious  adverse
events  did  not  occur,  the  numbers  of  subjects  in  these  studies  were  small  and  the
potential for rare, but serious, adverse events cannot be excluded. ACIP concluded that
although  longer  intervals  between  Td  and  Tdap  vaccination  could  decrease  the
occurrence of local reactions, the benefits of protection against pertussis outweigh the
potential risk for adverse events (8). ACIP concluded that the overall safety of Tdap and
the frequency of local reactions in persons aged 7–10 years who have not completed
the  childhood  DTaP  series  likely  would  be  similar  to  those  observed  in  children  who
received  4  doses  of  DTaP  (8).  Although  both  Tdap  products  are  approved  for  use  in
persons as young as age 10 years, no data have been published regarding the safety of
Tdap  in  children  aged  7–9  years  who  have  never  received  pertussis-containing
vaccines. Several studies assessing the safety and immunogenicity of Tdap or Tdap-IPV
as the fifth dose of acellular pertussis vaccine in children aged 4–8 years were reviewed
(175–179). No increase in the risk for severe local reactions or systemic adverse events
was observed (175–179). The most commonly reported adverse events that occurred

within 15 days after receipt of Tdap were pain (40%–56%), erythema (34%–53%), and
swelling (24%–45%). Fewer local reactions were observed or reported among Tdap or
Tdap-IPV  recipients  compared  with  those  who  received  DTaP  or  DTaP-IPV,  but  the
differences were not statistically significant. No differences were noted when children
aged 4–6 and 7–8 years were compared with respect to the frequency of solicited or
unsolicited adverse reactions following vaccination with Tdap-IPV (179). In 2011, when
ACIP first considered administration of Tdap during pregnancy, safety data on women
and their infants were limited (9); prelicensure evaluations did not study the safety of
administering a booster dose of Tdap to pregnant women. ACIP reviewed available data
from VAERS, pregnancy registries established by both Sanofi Pasteur (Adacel) and GSK
(Boostrix), and small studies (174,180–183). ACIP concluded that these studies did not
suggest any elevated risk for or unusual patterns of adverse events in pregnant women
who  received  Tdap  or  in  their  newborn  infants,  and  the  few  serious  adverse  events
reported were judged unlikely to have been caused by the vaccine (9). A summary of
these  studies  is  available  at  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/52820.  When  ACIP
considered  recommending  Tdap  vaccination  during  each  pregnancy,  the  safety
information  concerning  booster  doses  of  Tdap  in  pregnant  women  previously
vaccinated with Tdap was not available (6). Data on the safety of two closely spaced
doses of tetanus toxoid–containing vaccines were limited to receipt of Td and Tdap or
Tdap-IPV  vaccine  within  21  days  or  ≤2  years  and  receipt  of  2  doses  of  Tdap  at  a
five-year interval in nonpregnant persons; of the few serious adverse events reported,
none  were  attributed  to  the  vaccine  (172–174,184,185).  Receipt  of  a  second  dose  of
Tdap  in  nonpregnant  persons  was  well  tolerated;  injection-site  pain  was  the  most
commonly  reported  adverse  event  (184–188).  The  frequency  of  reported  adverse
events following the second dose of Tdap was similar to that after the first dose in the
same  subjects  and  in  controls  receiving  Tdap  for  the  first  time.  A  theoretical  risk  for
severe  local  reactions  exists  among  pregnant  women  who  are  vaccinated  during

multiple closely spaced pregnancies. These severe local reactions are hypersensitivity
reactions that have been associated with vaccines containing tetanus toxoid, tetanus,
and diphtheria toxoids and/or pertussis antigens in persons who have received multiple
doses  of  vaccine.  Most  of  the  data  on  multiple  doses  of  tetanus  toxoid–containing
vaccines and hypersensitivity reactions are historical, and the risk for severe adverse
events  likely  has  been  reduced  with  current  formulations  that  contain  lower
concentrations of tetanus toxoid (45,189,190). Recent studies were small and did not
include pregnant subjects; therefore, the findings do not exclude the possibility of rare
but  serious  adverse  events  in  pregnant  women  after  receipt  of  Tdap  (6).  ACIP
recognized  the  need  for  safety  studies  of  severe  adverse  events  when  Tdap  is
administered during subsequent pregnancies but concluded that the potential benefit of
preventing pertussis morbidity and mortality in infants too young to be fully vaccinated
outweighs  the  theoretical  concern  of  possible  localized  severe  adverse  events  in
pregnant  women  receiving  Tdap.  ACIP  also  concluded  that  experience  with  tetanus
toxoid–containing vaccines suggests no excess risk for severe adverse events among
women receiving Tdap with each pregnancy (6). Additional data from the United States
and elsewhere on the safety of Tdap vaccination during pregnancy for both pregnant
women  and  their  infants  continue  to  be  reassuring,  with  no  reported  increase  in
adverse  events,  including  adverse  birth  outcomes,  and  no  observation  of  new  or
unexpected vaccine safety concerns (191–209); a summary of these studies is available
at  https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/52820.  Receipt  of  Tdap  during  pregnancy  has  not
been  found  to  be  associated  with  an  increased  risk  for  frequency  of  major
malformations,  stillbirth,  preterm  birth,  small  for  gestational  age,  or  hypertensive
disorders  (193–195,197,208).  One  study  observed  a  slight  increase  in  the  risk  for
chorioamnionitis and, although chorioamnionitis is a risk factor for preterm birth, there
were  no  associated  increases  in  preterm  or  small  for  gestational  age  births  in  this
cohort  (193).  The  authors  concluded  that  the  small  increase  in  the  risk  for

chorioamnionitis  was  likely  due  to  residual  confounding  or  heterogeneity  in  outcome
ascertainment (193). A review of the VAERS database from 1990 through 2014 found
31 reports of chorioamnionitis following receipt of any vaccine out of 3,389 pregnancy
reports (198). An evaluation of the safety of Tdap and influenza vaccines administered
concomitantly  and  sequentially  to  pregnant  women  aged  14–49  years  found  no
statistically  significant  increase  in  risk  for  fever  or  any  medically  attended  acute
adverse  event  in  pregnant  women  vaccinated  concomitantly  compared  with
sequentially.  No  differences  in  preterm  delivery,  low  birth  weight,  or  small  for
gestational  age  neonates  were  observed  between  the  two  groups  (196).  Data  on  the
safety  of  receipt  of  Tdap  during  pregnancy  in  close  intervals  from  prior  tetanus
toxoid–containing vaccinations are limited. One study found no increased risk for acute
adverse events (i.e., fever, allergy, and local reactions) or adverse birth outcomes (i.e.,
small for gestational age, preterm delivery, and low birth weight) for those women who
had a previous vaccination ≤5 years before compared with those vaccinated >5 years
before  receipt  of  Tdap  during  pregnancy,  suggesting  that  recent  receipt  of  a  prior
tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccination  does  not  increase  risk  for  adverse  events  after
Tdap vaccination in pregnancy (195). Concerns about the possible role of vaccines with
pertussis  components  in  causing  neurologic  reactions  or  exacerbating  underlying
neurologic conditions are long-standing (12,131). Although the occurrence of neurologic
sequelae after receipt of vaccines with pertussis components is rare, the evidence for a
causal  association  between  acellular  pertussis–containing  vaccines  and  neurologic
outcomes  is  inconclusive  (133).  Concerns  about  vaccinating  adolescents  with
progressive or uncontrolled underlying neurologic disease must be weighed against the
potential morbidity of pertussis; adolescents with severe neurologic conditions might be
at risk for severe pertussis (CDC, unpublished data, 2005) (39). ACIP does not consider
a  history  of  well-controlled  seizures  in  the  vaccinee  or  a  family  history  of  seizures
(febrile or afebrile) or other neurologic disorder to be a contraindication or precaution to

vaccination with pertussis components (Table 3) (3). ACIP recommends that the risks
for  and  benefits  of  administering  subsequent  doses  of  vaccines  with  pertussis
components be evaluated for young children who, after receiving pediatric DTP/DTaP,
experienced any of the events listed in the table as contraindications and precautions
for  DTaP,  DT,  Td,  and  Tdap  vaccines  (Table  2);  all  of  these  events  were  documented
more  frequently  following  whole-cell  pertussis  vaccines  than  following  acellular
vaccines  (3,110,111,136,137).  For  adolescents  and  adults,  these  events  (e.g.,  febrile
seizures and HHE) either do not occur or are of less clinical concern than such events in
infants  and  children.  Taken  together,  this  information  supports  administering  Tdap  to
adolescents with a history of the events listed under pediatric DTaP/DTP (Table 2). ACIP
recommends  that  adolescents  with  unstabilized  progressive  neurologic  conditions  not
be vaccinated with Tdap until the condition stabilizes. However, progressive neurologic
disorders that are chronic and stable (e.g., dementia) are more common among adults,
and the possibility that Tdap would complicate subsequent neurologic evaluation is of
less  clinical  concern.  As  a  result,  chronic  progressive  neurologic  conditions  that  are
stable in adults do not constitute a reason to delay Tdap; this is in contrast to unstable
or
 evolving
 neurologic
 conditions
 (e.g.,
 cerebrovascular
 events
 and
 acute
encephalopathic  conditions)  (5).  Arthus  reactions  (type  III  hypersensitivity  reactions)
are rarely reported after vaccination, but can occur after tetanus toxoid- or diphtheria
toxoid–containing vaccines (CDC, unpublished data, 2005) (54,132,210–214). An Arthus
reaction  is  a  local  vasculitis  associated  with  deposition  of  immune  complexes  and
activation  of  complement.  Immune  complexes  form  in  the  setting  of  a  high  local
concentration  of  vaccine  antigens  and  high  concentration  of  circulating  antibody
(210,211,213,215).  Arthus  reactions  are  characterized  by  severe  pain,  swelling,
induration, edema, hemorrhage, and occasionally necrosis. These symptoms and signs
usually occur 4–12 hours after vaccination; by contrast, anaphylaxis (an immediate type
I  hypersensitivity  reaction)  usually  occurs  within  minutes  of  vaccination.  As  with

extensive  limb  swelling,  Arthus  reactions  usually  resolve  without  sequelae.  ACIP
recommends that persons who have experienced an Arthus reaction following a dose of
tetanus  toxoid  or  diphtheria  toxoid–containing  vaccine  should  not  receive  a  tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccine  more  frequently  than  every  10  years,  even  for  tetanus
prophylaxis  as  part  of  wound  management  (54).  Tetanus  toxoid  is  one  of  the  most
extensively  used  vaccines  globally,  either  as  a  monocomponent  vaccine  (TT)  or
combined with diphtheria toxoid (DT and Td) and pertussis antigens (DTP, DTaP, and
Tdap).  Historically,  mild  local  reactions  (i.e.,  redness,  pain  and  tenderness,  and  mild
swelling)  after  receipt  of  TT  vaccine  are  common  (0–95%).  Systemic  reactions  (i.e.,
fever,  malaise,  headache,  and  lymphadenopathy)  are  less  common  but  might  occur,
particularly  after  receipt  of  a  booster  dose  of  vaccine.  Severe  reactions,  including
neurologic  (e.g.,  peripheral  neuropathy,  particularly  brachial  plexus  neuropathy,
Guillain-Barré  syndrome,  seizures,  and  acute  encephalopathy)  and  hypersensitivity
reactions (anaphylaxis) are exceedingly rare (45,216). An evaluation by IOM concluded
that  evidence  from  case  reports  and  uncontrolled  studies  involving  tetanus
toxoid–containing vaccines favored a causal relation between tetanus toxoid–containing
vaccines  and  brachial  neuritis  (133).  Although  brachial  neuritis  is  considered  to  be  a
compensable event through the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP),
ACIP considers that occurrence of brachial neuritis following vaccination with a tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccine  does  not  preclude  their  future  use  in  the  same  person;
brachial  neuritis  is  usually  self-limited  (52,132,138).  As  with  the  recent  conclusions
regarding acellular pertussis–containing vaccines, IOM also concluded that the evidence
was  inadequate  to  accept  or  reject  a  causal  relation  between  receipt  of  diphtheria
toxoid-  and  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  and  encephalitis,  encephalopathy,
infantile  spasms,  seizures,  ataxia,  autism,  acute  disseminated  encephalomyelitis,
transverse  myelitis,  optic  neuritis,  onset  of  multiple  sclerosis  in  adults,  relapse  of
multiple  sclerosis  in  adults,  relapse  of  multiple  sclerosis  in  children,  Guillain-Barré

syndrome, chronic inflammatory disseminated polyneuropathy, opsoclonus myoclonus
syndrome, or Bell’s palsy (133). ACIP considers Guillain-Barré syndrome occurring <6
weeks after receipt of a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine a precaution for subsequent
administration  of  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccines  (52).  Active  surveillance  data
covering  two  million  doses  of  Tdap  administered  to  both  adolescent  and  adult
populations  failed  to  demonstrate  an  association  between  receipt  of  a  tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccine  and  onset  of  Guillain-Barré  syndrome  within  six  weeks
following  vaccination  (164,165,217).  Tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccines  are  safe  in
pregnant  women.  No  evidence  exists  to  indicate  that  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids
administered  during  pregnancy  are  teratogenic  (54).  Field  trials  of  tetanus  toxoid  in
pregnant  women  have  shown  high  efficacy  (80%–100%)  in  preventing  maternal  and
neonatal tetanus (50,218–222). Although the causal relation between vaccination with
tetanus  toxoid  and  arthritis  is  biologically  plausible,  the  evidence  of  a  possible
association between receipt of tetanus vaccine and arthritis is limited (132). In 1994, on
the  basis  of  case  reports,  case  series  and  uncontrolled  observational  studies,  IOM
concluded  that  the  evidence  was  insufficient  to  demonstrate  a  causal  link  between
receipt of tetanus toxoid and arthritis (132). In a second review of the evidence, IOM
reached a similar conclusion on the basis of several case reports and two case-control
studies (133). The first case-control study found an increased risk for psoriatic arthritis
after tetanus toxoid vaccination (odds ratio [OR]: 1.91; 95% CI = 1.0%–3.7%) (223). In
the  second  study,  the  investigators  concluded  that  tetanus  toxoid  or  diphtheria
vaccination  did  not  increase  the  risk  for  rheumatoid  arthritis  (224).  Both  studies  had
serious  limitations  and  low  precision  (133).  A  more  recent  study  in  a  large  health
maintenance  organization  assessed  the  risk  for  rheumatoid  arthritis  after  tetanus,
influenza,  and  hepatitis  B  vaccination,  using  a  cohort  and  case-control  design  to
determine risk at different intervals postvaccination (225). This study did not identify a
significantly increased risk for rheumatoid arthritis associated with tetanus vaccine for

any interval assessed (225). Reactogenicity with vaccines containing diphtheria toxoid
is  common.  All  available  pertussis-containing  vaccines  include  diphtheria  toxoid,  and
different  forms  of  diphtheria  toxoid  are  used  as  carrier  proteins  in  certain  conjugate
vaccines
 (MenACWY-D
 [Menactra,
 Sanofi
 Pasteur],
 MenACWY-CRM
 [Menveo,
GlaxoSmithKline,  Rixensart,  Belgium],  13-valent  pneumococcal  polysaccharide-protein
conjugate  vaccine  [PCV13,  Prevnar13,  Wyeth  Pharmaceuticals  Inc.,  Collegeville,
Pennsylvania,  a  subsidiary  of  Pfizer  Inc.,  New  York,  New  York]).  The  frequency  of
reported adverse events from diphtheria toxoid–containing vaccines varies by vaccine
formulation,  dose  of  diphtheria  toxoid,  prior  vaccination  history,  and  prevaccination
antidiphtheria  toxoid  antibody  levels.  Although  local  injection-site  reactions  are
common, only a small proportion of these are clinically significant (226). Administration
of  diphtheria  toxoid  has  not  been  associated  with  anaphylaxis.  Because  diphtheria
toxoid is not administered as a monovalent diphtheria toxoid vaccine, it is difficult to
characterize  reactogenicity  to  diphtheria  toxoid  alone.  However,  in  a  study  of  180
persons comparing the reactogenicity of DTaP (diphtheria toxoid ≥10 IU) with that of Td
(diphtheria toxoid ≥2 IU) and of monovalent diphtheria toxoid (diphtheria toxoid ≥2 IU),
the  proportion  of  vaccinees  with  local  reactions  (e.g.,  erythema,  induration,  warmth,
and  tenderness)  was  generally  lower  among  recipients  of  the  monovalent  diphtheria
toxoid  than  was  observed  in  the  other  two  groups  (227).  There  was  no  consistent
pattern of increased reactogenicity among recipients of DTaP compared with Td (227).
In addition, data from several controlled studies suggest that fever and local reactions
are  more  common  after  administration  of  Td  than  after  TT  vaccine  (190,228,229).  In
general, the frequencies of reported common systemic signs and symptoms in infants
(i.e., temperature of ≥38º C [≥100.4º F], crying for ≥1 hour, irritability, drowsiness, loss
of appetite, and vomiting) and local reactions (i.e., redness, swelling, and tenderness)
after vaccination with DT or DTaP were comparable (230). Diphtheria toxoid–containing
vaccines are safe in pregnant women. No evidence exists to indicate that tetanus and

diphtheria  toxoids  administered  during  pregnancy  are  teratogenic  (54).  Randomized
trials  of  diphtheria  toxoid  conducted  among  pregnant  women  in  the  1940s
demonstrated  efficient  transplacental  transfer  of  maternal  antidiphtheria  antibodies
and protection of infants against diphtheria (231–234). Pre- and postlicensure studies in
adolescents and adults have evaluated and support the safety and immunogenicity of
Tdap when administered simultaneously or sequentially with one or two other vaccines
(e.g.,  MenACWY,  HepB,  and  human  papillomavirus  [HPV]  and  trivalent  inactivated
influenza  vaccines)  (141,167,235–242).  In  most  of  these  studies,  no  differences  were
observed  in  the  safety  profiles  when  Tdap  was  administered  simultaneously  or
sequentially with another vaccine. However, the rates of erythema and swelling at the
Tdap injection site were higher when it was co-administered with HepB vaccine (141).
Swollen or sore joints were reported in both the simultaneous (22.5%) and sequential
(17.9%)  vaccination  groups,  with  most  joint  complaints  being  mild  in  intensity  and
lasting a mean duration of 1.8 days (141). Tdap was immunogenic when administered
simultaneously  with  other  vaccines.  The  proportions  of  subjects  achieving  protective
levels of antibodies against diphtheria and tetanus were similar in the simultaneously
vaccinated  group  compared  with  those  vaccinated  sequentially  (235–242).  Immune
responses  to  pertussis  antigens  were  similar  when  Tdap  was  administered
simultaneously  or  sequentially  with  MenACWY-D,  HPV  (bivalent  or  quadrivalent)  or
HepB  vaccines,  although  the  immune  responses  to  pertussis  antigens  with
MenACWY-CRM  (Menveo,  Novartis)  and  trivalent  inactivated  influenza  vaccines  were
lower  after  simultaneous  administration  (141,235–241).  When  Tdap  was  administered
simultaneously with MenACWY-CRM (Menveo, Novartis), the immune responses to two
of the three pertussis antigens were lower, but the clinical relevance of this finding, if
any,  is  not  clear  (237).  When  Tdap  and  trivalent  inactivated  influenza  vaccines  were
administered  to  adults  aged  19–64  years,  the  immune  responses  to  the  pertussis
antigens were lower but noninferior in the simultaneously vaccinated group compared

with the immue responses to the pertussis antigens in those vaccinated sequentially,
with the exception of Adacel’s PRN and Boostrix’s FHA and PRN (235,236). The clinical
significance, if any, of not meeting noninferiority criteria for these antigens is unclear
(235). For adults aged ≥65 years, compared with separate administration of Boostrix
and a trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine, simultaneous administration of these two
vaccines  also  was  safe  and  immunogenic  (242).  As  part  of  the  consideration  of
recommendations  for  use  of  Tdap  in  specific  populations,  cost-effectiveness  analyses
were conducted for specific vaccination strategies and target populations. These were
considered  for  adults  aged  ≥65  years  and  women  during  pregnancy.  Two
cost-effectiveness analyses of the epidemiologic and economic impact of substituting a
single dose of Tdap for one decennial Td booster in healthy persons aged ≥65 years
were  reviewed  by  ACIP  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2012)  (243).  Both  models  were
developed  to  assess  the  epidemiologic  and  economic  impact  of  Tdap  vaccination  in
adults  aged  ≥65  years,  and  both  demonstrated  that  a  dose  of  Tdap  administered  to
older  adults  resulted  in  a  modest  decrease  in  the  number  of  cases  of  pertussis  and
other outcomes (e.g., outpatient visits, hospitalizations, and deaths) (CDC, unpublished
data,  2012)  (243).  From  the  two  models  with  similar  incidence  (100–104  cases  per
100,000 population), the cost per quality adjusted life-year saved ranged from $30,946
to  $62,716  and  the  cost  per  case  averted  ranged  from  $1,966  to  $3,263  (CDC,
unpublished data, 2012) (243). Model results were most sensitive to the incidence of
pertussis;  however,  sensitivity  analyses  showed  that,  even  assuming  a  range  of
estimates  of  pertussis  underreporting,  Tdap  vaccination  compared  with  no  Tdap
vaccination  might  be  cost-effective  in  this  population.  Reassured  by  the  concordance
between  the  two  cost-effectiveness  models,  ACIP’s  conclusion  was  that  the  cost  per
case  averted  and  the  cost  per  quality-adjusted  life-year  saved  were  modest  (10).  A
decision and cost-effectiveness model was developed to assess the likely impact and
cost-effectiveness  of  Tdap  vaccination  administered  during  pregnancy  versus

postpartum with or without cocooning. The model showed that Tdap vaccination during
pregnancy  could  reduce  annual  infant  pertussis  incidence  more  than  postpartum
vaccination, reducing cases by 33% versus 20%, hospitalizations by 38% versus 19%,
and  deaths  by  49%  versus  16%.  The  cost  per  quality  adjusted  life-year  saved  for
pregnancy  vaccination  was  $414,523  compared  with  postpartum  vaccination,  which
was  $1,172,825.  The  two  primary  drivers  of  the  reduction  in  infant  pertussis  were
earlier indirect protection from the mother by vaccinating before the infant’s birth and
the  provision  of  passive  immunity  to  the  infant  through  transplacental  transfer  of
maternal  antibodies.  Sensitivity  analyses  under  robust  conditions,  including  reduced
Tdap  vaccine  effectiveness,  did  not  alter  the  relative  benefits  of  vaccination  during
pregnancy (244). Top In the United States, reported tetanus and diphtheria cases are
rare.  Although  vaccine  coverage  is  high  among  infants,  children,  and  adolescents,
serologic and survey data indicate that adults are undervaccinated against tetanus and
diphtheria  and  that  coverage  declines  with  increasing  age  (36,51).  Maintaining
seroprotection
 against
 tetanus
 and
 diphtheria
 through
 adherence
 to
 the
ACIP-recommended schedule of booster doses of vaccine is important for adults of all
ages. In contrast to tetanus and diphtheria, the incidence of reported pertussis in the
United  States  has  been  increasing  despite  high  infant  and  childhood  coverage  with
DTaP  vaccines  and  increasing  Tdap  coverage  among  adolescents  (245).  Although
vaccine-induced  protection  provided  by  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  wanes  over  time,
vaccination  remains  the  best  protection  available  against  pertussis.  ACIP  recognizes
that not all cases of pertussis can be prevented. However, sustaining vaccine coverage
in young children (DTaP) and adolescents (Tdap) with the available licensed vaccines
and achieving high Tdap coverage among adults, especially pregnant women, presents
the best available means of preventing pertussis. Because young infants continue to be
at greatest risk for hospitalization and death due to pertussis, ACIP has made efforts to
optimize the vaccination program strategies for preventing pertussis in those too young

to  be  vaccinated.  Very  young  infants  are  dependent  in  part  on  passively  acquired
maternal antibodies, which are thought to protect infants from infection and to modify
the  severity  of  diverse  infectious  diseases  in  infants  for  varying  periods  of  time
(246,247).  Before  the  ACIP  recommendation  to  vaccinate  pregnant  women,  several
studies provided evidence supporting the existence of efficient transplacental transfer
of  pertussis  antibodies  (181,248,249).  These  studies  indicated  that  newborn  infants
whose mothers received Tdap before or during pregnancy had higher concentrations of
pertussis  antibodies  at  birth  compared  with  those  of  unvaccinated  mothers
(181,248,249).  The  strategy  of  preventing  pertussis  in  newborns  through  the
vaccination of women with Tdap during pregnancy from 27 through 36 weeks’ gestation
is 80%–91% effective (CDC, unpublished data, 2016) (250–253). One study found that,
among  infants  infected  with  pertussis,  those  born  to  mothers  vaccinated  with  Tdap
during pregnancy had less severe pertussis than those born to unvaccinated mothers;
maternal  vaccination  was  58%  effective  in  preventing  hospitalization  among  infants
infected  with  pertussis  (254).  Tdap  may  be  administered  any  time  during  pregnancy,
but vaccination during the third trimester likely provides the highest concentration of
maternal antibodies to be transferred closer to birth (247). Substantial active transport
of maternal immunoglobulin G does not take place before 30 weeks of gestation (255).
After receipt of Tdap, a minimum of 2 weeks is required to mount a maximal immune
response  to  the  vaccine  antigens  (256,257).  One  study  noted  that,  after  receipt  of
Tdap, maternal antibodies waned quickly; pregnant women who received Tdap during
the first or second trimester had low levels of antibodies at term, suggesting that Tdap
might need to be administered later in pregnancy to have high levels of antibodies for
transfer  to  infants  (247).  Therefore,  to  optimize  the  concentration  of  vaccine-induced
antipertussis antibodies transported from mother to infant, ACIP concluded in 2012 that
pregnant women should be vaccinated with Tdap during the third trimester, preferably
from 27 through 36 weeks’ gestation (6). New data available since 2012 suggest that

vaccinating  earlier  in  the  27  through  36-week  time  period  will  maximize  passive
antibody transfer to the infant (C. Mary Healy, Baylor College of Medicine, unpublished
data,  2016)  (258–260);  however,  it  is  unclear  how  this  translates  to  effectiveness  in
preventing  infant  pertussis.  Three  studies  have  shown  that,  among  infants  whose
mothers  received  Tdap  during  the  27  through  36  weeks’  gestational  time  period,
antipertussis antibody concentrations were significantly higher in cord blood of infants
whose  mothers  received  Tdap  “earlier”  (e.g.,  27  through  32  weeks’  gestation)
compared  with  those  who  received  Tdap  “later”  (e.g.,  after  32  weeks’  gestation)  (C.
Mary  Healy,  Baylor  College  of  Medicine,  unpublished  data,  2016)  (259,260).  A  fourth
study  indicated  that  those  who  received  Tdap  as  early  as  22  through  26  weeks’
gestation  developed  similar  levels  of  antibody  to  those  vaccinated  27  through  36
weeks’ gestation (258). These studies support the observation that vaccinating earlier
within the 27 through 36 week period, or even slightly before 27 weeks, might optimize
the  production  and  transfer  of  maternal  antibodies  to  infants.  Assuring  a  sufficient
amount of time between a pregnant woman’s receipt of Tdap and her infant’s birth to
allow for the maximum production and transfer of maternal antibodies is important and
might be achieved by vaccinating at a gestational age earlier than the current guidance
of  27  through  36  weeks.  However,  ACIP  is  cautious  not  to  equate  higher  newborn
maternal  antibody  concentrations,  which  might  be  achieved  through  earlier  maternal
Tdap  vaccination,  with  similar  or  better  effectiveness  at  preventing  pertussis  during
infancy.  Furthermore,  it  is  unclear  whether  maternal  vaccination  earlier  in  pregnancy
would result in the development and transfer of maternal antibodies at concentrations
that  would  persist  at  protective  levels  until  the  infant’s  first  DTaP  dose.  Lacking
effectiveness  data  on  vaccination  before  27  weeks’  gestation,  ACIP  concluded  that
vaccinating  earlier  in  the  27  through  36  week  period  will  maximize  passive  antibody
transfer  to  the  infant  (261).  Studies  of  the  persistence  of  antipertussis  antibodies
following  a  dose  of  Tdap  show  substantial  decay  in  antibody  levels  after  one  year  in

healthy,  nonpregnant  adults  (186,262,263);  antibody  kinetics  in  pregnant  women  are
likely  to  be  similar.  With  regard  to  maternal  antipertussis  antibody  concentrations  in
infants born to women who received Tdap within the preceding 2 years, results from
one  study  indicated  that  antipertussis  antibody  concentrations  waned  quickly  in
pregnant women vaccinated before pregnancy and were unlikely to be high enough to
provide passive protection to infants (247). Because antibody levels wane substantially
during the first year following vaccination, ACIP concluded that a single dose of Tdap
during  a  pregnancy  would  be  insufficient  to  provide  protection  for  subsequent
pregnancies  (6).  The  presence  of  maternally  derived  transplacental  antipertussis
antibodies might interfere with an infant’s response to subsequent active vaccination
with recommended DTaP vaccines potentially putting an infant at risk for disease later
in  infancy.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  infants  born  to  mothers  who  received  Tdap-IPV
during  pregnancy  had  lower  PT,  FHA,  and  FIM  antibodies  when  measured  3–6  weeks
after  the  third  dose  of  a  2-3-4  month  schedule,  compared  with  infants  born  to
unvaccinated  mothers  (264).  Antibodies  to  diphtheria  also  were  lower,  as  were
antibodies  to  some  CRM-conjugated  pneumococcal  antigens  when  vaccinated  with
PCV13  on  a  2–4-month  schedule.  In  contrast,  antitetanus  antibody  and  anti-Hib
antibody  responses  were  enhanced.  In  the  United  States  and  Canada,  pertussis
antibody levels were modestly diminished (7.2%–48.3%) following the third dose of a
2-4-6 month DTaP schedule in infants whose mothers received Tdap during pregnancy,
compared with infants whose mothers were not vaccinated during pregnancy; however,
after  the  fourth  dose  of  DTaP,  pertussis  antibody  levels  were  comparable  in  the  two
groups  of  infants  (S.  A.  Halperin,  Dalhousie  University,  unpublished  data,  2011)
(192,249).  Because  correlates  of  protection  are  not  well  defined  for  pertussis,  the
clinical  importance  of  lower  infant  immune  responses  following  receipt  of  DTaP  is
unclear.  However,  any  interference  with  infant  immune  responses  is  likely  to  be
short-lived because circulating maternal antibodies decline rapidly (265). Although it is

not known what level of maternal antibody is protective against infant pertussis, ACIP
concluded that the potential benefit of protection from maternal antibodies in newborn
infants  outweighs  the  potential  risk  for  shifting  pertussis  disease  burden  to  later  in
infancy and emphasized the importance of timely receipt of the fourth DTaP dose (9).
ACIP  recommends  Tdap  vaccination  for  women  during  pregnancy  to  prevent  infant
pertussis.  Before  this  recommendation  was  developed  to  vaccinate  pregnant  women
with  Tdap,  the  primary  strategy  to  prevent  infant  pertussis  was  Tdap  vaccination  of
close contacts of infants, on the assumption that vaccination with Tdap would reduce
the  risk  for  pertussis  exposure  and  transmission  to  infants,  a  strategy  referred  to  as
“cocooning”  (5).  Cocooning  programs  had  limited  success  and  have  been  confronted
with  substantial  logistical  and  financial  challenges  to  implementation  and  program
sustainability  (43,266–268).  Programs  achieved  moderate  Tdap  coverage  among
postpartum mothers, but had less success vaccinating other family members (268,269).
The evidence on the effectiveness and impact of cocooning in preventing transmission
of pertussis to infants is inconclusive (153,154,270). Recent epidemiologic and animal
model  evidence  suggests  that  Tdap  vaccination  does  not  prevent  transmission  and
therefore  does  not  afford  indirect  protection  of  close  contacts  against  pertussis
(155,156,159). However, persons who are up to date with pertussis vaccines and who
become infected generally have a milder infection compared with those who have not
been  vaccinated,  which  might  make  them  less  efficient  in  transmitting  pertussis  to
others  (160).  When  recommendations  for  Tdap  vaccination  were  made  in  2005,
mothers  were  identified  as  the  primary  source  of  pertussis  in  infants  (271,272).  This
appears to have shifted, with siblings now identified as the primary source of pertussis
infection for infants (40,42,43). This shift in the source of infant pertussis, along with
recent evidence suggesting that Tdap vaccination does not prevent transmission of B.
pertussis,  underscores  the  importance  of  providing  newborns  with  maternal
antipertussis  antibodies  through  Tdap  vaccination  of  women  during  pregnancy

(155,156,159). A single dose of Tdap is recommended for all persons aged ≥11 years
who have not previously received a dose; having a pregnancy in a household presents
an opportunity to review the Tdap vaccination status of close contacts to ensure that
they are up to date. Health care personnel in the United States are not known to have
higher risk for diphtheria or tetanus compared with the general population. However,
for  pertussis,  occupational  exposures  occur  in  health  care  settings,  and  nosocomial
spread of pertussis in various health care settings has been documented (273–288). In
these settings, the index case might occur in a health care provider, patient, or hospital
visitor (273–288). Although the frequency and intensity of patient exposure might lead
to  infection  of  health  care  personnel  with  subsequent  transmission  to  other  patients,
the  risk  for  and  burden  of  pertussis  in  health  care  personnel  are  difficult  to  quantify.
The  few  population-based  estimates  of  the  risk  for  pertussis  among  health  care
personnel  in  the  United  States  suggest  the  risk  for  pertussis  among  health  care
personnel is comparable to the risk among the general population of adolescents and
adults  (289–291).  Since  2005,  ACIP  has  recommended  that  health  care  personnel
receive  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  to  protect  them  against  pertussis  and  possibly  reduce
transmission  to  patients,  co-workers,  household  members,  and  persons  in  the
community.  Hospital-based  Tdap  coverage  rates  among  health  care  personnel  might
depend  on  the  type  of  Tdap  vaccination  program  an  institution  employs;  reported
coverage  ranges  from  30%  (campaign)  to  100%  (hospital  mandate)  (292,293).
Nationally, Tdap coverage among health care personnel is 42.1% (36). Previous models
assessing the likely benefits and costs of vaccinating health care personnel with Tdap
to  prevent  nosocomial  pertussis  outbreaks  indicated  that  vaccination  of  health  care
personnel  substantially  reduced  the  risk  for  hospital-based  outbreaks  and  was
cost-saving  (294,295).  However,  model  inputs  included  estimates  of  Tdap  vaccine
efficacy  against  pertussis  higher  than  current  estimates,  and  assumed  vaccination
would decrease pertussis transmission and thereby prevent secondary cases. Current

data do not support the assumption that Tdap vaccination would prevent transmission.
Depending on the approach used, management of pertussis exposures in health care
settings  can  be  complicated,  time-consuming,  and  costly.  Exposed  health  care
personnel with cough illness must be evaluated and might require diagnostic testing,
administration of prophylactic antimicrobial agents, and possible exclusion from work.
Several studies have shown that the costs of investigating pertussis outbreaks in the
health  care  setting  and  implementing  control  measures  are  substantial.  The  cost  of
managing pertussis exposures in the health care setting over a 12-month period ranged
from $84,000 to $98,000 (284,294). The associated costs of dealing with hospital-based
pertussis  outbreaks  ranged  from  $74,000  to  $263,000  (285,288).  Since  the
promulgation of the 2005 Tdap recommendations for health care personnel, only one
study  has  tried  to  determine  whether  it  is  necessary  to  give  Tdap-vaccinated  health
care  personnel  postexposure  antimicrobial  prophylaxis,  but  the  results  were
inconclusive  due  to  the  low  risk  for  disease  during  the  study  period  (296).  Tdap
vaccination  status  does  not  change  the  approach  to  evaluating  postexposure
prophylaxis  when  health  care  personnel  are  exposed  to  pertussis.  Postexposure
prophylaxis is recommended for health care personnel in contact with persons at risk
for  severe  disease  (e.g.,  hospitalized  neonates,  newborn  infants,  and  patients  with
chronic  respiratory  conditions).  Other  health  care  personnel  can  either  receive
postexposure  prophylaxis  or  be  carefully  monitored  for  21  days  after  pertussis
exposure. Health care personnel should be treated with antibiotics at the onset of signs
and symptoms of pertussis, and excluded from work for the first 5 days while receiving
appropriate
 antibiotics.
 Recommended
 antimicrobial
 agents
 for
 postexposure
prophylaxis  among  health  care  personnel  exposed  to  pertussis  include  azithromycin,
clarithromycin, erythromycin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). Guidance
on
 postexposure
 prophylaxis
 of
 pertussis
 is
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/rr/rr5414.pdf.  With  the  exception  of  pregnant  women,

only a single booster dose of Tdap is recommended for persons aged ≥11 years. Both
available Tdap products are approved for use as a single booster dose (141,142). Tdap
provides  protection  against  tetanus,  diphtheria,  and  pertussis,  but  protection  from
pertussis  infection  begins  to  decline  within  2  to  4  years  after  receipt  of  Tdap
(29,149,150).  Clinical  trials  support  that  a  second  dose  of  Tdap  is  safe  and
immunogenic at a 5- or 10-year interval (184–188). Immunogenicity studies show that
diphtheria  and  tetanus  antibody  levels  persisted  for  five  to  10  years  after  receipt  of
Tdap  (186,188,262,263,297–301).  However,  antipertussis  antibodies  decline  rapidly
after  the  first  year,  suggesting  that  protection  wanes,  which  would  likely  limit  the
impact of a second dose of Tdap on the overall burden of pertussis in the United States
(186,188,262,263,297–301). Antibody decay and, therefore, clinical protection following
additional doses of Tdap are likely similar to what is observed following the first dose of
Tdap. ACIP recognizes the increasing burden of pertussis in the United States and the
need  for  an  effective  strategy  to  reduce  this  burden.  A  decision  analysis  model
evaluating the epidemiologic and economic impact of a routine program of additional
doses of Tdap administered at either a 5- or 10-year interval to persons who received
their  first  Tdap  at  age  11  years  suggested  that  the  reduction  in  pertussis  disease
burden attributable to the routine use of a second dose of Tdap would be limited (302).
In the model, the proportion of cases preventable compared with the recommendation,
ranged from 3% to 5% (302). ACIP concluded that the data do not support a general
recommendation for a routine second dose of Tdap, and that the public health impact
of routinely recommending a second dose of Tdap would be limited (303). Top Before
the availability of vaccines, pertussis, tetanus, and diphtheria were common diseases
and  caused  severe  morbidity  and  mortality.  As  a  result  of  the  routine  DTP/DTaP
childhood  vaccination  program  and  decennial  booster  doses  of  tetanus-toxoid
containing  vaccines  for  adolescents  and  adults,  the  number  of  cases  of  all  three
diseases has declined markedly; cases of tetanus and diphtheria are rare in the United

States.  For  pertussis,  the  number  of  reported  cases  declined  dramatically  following
introduction  of  universal  childhood  pertussis  vaccination  (3).  However,  even  with
sustained high vaccine coverage, the incidence of reported pertussis began increasing
in the 1980s. In 1997, ACIP recommended that DTaP replace all DTP doses; since then,
no changes have been made to these childhood vaccine recommendations (3). In 2005,
to  address  the  increase  in  the  incidence  of  pertussis  among  adolescents  and  adults,
ACIP recommended a single dose of Tdap for persons aged 11–64 years as a booster
immunization against tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis, with the intention to provide
routine  vaccination  at  ages  11–12  years  (4,5).  Additionally,  special  populations,
including  health  care  personnel  and  close  contacts  of  infants,  were  recommended  to
receive a dose of Tdap. Since the promulgation of the ACIP Tdap recommendations in
2005,  several  studies  have  identified  barriers  to  and  programmatic  gaps  in  the
implementation  of  the  recommendations  for  adolescents  and  adults.  Barriers  to
implementation included confusion around guidance language concerning the timing of
administration  of  Tdap  after  the  last  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  dose  and
obstacles to vaccinating health care personnel. Programmatic gaps at the time of the
2005 recommendations included lack of a Tdap vaccine licensed for children aged 7–10
years and for adults aged ≥65 years. In 2011 and 2012, ACIP recommended a dose of
Tdap  for  these  age  groups  and  clarified  the  language  concerning  the  timing  of  Tdap
vaccination  and  the  vaccination  of  health  care  personnel  (8,10,304).  Compared  with
older children and adults, infants aged <12 months have substantially higher rates of
pertussis (Figure 2) and the largest burden of pertussis-related deaths. The majority of
pertussis-related hospitalizations and deaths occur in infants aged ≤2 months who are
too young to be vaccinated. The desire to protect the youngest infants from pertussis
morbidity  and  mortality  prompted  ACIP  in  2011  to  recommend  a  dose  of  Tdap  be
administered to women during pregnancy, but only for pregnant women who had never
received Tdap (9). Because antibody levels wane substantially after vaccination, ACIP

concluded  that  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  during  one  pregnancy  would  not  provide
protection  for  infants  who  were  the  product  of  subsequent  pregnancies.  In  2012,  the
recommendation  was  revised;  ACIP  recommends  the  use  of  Tdap  during  each
pregnancy (6). Top All persons are recommended to receive routine pertussis, tetanus,
and diphtheria vaccination. Vaccine type, product, number of doses and booster dose
recommendations  are  based  on  age  and  pregnancy  status  (Tables  4  and  5).
Recommendations for off-label use of Tdap vaccines were made after thorough review
of  available  data  on  the  risks  for  and  benefits  of  Tdap  vaccination,  and  include  the
following persons: pregnant women, children aged 7–10 years, and persons aged ≥65
years (for one Tdap product) (6,8–10). At the time these recommendations were made,
ACIP  determined  that  although  data  were  limited,  the  benefits  of  off-label  Tdap
vaccination  in  preventing  pertussis  and  decreasing  pertussis-related  morbidity  and
mortality  outweigh  the  risks  of  an  adverse  event.  The  routine  pertussis,  tetanus,  and
diphtheria vaccination schedule for persons aged 2 months–6 years is comprised of five
doses  of  vaccine  containing  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids,  and  pertussis  antigens
(DTaP),  administered  at  ages  2,  4,  6,  15–18  months  and  4–6  years.  Three  (primary)
doses  should  be  administered  at  ages  2,  4,  and  6  months.  The  fourth  (first  booster)
dose  should  be  administered  to  children  aged  15–18  months  to  maintain  adequate
immunity  during  preschool  years.  The  fifth  (second  booster)  dose  should  be
administered to children aged 4–6 years to confer continued protection against disease
during  the  early  years  of  schooling.  Guidance  for  Use  The  first  DTaP  dose  can  be
administered as early as age 6 weeks. The fourth DTaP dose should be administered at
least  6  months  after  the  third  DTaP  dose  and  should  not  be  administered  to  a  child
aged  <12  months.  A  fifth  DTaP  dose  is  not  necessary  if  the  fourth  DTaP  dose  in  the
series  is  administered  at  age  ≥4  years.  Persons  aged  11–18  years  should  receive  a
single  dose  of  Tdap,  preferably  at  a  preventive  care  visit  at  ages  11–12  years.  To
ensure continued protection against tetanus and diphtheria, booster doses of Td should

be  administered  every  10  years  throughout  life.  Persons  aged  ≥19  years  who
previously  have  not  received  a  dose  of  Tdap  should  receive  a  single  dose  of  Tdap  in
place of a decennial Td booster dose. The dose of Tdap, when indicated, should not be
delayed  and  should  be  administered  regardless  of  interval  since  the  last  tetanus  or
diphtheria  toxoid–containing  vaccine.  To  ensure  continued  protection  against  tetanus
and diphtheria, booster doses of Td should be administered every 10 years throughout
life. ACIP recommends that providers of prenatal care implement a Tdap immunization
program  for  all  pregnant  women.  Health  care  personnel  should  administer  a  dose  of
Tdap during each pregnancy, irrespective of the patient’s prior history of receiving the
vaccine.  Guidance  for  Use  Tdap  should  be  administered  between  27  and  36  weeks’
gestation,  although  it  may  be  administered  at  any  time  during  pregnancy.  Available
data  suggest  that  vaccinating  earlier  in  the  27–36  week  time  period  will  maximize
passive antibody transfer to the infant.  Tdap may be simultaneously administered with
an inactivated influenza vaccine to pregnant women. If a woman did not receive Tdap
during her current pregnancy and did not receive a prior dose of Tdap ever (i.e., during
adolescence, adulthood, or a previous pregnancy), then Tdap should be administered
immediately postpartum. If a woman did not receive Tdap during her current pregnancy
but  did  receive  a  prior  dose  of  Tdap,  then  she  should  not  receive  a  dose  of  Tdap
postpartum. Contraindications to pertussis vaccination. For children aged <7 years with
a contraindication to pertussis vaccination (Table 2), DT should be used instead of DTaP
to  complete  an  age  appropriate  series.  Previously  unvaccinated  children  who  receive
their first DT dose at age <12 months should receive a total of 4 doses of DT, the first 3
doses at 4- to 8-week intervals and the fourth dose 6 to 12 months later (similar to the
recommended  DTaP  schedule).  Unvaccinated  children  aged  ≥12  months  for  whom
pertussis vaccine is contraindicated should receive 2 doses of DT 4 to 8 weeks apart,
followed by a third dose 6 to 12 months later to complete the primary series. Children
who have already received 1 or 2 doses of DT or DTaP after their first birthday and for

whom further pertussis vaccine is contraindicated should receive a total of 3 doses of a
preparation  containing  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  appropriate  for  age,  with  the
third dose administered 6 to 12 months after the second dose. Children aged 4–6 years
who complete a primary series of DT before their fourth birthday should receive a fifth
dose of DT by the time of school entry to confer continued protection against disease.
Personal  history  of  seizures.  Among  infants  and  children  with  a  history  of  previous
seizures, it is prudent to delay pertussis vaccination until the child’s neurologic status
has  been  assessed.  Infants  and  children  with  a  stable  neurologic  condition,  including
well-controlled seizures, may be vaccinated with DTaP. Infants with evolving neurologic
conditions  should  not  be  vaccinated  until  a  treatment  regimen  has  been  established
and the condition has stabilized. A family history of seizures is not a contradiction to
pertussis vaccination. Close contacts of infants. Persons aged ≥11 years who have or
anticipate having close contact with an infant aged ≤12 months (e.g., parents, siblings,
grandparents,  child  care  providers,  and  health  care  providers)  and  who  have  never
received  Tdap  should  receive  a  dose  of  Tdap.  Ideally,  these  persons  should  receive
Tdap at least 2 weeks prior to contact with the infant to allow for an immune response
to pertussis vaccine antigens. Health care personnel. All health care personnel should
receive a single dose of Tdap as soon as feasible if they have not previously received
Tdap. After receipt of 1 dose of Tdap, health care personnel should receive routine Td
booster  immunizations  according  to  the  recommended  schedule.  In-patient  and
out-patient care facilities should consider approaches that maximize vaccination rates
of health care personnel (e.g., education about the benefits of vaccination, convenient
access, provision of Tdap at no charge). For persons aged <7 years not fully immunized
with  DTaP  vaccine,  the  catch-up  schedule  and  minimum  intervals  between  doses  are
available  at  https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html.  The
vaccine series does not need to be restarted regardless of the time that has elapsed
between  doses  for  those  with  incomplete  DTaP  vaccine  history.  Because  of  concern

about  adverse  reactions,  the  total  number  of  doses  of  vaccines  containing  diphtheria
and  tetanus  toxoids  (e.g.,  DTaP,  DT,  and  DTP)  received  should  not  exceed  6  doses
before the seventh birthday. Only documented doses count toward the maximum of 6
doses. Persons aged 7–18 years not fully immunized with DTaP vaccine should receive a
single dose of Tdap as one (preferably the first) dose of the catch-up series; if additional
doses are needed, use Td vaccine. The vaccine series does not need to be restarted,
regardless of the time that has elapsed between doses for those with incomplete DTaP
vaccine  history.  The  catch-up  schedule  and  minimum  intervals  between  doses  are
available
 at
 https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html.
 For
persons aged 7–10 years who receive a dose of Tdap as part of the catch-up series, an
adolescent  Tdap  vaccine  dose  should  be  administered  at  age  11–12  years.  Persons
aged  >18  years  who  have  never  been  vaccinated  against  pertussis,  tetanus,  or
diphtheria  should  receive  a  series  of  three  vaccinations  containing  tetanus  and
diphtheria toxoids, which includes 1 dose of Tdap. The preferred schedule is a single
dose of Tdap, followed by a dose of Td at least 4 weeks after Tdap and another dose of
Td 6 to 12 months later. However, the single dose of Tdap can substitute for any of the
Td  doses  in  the  3-dose  primary  series.  Persons  aged  >18  years  who  are  not  fully
immunized  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  should  receive  1  dose  of  Tdap  (preferably
the  first)  in  the  catch-up  series;  if  additional  tetanus  toxoid–containing  doses  are
needed, use Td vaccine. Alternatively, in situations in which a person aged >18 years
probably  received  vaccination  against  tetanus  and  diphtheria  but  cannot  produce
documentation,  vaccine  providers  may  consider  serologic  testing  for  antibodies  to
tetanus and diphtheria toxin to avoid unnecessary vaccination. If tetanus and diphtheria
antitoxin levels are each >0.01 IU/mL, previous vaccination with tetanus and diphtheria
toxoid vaccine is presumed, and a single dose of Tdap is indicated. Pregnant women
who  have  completed  the  childhood  immunization  schedule  and  were  last  vaccinated
more  than  ten  years  previously  should  receive  a  booster  dose  of  tetanus

toxoid–containing vaccine to prevent neonatal tetanus. The risk of neonatal tetanus is
minimal if a previously unimmunized woman has received at least 2 properly spaced
doses  of  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  during  pregnancy;  one  of  the  doses
administered during pregnancy should be Tdap, administered according to the current
guidance.  She  should  complete  the  3-dose  primary  series  at  the  recommended
intervals. ACIP has recommended administering tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine and
tetanus immune globulin (TIG) when indicated as part of standard wound management
to prevent tetanus (Table 6). A tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine is indicated as part of
wound  management  if  more  than  five  years  has  passed  since  the  last  tetanus
toxoid–containing vaccine dose. If a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine is indicated for
persons  aged  ≥11  years,  Tdap  is  preferred  for  persons  who  have  not  previously
received Tdap or whose Tdap history is unknown. If a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine
is indicated for a pregnant woman, Tdap should be used. For nonpregnant persons with
documentation  of  previous  vaccination  with  Tdap,  Td  should  be  used  if  a  tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccine  is  indicated.  If  a  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  is
indicated  and  Td  is  unavailable,  Tdap  may  be  administered.  Persons  who  have
completed the 3-dose primary tetanus vaccination series and have received a tetanus
toxoid–containing  vaccine  <5  years  earlier  are  protected  against  tetanus  and  do  not
require a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine or TIG as part of wound management. An
attempt  should  be  made  to  determine  whether  a  patient  has  completed  the  3-dose
primary tetanus vaccination series. Persons with unknown or uncertain previous tetanus
vaccination  histories  should  be  considered  to  have  had  no  previous  tetanus
toxoid–containing vaccine. Persons who have not completed the primary series might
require tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine and passive vaccination with TIG at the time
of  wound  management  (Table  6).  When  both  TIG  and  a  tetanus  toxoid–containing
vaccine are indicated, the products should be administered using separate syringes at
different anatomical sites. Persons with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection

or severe immunodeficiency who have contaminated wounds should also receive TIG,
regardless of their history of tetanus immunizations. Persons with a history of an Arthus
reaction  following  a  previous  dose  of  a  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  should  not
receive a tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine until >10 years after the most recent dose;
this  interval  is  recommended  regardless  of  the  wound  condition  (e.g.,  even  if
contaminated or severe). In all circumstances, the decision to administer TIG should be
based  on  the  primary  vaccination  history  for  tetanus  (Table  6).  For  an  infant  or  child
aged <7 years, circumstances such as travel, potential loss to follow-up or increased
risk  of  exposure  to  pertussis  might  warrant  an  accelerated  schedule  to  provide
protection as early as possible. An accelerated schedule can be started as soon as the
infant is aged 6 weeks, with the second and third DTaP doses administered no earlier
than  4  weeks  after  each  preceding  dose.  The  fourth  DTaP  dose  should  not  be
administered  before  the  infant  is  aged  12  months  and  should  be  separated  from  the
third dose by at least 6 months. The fifth DTaP dose should not be administered before
the  child  is  aged  4  years.  When  considering  an  accelerated  schedule,  providers  also
should  consider  the  timing  of  other  recommended  vaccines  and  well-child  visits.
Persons who have a history of pertussis should receive a pertussis-containing vaccine
(i.e.,  DTaP  or  Tdap)  according  to  the  routine  recommendation.  Although  pertussis
disease  is  likely  to  confer  natural  immunity  against  pertussis,  the  immune  response
might  be  suboptimal  against  subsequent  pertussis  disease  and  the  duration  of
protection  induced  by  an  infection  does  not  provide  long-term  immunity  (305,306).
Tetanus or diphtheria infection do not necessarily confer immunity against re-infection
(54,307,308); therefore, active vaccination should be initiated at the time of recovery
from  the  illness  according  to  the  schedule.  Persons  who  have  completed  the  primary
tetanus  vaccination  series  should  receive  a  booster  dose  as  soon  as  feasible  during
convalescence.  Persons  with  unknown  or  uncertain  previous  tetanus  vaccination
histories  should  be  considered  to  have  had  no  previous  tetanus  toxoid–containing

vaccine and should begin the 3-dose tetanus and diphtheria toxoids vaccination series.
A summary of dose schedules is provided (Tables 4 and 5). All health care personnel
administering  vaccinations  should  be  aware  of  the  potential  for  syncope  after
vaccination,  especially  among  adolescents  and  young  adults,  and  should  take
appropriate measures to prevent potential injuries. Providers should strongly consider
observing  patients  for  15  minutes  after  they  are  vaccinated.  If  syncope  occurs,  the
vaccine  recipient  should  be  observed  until  symptoms  resolve  (52).  Six  vaccines  are
licensed for the pertussis, tetanus and diphtheria vaccination series (Table 4). The dose
of DTaP is 0.5 mL, administered intramuscularly. The preferred intramuscular injection
site for infants and children through age 2 years is the anterolateral aspect of the thigh
(52).  For  children  aged  ≥3  years,  the  preferred  site  is  the  deltoid  muscle  (52).  DTaP
may be administered simultaneously with other vaccines at a different anatomical site.
Interchangeable use of acellular pertussis vaccines. Whenever feasible, the same DTaP
product  should  be  used  for  all  doses  of  the  vaccination  series.  Data  are  limited
regarding  the  safety,  immunogenicity,  and  efficacy  of  using  DTaP  vaccines  from
different  manufacturers  for  successive  doses  of  the  primary  or  booster  vaccination
series.  However,  the  vaccine  provider  might  not  know  or  have  available  the  type  of
DTaP vaccine previously administered to a child; neither circumstance should present a
barrier to administration of the vaccine. Any of the licensed DTaP vaccines may be used
to  complete  the  vaccination  series.  Minimum  interval  between  third  and  fourth  DTaP
dose. The recommended minimal interval between the third and fourth doses of DTaP is
6 months, and the minimum age for receipt of the fourth dose of DTaP is 12 months.
However, a fourth DTaP dose is considered valid if administered at least 4 months after
the third dose of DTaP and the child is aged ≥12 months. One vaccine is licensed for
active immunization of children up to age seven years against diphtheria and tetanus in
instances  where  the  pertussis  vaccine  component  is  contraindicated  or  where  the
physician decides that pertussis vaccine is not to be administered (Table 4). The dose

of DT is 0.5 mL, administered intramuscularly. The preferred intramuscular injection site
for  infants  and  children  through  age  2  years  is  the  anterolateral  aspect  of  the  thigh
(52).  For  children  aged  ≥3  years,  the  preferred  site  is  the  deltoid  muscle  (52).  Two
vaccines are licensed for the pertussis, tetanus and diphtheria vaccination booster dose
for  adolescents  and  adults  (Table  5).  The  dose  of  Tdap  is  0.5  mL,  administered
intramuscularly,  preferably  into  the  deltoid  muscle  (52).  Tdap  may  be  administered
simultaneously with other vaccines at a different anatomical site. Interval between Td
and  Tdap.  ACIP  recommends  that  for  pertussis  vaccination,  when  indicated,  Tdap
should  be  administered  regardless  of  interval  since  the  last  tetanus  or  diphtheria
toxoid–containing vaccine. ACIP concluded that, while longer intervals between Td and
Tdap  vaccination  could  decrease  the  occurrence  of  local  reactions,  the  benefits  of
protection against pertussis outweigh the potential risk for adverse events. For persons
aged ≥7 years with incomplete or unknown vaccine history, the interval between doses
of tetanus toxoid–containing vaccines should follow the catch-up series schedule. Tdap
products  in  adults  aged  ≥65  years.  Providers  should  not  miss  an  opportunity  to
vaccinate persons aged ≥65 years with Tdap. When feasible, Boostrix (approved for use
in persons aged ≥10 years) should be used for adults aged ≥65 years instead of Adacel
(approved for use in persons aged 10–64 years); however, ACIP concluded that either
vaccine administered to a person aged ≥65 years is immunogenic and would provide
protection. A dose of either Tdap product is considered valid; therefore, providers may
administer  the  Tdap  vaccine  they  have  available.  For  tetanus  and  diphtheria  toxoids
adsorbed vaccines, there are two licensed vaccines (Table 5). The dose of Td is 0.5 mL,
administered  intramuscularly,  preferably  into  the  deltoid  muscle  (52).  DTaP  is  not
indicated  for  persons  aged  ≥7  years.  If  DTaP  is  administered  inadvertently  to  a  fully
vaccinated child aged 7–10 years, this dose should be counted as the adolescent Tdap
dose.  If  DTaP  is  administered  inadvertently  to  an  undervaccinated  child  aged  7–10
years,  this  dose  should  count  as  the  Tdap  dose  of  the  catch-up  series  and  the  child

should  receive  an  adolescent  booster  dose  of  Tdap.  If  DTaP  is  administered
inadvertently to a person aged ≥11 years, this dose should count as the Tdap dose, and
the  person  should  not  receive  an  additional  dose  of  Tdap.  Persons  aged  2  months–6
years. If Tdap is administered inadvertently instead of DTaP as any one of the first 3
doses of the tetanus-diphtheria-pertussis vaccination series, the Tdap dose should not
be  counted  as  valid,  and  a  replacement  dose  of  DTaP  should  be  administered.  The
replacement dose of DTaP can be administered as soon as feasible at any interval after
the  inadvertent  Tdap  dose.  The  remaining  doses  of  the  DTaP  series  should  be
administered on the routine schedule, with at least a four-week interval between the
replacement dose of DTaP and the next dose of DTaP. The adolescent Tdap dose should
be  administered  as  recommended  when  this  child  is  aged  11–12  years.  If  Tdap  is
administered
 inadvertently
 as
 the
 fourth
 or
 the
 fifth
 dose
 in
 the
tetanus-diphtheria-pertussis  vaccination  series,  the  Tdap  dose  should  be  counted  as
valid and does not need to be repeated; the child who received Tdap as a fourth dose
should  complete  the  pediatric  DTaP  schedule.  The  adolescent  Tdap  dose  should  be
administered as recommended when this child is aged 11–12 years. Children aged 7–10
years who are fully vaccinated.¶ If Tdap is administered inadvertently, the Tdap dose
should not be counted as valid. The adolescent Tdap dose should be administered as
recommended when this child is aged 11–12 years. Both Tdap products are licensed for
use as a single dose for active booster immunization; Boostrix is approved for use in
persons aged ≥10 years and Adacel is approved for use in persons aged 10–64 years.
Tdap  is  not  licensed  for  multiple  administrations  nor  is  it  recommended  for  multiple
administrations,  with  the  exception  of  the  recommendation  that  pregnant  women
receive a dose of Tdap during each pregnancy. If a dose of Tdap is administered to a
person who has previously received Tdap, this dose should count as the next booster
dose  of  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine.  Providers  should  screen  patients  for
contraindications  and  precautions  to  the  vaccine  before  each  dose  of  vaccine  is

administered  (Table  2).  A  contraindication  is  a  condition  in  a  recipient  that  increases
the risk for a serious adverse reaction. A vaccine should not be administered when a
contraindication is present. In contrast, certain conditions are commonly misperceived
as  contraindications  (i.e.,  are  not  valid  reasons  to  defer  vaccination)  (Table  3).  In
general,  vaccinations  should  be  deferred  when  a  precaution  is  present.  However,  a
vaccination might be indicated in the presence of a precaution if the perceived benefit
of  protection  from  the  vaccine  outweighs  the  risk  for  an  adverse  reaction.  For  DTaP
vaccines, providers and parents should evaluate the risks and benefits of administering
subsequent  doses  of  a  pertussis-containing  vaccine.  In  circumstances  in  which  the
benefits  of  further  pertussis  vaccination  outweigh  the  possible  risks  (e.g.,  during  an
outbreak of pertussis), DTaP vaccine should be administered for the subsequent doses.
Clinically significant and serious adverse events that arise after vaccination should be
reported to VAERS at https://vaers.hhs.gov/reportevent.html. VAERS is a postmarketing
safety  surveillance  program  that  collects  information  about  adverse  events  (possible
side  effects)  that  occur  after  the  administration  of  vaccines  licensed  for  use  in  the
United States. Reports can be filed securely online, by mail, or by fax. A VAERS form
can be downloaded from the VAERS website or requested by e-mail (info@vaers.org),
telephone (800-822-7967), or fax (877-721-0366). Additional information on VAERS and
vaccine safety is available at https://vaers.hhs.gov/about/index or by calling telephone
800-822-7967.  Top  The  National  Vaccine  Injury  Compensation  Program  (VICP),
established by the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986, as amended, provides
a  mechanism  through  which  compensation  can  be  paid  on  behalf  of  a  person
determined  to  have  been  injured  or  to  have  died  as  a  result  of  receiving  a  vaccine
covered by VICP. National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act requires health care providers
to report any adverse events listed by the manufacturer as a contraindication to further
vaccination  or  any  adverse  event  listed  in  the  VAERS  Table  of  Reportable  Events
Following Vaccination that occurs within the specified time period after vaccination. The

Vaccine Injury Table lists the vaccines covered by VICP and the injuries and conditions
(including death) for which compensation might be paid. If the injury or condition is not
included in the table or does not occur within the time period specified on the table,
persons must prove that the vaccine caused the injury or condition. For a person to be
eligible for compensation, the general filing deadlines for injuries require claims to be
filed within 3 years after the first sign or symptom of the vaccine injury; for a death,
claims must be filed within 2 years of the vaccine-related death and not more than 4
years  after  the  start  of  the  first  sign  or  symptom  of  the  vaccine-related  injury  from
which  the  death  occurred.  When  a  new  vaccine  is  covered  by  VICP  or  when  a  new
injury/condition  is  added  to  the  table,  claims  that  do  not  meet  the  general  filing
deadlines must be filed within 2 years from the date the vaccine or injury/condition is
added to the table for injuries or deaths that occurred up to 8 years before the table
change. Persons who receive a VICP-covered vaccine might be eligible to file a claim.
Additional
 information
 about
 VICP
 is
 available
https://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation/index.html or by calling 800–338–2382. Top
Safety monitoring in pregnant women following Tdap administration includes enhanced
monitoring in VAERS and utilization of the VSD to assess acute adverse events during
pregnancy,  adverse  pregnancy  outcomes  affecting  the  mother,  and  birth  outcomes.
Although  not  required  by  the  FDA,  pregnancy  registries  were  established  by  Sanofi
Pasteur  and  GSK  during  licensure  of  both  Tdap  vaccines  to  collect  data  on  adverse
events  following  inadvertent  administration  of  Tdap  vaccine  during  pregnancy.  ACIP
recommends  administration  of  Tdap  vaccine  during  each  pregnancy.  Neither  Tdap
product is contraindicated for use in pregnant women; lack of a specific “indication and
usage” statement about use of the product in pregnant women in the product labeling
does  not  preclude  use  of  these  vaccines  during  pregnancy.  Both  pharmaceutical
companies continue to maintain a pregnancy registry. Health care providers may report
Tdap  vaccination  during  pregnancy,  regardless  of  trimester,  to  the  appropriate

company’s  pregnancy  registry:  Sanofi  Pasteur  (Adacel)  telephone:  800-822-2463  and
GSK  (Boostrix)  telephone:  888-452-9622.  Top  The  United  States  has  experienced
substantial  increases  in  the  number  of  reported  pertussis  cases  and  changes  in  the
epidemiologic features of pertussis since the early 1990s. The impact of switching from
whole-cell  pertussis  vaccines  (DTP)  to  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  (DTaP)  on  the
epidemiologic  features  of  pertussis  is  still  being  investigated.  Both  DTaP  and  Tdap
vaccines  remain  the  most  effective  tools  for  preventing  pertussis  disease  and  are
associated with fewer serious adverse events than DTP, but data thus far indicate that
they do not provide long-term protection and might not prevent transmission. Since the
introduction  of  a  single  Tdap  booster  vaccine  for  adolescents  and  adults  in  2005,
changes to the recommendation were made in order to reduce barriers to Tdap uptake
and coverage among adolescents and adults and to reduce the burden of pertussis in
infants.  High  vaccine  coverage  in  adolescents  is  being  achieved  and  has  met  the
Healthy People 2020 target (80%), but attaining high coverage among adults remains a
challenge  (35).  Despite  challenges  to  vaccinating  women  during  pregnancy,  focused
efforts  to  educate  providers  and  pregnant  women  have  resulted  in  gradual
improvement in Tdap coverage. Ongoing efforts are needed to increase Tdap coverage
in  each  pregnancy  to  optimize  prevention  of  severe  pertussis  in  young  infants.  The
effects of the changes made to the Tdap recommendations need to be monitored and
evaluated  over  time  for  their  effectiveness  and  impact  on  pertussis,  particularly  in
infants.  As  the  epidemiologic  features  of  pertussis  in  the  United  States  continue  to
evolve  and  more  is  understood  about  acellular  pertussis  vaccines,  reassessment  of
immunization strategies might be required in the future. Looking ahead, the ability to
improve  the  current  prevention  and  control  strategies  is  limited  by  gaps  in  the
understanding  of  the  immune  response  to  acellular  pertussis  vaccines  and  pertussis
infection, as well as the lack of accepted defined serologic or laboratory correlates of
protection against pertussis. Given existing understanding of the durability of protection

provided by the current pertussis vaccines, optimizing the current pertussis vaccination
program and protecting infants, who are at highest risk for pertussis-related death, are
immediate  priorities.  Top  This  report  is  based,  in  part,  on  contributions  by  Amanda
Cohn,  MD;  Amanda  Faulkner,  MPH;  and  Bo-Hyun  Cho,  PhD;  National  Center  for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases; Mark Messonnier, PhD; Office of Public Health
Scientific  Services;  and  Hajime  Kamiya,  MD,  PhD,  National  Institute  of  Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan. Membership as of October 20, 2016 Chair: Nancy Bennett, MD,
University  of  Rochester  School  of  Medicine  and  Dentistry,  Rochester,  New  York.
Executive  Secretary:  Amanda  Cohn,  MD,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and
Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Members:  Robert  L  Atmar,  MD,  Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Edward Belongia, MD, Marshfield Clinic Research
Foundation, Marshfield, Wisconsin; Echezona Ezeanolue, MD, University of Nevada, Las
Vegas,  Nevada;  Paul  Hunter,  MD,  City  of  Milwaukee  Health  Department,  Milwaukee,
Wisconsin;  Allison  Kempe,  MD,  University  of  Colorado  School  of  Medicine,  Denver,
Colorado;  Grace  Lee,  MD,  Harvard  Pilgrim  Health  Care  Institute  &  Harvard  Medical
School,  Boston,  Massachusetts;  Kelly  Moore,  MD,  Tennessee  Department  of  Health,
Nashville,  Tennessee;  Cynthia  Pellegrini,  March  of  Dimes,  Washington  D.C.;  Arthur  L.
Reingold, MD, University of California, Berkeley, California; Laura E. Riley, MD, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; José R. Romero, MD, University of Arkansas for
Medical  Sciences  and  Arkansas  Children’s  Hospital,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas;  David
Stephens,  MD,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Peter  Szilagyi,
MD,  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles  (UCLA),  Los  Angeles,  California;  Emmanuel
Walter, Jr., MD, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina. Ex Officio
Members:  Eric  Deussing,  MD,  Department  of  Defense,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Bruce  Gellin,
MD,  National  Vaccine  Program  Office,  District  of  Columba;  Richard  Gorman,  MD,
National  Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Amy  Groom,  MPH,  Indian  Health
Service,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico;  Mary  Beth  Hance,  Centers  for  Medicare  and

Medicaid  Services,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Jane  A.  Kim,  MD,  Department  of  Veterans
Affairs,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  Narayan  Nair,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services
Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Wellington Sun, MD, Food and Drug Administration,
Bethesda, Maryland. Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians,
Margot  Savoy,  MD,  Wilmington,  Delaware;  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics,  Carrie  L.
Byington,  MD,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  David  Kimberlin,  MD,  Birmingham,  Alabama;
American  Academy  of  Physician  Assistants,  Marie-Michèle  Léger,  MPH,  Alexandria,
Virginia;  American  College  Health  Association,  Susan  Even,  MD,  Columbia,  Missouri;
American College of Nurse Midwives, Carol E. Hayes,CNM, MN, MPH, Atlanta, Georgia;
American  College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,  Kevin  A.  Ault,  MD  Kansas  City,
Kansas;  American  College  of  Physicians,  Sandra  Adamson  Fryhofer,  MD,  Atlanta
Georgia; American Geriatrics Society, Kenneth Schmader, MD, Durham, North Carolina;
America’s  Health  Insurance  Plans,  Mark  J.  Netoskie,  MD,  Houston,  Texas;  American
Medical Association, Sandra Adamson Fryhofer, MD, Atlanta Georgia; American Nurses
Association,  Charles  Rittle,  DNP,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania;  American  Osteopathic
Association, Stanley E. Grogg, DO, Tulsa, Oklahoma; American Pharmacists Association,
Stephan  L.  Foster,  PharmD,  Memphis,  Tennessee;  Association  of  Immunization
Managers,  Christine  Finley,  MPH,  Burlington,  Vermont;  Association  for  Prevention
Teaching  and  Research,  W.  Paul  McKinney,  MD,  Louisville,  Kentucky;  Association  of
State  and  Territorial  Health  Officials,  Terry  L.  Dwelle,  MD,  Bismark,  North  Dakota;
Biotechnology Industry Organization, Phyllis A. Arthur, MBA, Washington D.C.; Canadian
National Advisory Committee on Immunization, Ian MacDonald Gemmill, MD, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada; Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, Christine Hahn, MD,
Boise,  Idaho;  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America,  Kathleen  Neuzil,  MD,  Seattle,
Washington;  National  Association  of  County  and  City  Health  Officials,  Matthew  Zahn,
MD, Santa Ana, California; National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners, Patricia
Stinchfield, MS, St. Paul, Minnesota; National Foundation for Infectious Diseases, William

Schaffner,  MD,  Nashville,  Tennessee;  National  Immunization  Council  and  Child  Health
Program,  Mexico,  Ignacio  Villaseñor  Ruiz,  MD,  Mexico;  National  Medical  Association,
Patricia  Whitley-Williams,  MD,  New  Brunswick,  New  Jersey;  National  Vaccine  Advisory
Committee,  Kimberly  Thompson,  ScD,  Orlando,  Florida;  Pediatric  Infectious  Diseases
Society,  Sean  O’Leary,  MD,  Denver,  Colorado;  Pharmaceutical  Research  and
Manufacturers of America, David R. Johnson, MD, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania; Society for
Adolescent  Health  and  Medicine,  Amy  Middleman,  MD,  Houston,  Texas;  Society  for
Healthcare  Epidemiology  of  America,  David  Weber,  MD,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina.
Membership as of October 20, 2016 Chair: Arthur Reingold, MD, University of California
–  Berkeley,  Berkeley,  CA  (ACIP)  Members:  William  Atkinson,  MD,  Immunization  Action
Coalition, Saint Paul, Minnesota; Carol Baker, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas; Richard H. Beigi, MD, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Albert
Bourbon,  MPAS,  University  of  New  Mexico  Hospital,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico;  Lance
Chilton,  MD,  University  of  New  Mexico,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico;  Alexis  Elward,  MD,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Xin-Xing Gu, MD, National
Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Christine  Hahn,  MD,  Idaho  Department  of
Health and Welfare, Boise, Idaho; Scott Halperin, MD, Canadian Center for Vaccinology,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada; Kathleen Harriman, PhD, California Department of Public
Health,  Richmond,  California;  Carol  Hayes,  CNM,  MN,  MPH,  America  College  of  Nurse
Midwives,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Mary  Healy,  MD,  Baylor  College  of  Medicine,  Houston,
Texas; Jessica Kahn, MD, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio;
Ruth  Karron,  MD,  Johns  Hopkins  Bloomberg  School  of  Public  Health,  Baltimore,
Maryland;  Sarah  Long,  MD,  St.  Christopher’s  Hospital  for  Children,  Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania;  Peter  McIntyre,  PhD,  National  Centre  for  Immunization  Research  and
Surveillance,  Sydney,  Australia;  Paul  Offit,  MD,  Children’s  Hospital  of  Philadelphia,
Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  Laura  Riley,  MD,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,
Massachusetts  (ACIP);  Elizabeth  Rosenblum,  MD,  University  of  California,  San  Diego

School  of  Medicine,  San  Diego,  California;  Mark  Sawyer,  MD,  University  of  California,
San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, California; Stephanie Schauer, PhD, Wisconsin
Department  of  Health  Services,  Madison,  Wisconsin;  Kenneth  Schmader,  MD,  Duke
University and Durham VA Medical Centers, Durham, North Carolina; Ann Schwartz, MD,
Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Tina  Tan,  MD,  Northwestern
University  Feinberg  School  of  Medicine,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Marietta  Vázquez,  MD,  Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; David Weber, MD, University of
North  Carolina  Schools  of  Medicine  and  Public  Health,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina;
Matthew  Zahn,  MD,  Orange  County  Health  Care  Agency,  Santa  Ana,  California.
Contributors:  Anna  Acosta,  MD;  Thomas  A.  Clark,  MD;  Denise  Jamieson,  MD;  Stacey
Martin, MSc; Nancy E. Messonnier, MD; Pedro Moro, MD; Sonia Rasmussen, MD; Tami
Skoff,  MS;  Tejpratap  Tiwari,  MD,  Lucia  Tondella,  PhD;  JoEllen  Wolicki,  CDC,  Atlanta,
Georgia.  Work  Group  Secretariat  (CDC):  Jennifer  L.  Liang,  DVM.  Top  Corresponding
preparer: Jennifer L. Liang, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
CDC.  E-mail:  JLiang@cdc.gov.  Top  1Division  of  Bacterial  Diseases,  National  Center  for
Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;  2Division  of  Healthcare  Quality
Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 3Office
of  the  Director,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC;
4University of California, Berkeley; Berkeley, CA; 5University of California, San Diego;
La  Jolla,  California;  6Division  of  Reproductive  Health,  National  Center  for  Chronic
Disease  Prevention  and  Health  Promotion,  CDC  Top  CDC  Adoption  of  ACIP
Recommendations for MMWR Recommendations and Reports, MMWR Policy Notes, and
Immunization Schedules (Child/Adolescent, Adult): Recommendations for routine use of
vaccines in children, adolescents, and adults are developed by the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP). ACIP is chartered as a federal advisory committee to
provide expert external advice and guidance to the Director of CDC on use of vaccines
and  related  agents  for  the  control  of  vaccine-preventable  diseases  in  the  civilian

population  of  the  United  States.  Recommendations  for  routine  use  of  vaccines  in
children  and  adolescents  are  harmonized  to  the  greatest  extent  possible  with
recommendations  made  by  the  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  (AAP),  the  American
Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists  (ACOG).  Recommendations  for  routine  use  of  vaccines  in  adults  are
harmonized  with  recommendations  of  AAFP,  ACOG,  and  the  American  College  of
Physicians (ACP). ACIP recommendations approved by the CDC Director become agency
guidelines on the date published in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR).
Additional  information  is  available  at  https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip.  Disclosure  of
Relationship CDC planners and content experts wish to disclose they have no financial
interests  or  other  relationships  with  the  manufacturers  of  commercial  products,
suppliers  of  commercial  services,  or  commercial  supporters.  This  report  includes
discussion of the unlabeled use of diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis
(DTaP)  vaccines  or  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular  pertussis
(Tdap) vaccine in the following situations: * A list of the members of the Work Group
appears
 on
 page
 43.
 †
 Information
 available
 at
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/yellowbook-home.  §  The  case  definition  was  a
confirmed case of pertussis with ≥21 days of paroxysmal cough illness with culture or
serologic  confirmation  of  infection  with  B.  pertussis.  ¶  Fully  vaccinated  is  defined  as
having received 5 valid doses of DTaP or 4 valid doses of DTaP if the fourth dose was
administered on or after the fourth birthday. Top Top Abbreviations: DTaP = diphtheria
and  tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccine;  Td  =  tetanus  and  diphtheria
toxoids  vaccine;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular
pertussis vaccine.*See Table 4 for vaccine type and ages for licensed use.† See Table 5
for vaccine type and ages for licensed use.§ Off-label use of Tdap in persons aged 7–9
years.¶ Off-label use of Tdap. Top Abbreviations: DT = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids
vaccine; DTaP = diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine; DTP =

diphtheria  toxoid,  tetanus  toxoid  and  whole-cell  pertussis  vaccine;  MenACWY  =
quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate,  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  Y  vaccine;  Td  =  tetanus
and diphtheria toxoids vaccine; Tdap = tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and
acellular  pertussis  vaccine.*  Events  or  conditions  listed  as  precautions  should  be
reviewed carefully. Benefits of and risks for administering a specific vaccine to a person
under  these  circumstances  should  be  considered.  If  the  risk  from  the  vaccine  is
believed to outweigh the benefit, the vaccine should not be administered. If the benefit
of  vaccination  is  believed  to  outweigh  the  risk,  the  vaccine  should  be  administered.
Whether and when to administer DTaP to children with proven or suspected underlying
neurologic  disorders  should  be  decided  on  a  case-by-case  basis.†  Further  vaccination
with any of the three components of DTaP should be deferred because of uncertainty as
to which component of the vaccine might be responsible.§ Because of the importance of
tetanus vaccination, persons who experience anaphylactic reactions should be referred
to an allergist to determine whether they have a specific allergy to tetanus toxoid and
can  be  desensitized  to  tetanus  toxoid.¶  In  such  cases,  DT  vaccine  should  be
administered for the remaining doses in the vaccination schedule to ensure protection
against diphtheria and tetanus.** This contraindication is for the pertussis component,
and  these  persons  should  receive  Td  instead  of  Tdap.  Top  Abbreviations:  DT  =
diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  vaccine;  DTaP  =  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and
acellular  pertussis  vaccine;  DTP  =  diphtheria  toxoid,  tetanus  toxoid  and  whole-cell
pertussis vaccine; Td = tetanus and diphtheria toxoids vaccine; Tdap = tetanus toxoid,
reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccine.Source: Adapted from CDC.
General  recommendations  on  immunization:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2011;60(No. RR-2).
Top  Abbreviations:  DTaP  =  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis
vaccine; DTP = diphtheria toxoid, tetanus toxoid and whole-cell pertussis vaccine; Tdap
=  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccine.  Sources:

National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System  and  Supplemental  Pertussis
Surveillance System and 1922–1949, passive reports to the U.S. Public Health Service. 
Top  Sources:  National  Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System  and  Supplemental
Pertussis  Surveillance  System.  *  Per  100,000  population.   Top  Sources:  National
Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System and passive reports to the U.S. Public Health
Service.  *  Per  100,000  population.   Top  Sources:  National  Notifiable  Diseases
Surveillance  System  and  passive  reports  to  the  U.S.  Public  Health  Service.   Top
Abbreviations:  DT=  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  vaccine;  DTaP  =  diphtheria  and
tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccine;  FDA=  U.S.  Food  and  Drug
Administration; FHA = filamentous hemagglutinin; FIM = fimbriae types 2 and 3; HepB
= hepatitis B; Hib = Haemophilus influenza type b; IPV = inactivated poliovirus; Lf =
limit  of  flocculation  unit;  PRN  =  pertactin;  PT  =  pertussis  toxin.*  Vaccine  dosage  and
administration:  0.5mL  intramuscular  injection.†  FDA-approved  for  use  in  infants  as
young as 6 weeks.§ FDA-approved for use through age 6 years (prior to 7th birthday).¶
FDA-approved for use through age 4 years (prior to 5th birthday). Top Abbreviations:
FHA  =  filamentous  hemagglutinin;  FIM  =  fimbriae  types  2  and  3;  Lf  =  limit  of
flocculation  unit;  PRN  =  pertactin;  PT  =  pertussis  toxin;Td  =  tetanus  and  diphtheria
toxoids  vaccine;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid  vaccine,  and
acellular  pertussis  vaccine.*  Vaccine  dosage  and  administration:  0.5mL  intramuscular
injection.  Top  Abbreviations:  DTaP  =  diphtheria  and  tetanus  toxoids  and  acellular
pertussis  vaccine;  Tdap  =  tetanus  toxoid,  reduced  diphtheria  toxoid,  and  acellular
pertussis; Td = tetanus and diphtheria toxoids; TIG = tetanus immune globulin.* Such
as, but not limited to, wounds contaminated with dirt, feces, soil, and saliva; puncture
wounds; avulsions; and wounds resulting from missiles, crushing, burns, and frostbite.†
DTaP is recommended for children aged <7 years. Tdap is preferred to Td for persons
aged ≥11 years who have not previously received Tdap. Persons aged ≥7 years who
are  not  fully  immunized  against  pertussis,  tetanus  or  diphtheria  should  receive  one

dose of Tdap for wound management and as part of the catch-up series.§ Persons with
HIV infection or severe immunodeficiency who have contaminated wounds should also
receive TIG, regardless of their history of tetanus immunization.¶Yes, if >10 years since
the  last  tetanus  toxoid–containing  vaccine  dose.**  Yes,  if  ≥5  years  since  the  last
tetanus toxoid–containing vaccine dose. Top Suggested citation for this article: Liang JL,
Tiwari T, Moro P, et al.  Prevention of Pertussis, Tetanus, and Diphtheria with Vaccines
in  the  United  States:  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization
Practices
 (ACIP).
 MMWR
 Recomm
 Rep
 2018;67(No.
 RR-2):1–44.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6702a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/rr/rr6702a1.htm
