  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by  Amanda C. Cohn,
MD1 Jessica R. MacNeil, MPH1 Thomas A. Clark, MD1 Ismael R. Ortega-Sanchez, PhD2
Elizabeth  Z.  Briere,  MD1  H.  Cody  Meissner,  MD3  Carol  J.  Baker,  MD4  Nancy  E.
Messonnier, MD1 1Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases, CDC 2Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization
and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC  3Tufts  University  School  of  Medicine,  Boston,
Massachusetts 4Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas The material in this report
originated  in  the  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  Anne
Schuchat,  MD,  Director,   and  the  Division  of  Bacterial  Diseases,  Rana  Hajjeh,  MD,
Director.   Corresponding  preparer:  Amanda  C.  Cohn,  MD,  National  Center  for
Immunizations  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  CDC.  Telephone:  404-639-6039;  E-mail:
acohn@cdc.gov. Meningococcal disease describes the spectrum of infections caused by
Neisseria meningiditis, including meningitdis, bacteremia, and bacteremic pneumonia.
Two  quadrivalent  meningococcal  polysaccharide-protein  conjugate  vaccines  that
provide  protection  against  meningococcal  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  (MenACWY-D
[Menactra,  manufactured  by  Sanofi  Pasteur,  Inc.,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania]  and
MenACWY-CRM
 [Menveo,
 manufactured
 by
 Novartis
 Vaccines,
 Cambridge,
Massachusetts])  are  licensed  in  the  United  States  for  use  among  persons  aged  2
through 55 years. MenACWY-D also is licensed for use among infants and toddlers aged
9  through  23  months.  Quadrivalent  meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  (MPSV4
[Menommune, manufactured by sanofi pasteur, Inc., Swiftwater, Pennsylvania]) is the
only vaccine licensed for use among persons aged ≥56 years. A bivalent meningococcal
polysaccharide
 protein
 conjugate
 vaccine
 that
 provides
 protection
 against
meningococcal  serogroups  C  and  Y  along  with  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  (Hib)
(Hib-MenCY-TT  [MenHibrix,  manufactured  by  GlaxoSmithKline  Biologicals,  Rixensart,

Belgium]) is licensed for use in children aged 6 weeks through 18 months. This report
compiles  and  summarizes  all  recommendations  from  CDC's  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  regarding  prevention  and  control  of  meningococcal
disease  in  the  United  States,  specifically  the  changes  in  the  recommendations
published  since  2005  (CDC.  Prevention  and  control  of  meningococcal  disease:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP]. MMWR
2005;54[No.
 RR-7]).
 As
 a
 comprehensive
 summary
 of
 previously
 published
recommendations,  this  report  does  not  contain  any  new  recommendations;  it  is
intended for use by clinicians as a resource. ACIP recommends routine vaccination with
a quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MenACWY) for adolescents aged 11
or  12  years,  with  a  booster  dose  at  age  16  years.  ACIP  also  recommends  routine
vaccination for persons at increased risk for meningococcal disease (i.e., persons who
have  persistent  complement  component  deficiencies,  persons  who  have  anatomic  or
functional  asplenia,  microbiologists  who  routinely  are  exposed  to  isolates  of  N.
meningitidis,  military  recruits,  and  persons  who  travel  to  or  reside  in  areas  in  which
meningococcal  disease  is  hyperendemic  or  epidemic).  Guidelines  for  antimicrobial
chemoprophylaxis  and  for  evaluation  and  management  of  suspected  outbreaks  of
meningococcal  disease  also  are  provided.  This  report  compiles  and  summarizes  all
recommendations  from  CDC's  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)
regarding  prevention  and  control  of  meningococcal  disease  in  the  United  States,
specifically  the  changes  in  the  recommendations  published  since  2005  (1),  and
describes  the  process  undertaken  and  the  rationale  used  in  support  of  these
recommendations.  This  report  is  a  comprehensive  summary  of  previously  published
recommendations  (Box  1)  and  does  not  contain  any  new  recommendations;  it  is
intended
 for
 use
 by
 clinicians
 as
 a
 resource.
 Guidelines
 for
 antimicrobial
chemoprophylaxis  (Appendix  A)  and  evaluation  and  management  of  suspected
outbreaks  of  meningococcal  disease  (Appendix  B)  also  are  provided.  Meningococcal

disease describes the spectrum of infections caused by Neisseria meningitidis, including
meningitis,  bacteremia,  and  bacteremic  pneumonia.  Meningococcal  disease  develops
rapidly,  typically  among  previously  healthy  children  and  adolescents,  and  results  in
high  morbidity  and  mortality.  For  unknown  reasons,  incidence  has  declined  since  the
peak  of  disease  in  the  late  1990s,  and  approximately  800–1,200  cases  are  reported
annually in the United States. This decline began before implementation of routine use
of  meningococcal  vaccines  in  adolescents  and  have  occurred  in  all  serogroups.  Four
vaccines are licensed in the United States and provide protection against four (A, C, W,
and Y) and two (C and Y)  serogroups (Table 1). Vaccines that protect against serogroup
B  meningococcal  disease  are  not  available  in  the  United  States.  Meningococcal
vaccination  is  recommended  for  groups  at  increased  risk  for  disease.  These  groups
include  adolescents,  persons  with  certain  medical  conditions,  and  persons  with
increased  risk  for  exposure.  Among  these  risk  groups,  the  number  of  vaccine  doses
(i.e., 2- or 4-dose primary series or a single dose with or without a booster dose) and
vaccine  product  are  determined  by  the  indication  for  vaccination  and  age.  In  certain
situations  such  as  special  dosing  regimens  (i.e.,  booster  dose[s]  or  serial  vaccination
and 2-dose primary series for persons aged ≥2 years), off-label use of meningococcal
vaccine has been recommended. Special dosing regimens have been recommended on
the  basis  of  data  from  studies  of  immunologic  response  to  vaccination,  postlicensure
observational data, and the need for long-term protection in certain risk groups (2–4).
ACIP recommendations for meningococcal vaccination have been summarized (Box 2).
Details regarding dosing (2- or 4-dose primary series or a single dose with or without a
booster  dose),  contraindications,  precautions,  and  special  circumstances  (e.g.,
adolescents infected with human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] and asplenic children)
are described elsewhere in this report (see Recommendations for Use of Meningococcal
Vaccines).  ACIP's Meningococcal Vaccines Work Group* (the Work Group) revised the
meningococcal  vaccine  recommendations  on  the  basis  of  the  most  current  data  on

safety,  efficacy,  and  immunogenicity  of  meningococcal  vaccines.  The  Work  Group
comprises a diverse group of health-care providers and public health officials, including
professionals  from  academic  medicine  (pediatrics,  family  practice,  internal  medicine,
and  infectious  disease  specialists),  federal  and  state  public  health  professionals,  and
representatives  of  provider  organizations.  Since  2006,  the  Work  Group  has  held
teleconference meetings monthly and has held in-person meetings once or twice a year
to discuss recently published studies, review current guidelines, and consider potential
revisions  to  the  recommendations.  During  these  meetings,  CDC  staff  members,
pharmaceutical  manufacturer  representatives,  and  other  academic  partners  delivered
presentations  on  meningococcal  disease  epidemiology,  immunogenicity  and  safety  of
meningococcal vaccines, cost effectiveness, programmatic considerations, and vaccine
effectiveness studies.  The Work Group considers published, peer-reviewed studies as
the primary source of data in making recommendations for the prevention and control
of  meningococcal  disease.  In  addition,  unpublished  data  (e.g.,  immunogenicity  and
safety  data  in  age  groups  outside  the  licensed  indication)  that  are  relevant  to  issues
under  discussion  also  were  considered.  Randomized,  controlled  clinical  trials  for
meningococcal  vaccines  are  unable  to  evaluate  clinical  efficacy  because  of  the  low
incidence  of  meningococcal  disease;  because  efficacy  cannot  be  measured,
immunogenicity  data  are  used  as  a  surrogate  for  efficacy  for  licensure.   In  addition,
because  rare  adverse  events  might  not  be  observed  in  prelicensure  clinical  trials
because  of  the  limited  number  of  subjects  enrolled,  postlicensure  observational  data
also  were  used  in  the  assessment  of  meningococcal  vaccines.  Observational  data
included reports of vaccine failures, a postlicensure case-control study, Vaccine Adverse
Events Reporting System (VAERS) data (12), and safety data collected from the Vaccine
Safety Datalink (VSD) (13). Data reviewed on the incidence and burden of disease came
from the Active Bacterial Core surveillance (ABCs) system and the National Notifiable
Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) (14). The evidence for the benefits and risks of

meningococcal vaccination in infants and toddlers was evaluated using the Grading of
Recommendations,  Assessment,  Development,  and  Evaluation  (GRADE)  framework
(GRADE evidence tables for toddler and infant meningococcal vaccine are available at
http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recs/GRADE/mening-vac-infants.html).  Summaries  of
the data reviewed and Work Group discussions were presented to ACIP before changes
were proposed to the recommendations. Proposed changes to meningococcal vaccine
recommendations  were  presented  at  nine  ACIP  meetings  from  October  2007  through
October 2012. During these nine meetings, recommendations were approved either as
submitted or as amended and approved by ACIP, and ACIP members approved a draft
of this report in April 2012. During the review process, CDC modified the statement to
update and clarify wording in the report. Meningococcal disease is a bacterial infection
caused by N. meningitidis. Meningococcal disease usually presents clinically as one of
three  syndromes:  meningitis  (50.2%),  bacteremia  (37.5%),  or  bacteremic  pneumonia
(9.2%)  (15).  N.  meningitidis  colonizes  mucosal  surfaces  of  the  nasopharynx  and  is
transmitted through direct contact with large-droplet respiratory tract secretions from
patients  or  asymptomatic  carriers.  Nasopharyngeal  carriage  rates  are  highest  in
adolescents  and  young  adults  (16,17),  who  serve  as  reservoirs  for  transmission  of  N.
meningitidis.  Invasive  disease  is  an  infrequent  consequence  of  nasopharyngeal
colonization.   During  2005–2011,  an  estimated  800–1,200  cases  of  meningococcal
disease occurred annually in the United States, representing an incidence of 0.3 cases
per 100,000 population (CDC, unpublished data, 2012). Incidence has declined annually
since  a  peak  of  disease  in  the  late  1990s  (Figure  1).  Even  before  routine  use  of  a
meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  in  adolescents  was  recommended  in  2005,  the
overall annual incidence of meningococcal disease had decreased 64%, from 1.1 cases
per  100,000  population  in  1996  to  0.4  cases  per  100,000  population  in  2005.  Since
2005,  declines  have  occurred  among  all  age  groups  and  in  all  vaccine-containing  
serogroups. In addition, incidence of disease attributable to serogroup B, a serogroup

not included in the vaccine, declined for reasons that are not known. Although disease
incidence  is  at  historic  lows,  the  overall  case-fatality  ratio  remains  at  10%–15%,  and
11%–19% of survivors have long-term sequelae (e.g., neurologic disability, limb or digit
loss,  and  hearing  loss)  (15,18,19).  Serogroups  B,  C,  and  Y  are  the  major  causes  of
meningococcal  disease  in  the  United  States,  each  accounting  for  approximately  one
third of cases. However, the proportion of cases caused by each serogroup varies by
age group. Approximately 60% of disease among children aged 0 through 59 months is
caused  by  serogroup  B  N.  meningitidis,  which  is  not  prevented  by  currently  licensed
vaccines (Table 1) (15). Serogroups C, Y, or W, which are included in vaccines available
in the United States, cause 73% of all cases of meningococcal disease among persons
aged  ≥11  years  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2012).  In  the  United  States,  approximately
98%  of  cases  of  meningococcal  disease  are  sporadic;  however,  outbreaks  of
meningococcal  disease  continue  to  occur  (20).  During  2010,  two  serogroup  C
meningococcal  outbreaks  were  reported  to  CDC  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2010);  in
these  two  instances,  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccination  was  recommended  for  a
target  age  group  in  the  community  by  local  and  state  health  officials  as  a  control
measure.
 These
 outbreaks
 ended
 shortly
 after
 vaccination
 campaigns
 were
implemented,  but  whether  vaccination  prevented  additional  cases  from  occurring  is
unknown (21). In 2010, two serogroup B outbreaks also were reported to CDC. Cases
associated  with  all  reported  outbreaks  accounted  for  108  (1.5%)  of  the  7,343  cases
reported  to  CDC  during  2005–2011  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2012).  Incidence  of
meningococcal disease peaks among persons in three age groups: infants and children
aged  <5  years,  adolescents  and  young  adults  aged  16  through  21  years,  and  adults
aged ≥65 years (CDC, unpublished data; Table 2; Figure 2). The highest incidence in
the  first  5  years  of  life  occurs  among  infants  aged  0  through  5  months;  47%  of
serogroup  C  and  Y  disease  among  children  aged  0  through  59  months  occurs  before
age  6  months.  Approximately  60%  of  disease  in  the  first  year  of  life  is  caused  by

serogroup  B.  Licensure  in  2005  of  the  first  MenACWY  vaccine  made  it  possible  to
address the second peak in disease incidence, which occurs in late adolescence. The
third  peak  in  incidence  occurs  among  adults  aged  ≥65  years;  approximately  60%  of
these  cases  are  caused  by  serogroup  Y,  and  43%  are  characterized  by  bacteremic
pneumonia. The highest case-fatality ratio (23.8%) is observed among adults aged ≥65
years  (15).   Since  2006,  the  National  Immunization  Survey–Teen  (22)  has  assessed
vaccination  coverage  annually  among  adolescents  aged  13  through  17  years.  Among
this age group, coverage with MenACWY has increased from 10.2% in 2006 to 70.5% in
2011 (22,23); coverage by state in 2011 ranged from 27.6% to 92.1% (23). One method
for  assessing  the  impact  of  MenACWY  is  to  monitor  changes  in  disease  incidence
caused  by  vaccine  serogroups.  During  2005–2009,  MenACWY-D  was  the  only
meningococcal
 conjugate
 vaccine
 licensed
 in
 the
 United
 States.
 Therefore,
postlicensure data  primarily  reflect  use of  MenACWY-D.  During  2009 and  2010,  when
routine  vaccine  use  was  recommended  and  supply  was  sufficient,  incidence  of
serogroup  C  and  Y  meningococcal  disease  declined  among  adolescents  aged  11
through 18 years. Incidence did not decline in other age groups, suggesting an impact
of  vaccination  on  adolescent  disease,  but  no  evidence  of  herd  protection  (Table  3).
During 2006–2010 (i.e., in the first 5 years after routine use of meningococcal vaccine
was recommended), CDC received reports of approximately 30 cases of serogroups C
and  Y  meningococcal  disease  among  persons  who  had  received  the  vaccine.  The
case-fatality ratio was similar among persons who had received vaccine compared with
those  who  were  unvaccinated  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2012).  To  assess  vaccine
effectiveness among adolescents, CDC carried out a simulation study of breakthrough
disease  (i.e.,  cases  that  occur  among  vaccine  recipients)  and  a  case-control  study
(24,25). The first estimate of vaccine effectiveness was based on a simulation approach
that  calculated  the  expected  number  of  cases  in  vaccinated  persons.  The  expected
number  of  breakthrough  cases  was  calculated  from  available  vaccine  coverage  and

disease incidence data, and estimates of expected vaccine effectiveness were based on
prelicensure  serologic  evidence  of  immune  response.  When  the  number  of  expected
cases  was  compared  with  the  observed  number  of  breakthrough  cases,  vaccine
effectiveness during 2005–2008 was estimated to be 80%–85%  (24). Of the 13 reports
of  breakthrough  disease  for  which  data  on  underlying  conditions  were  available,  four
persons  had  underlying  conditions  or  behaviors  associated  with  an  increased  risk  for
bacterial infections, including 1) Type 1 diabetes mellitus; 2) current smoking; 3) history
of  bacterial  meningitis  and  recurrent  infections;  and  4)  aplastic  anemia,  paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria, and receipt of eculizumab (which blocks complement protein
C5)  (24).  A  case-control  study  evaluating  the  vaccine  effectiveness  of  meningococcal
conjugate vaccine in adolescents began in January 2006 (25). Because MenACWY-D was
the  only  licensed  conjugate  vaccine  until  February  2010,  the  preliminary  results
provided in this report are estimates for MenACWY-D only. As of  August 29, 2012, a
total  of  157  case-patients  and  180  controls  were  enrolled  in  the  effectiveness  study.
The  overall  estimate  of  vaccine  effectiveness  in  adolescents  vaccinated  0  through  6
years earlier was 69% (95% confidence interval [CI] = 50%–81%). Vaccine effectiveness
was  82%  (CI  =  54%–93%)  for  adolescents  vaccinated  <1  year  earlier,  80%  (CI  =
52%–92%)  for  adolescents  vaccinated  1–<2  years  earlier,  71%  (CI  =  34%–87%)  for
adolescents  vaccinated  2–<3  years  earlier,  and  59%  (CI  =  5%–83%)  for  adolescents
vaccinated 3–<6 years earlier (25). Although CIs around the point estimates are wide,
these  results  suggest  that  vaccine  effectiveness  wanes  over  time.   Risk  factors  for
meningococcal disease can be grouped into organism, host, and environmental factors.
Noncapsular  strains  of  N.  meningitidis  are  less  virulent  than  capsular  strains.  More
virulent  strains  of  N.  meningitidis  can  circulate  in  a  population  and  cause  increased
incidence  of  disease  or  increased  mortality  (26).  Persons  who  have  persistent  (i.e.,
genetic) deficiencies in the common complement pathway (e.g., C3, properdin, Factor
D,  Factor  H,  or  C5–C9)  have  up  to  a  10,000-fold  increased  risk  for  meningococcal

disease and can experience recurrent disease (27,28). Although persons with anatomic
or  functional  asplenia  also  appear  to  be  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease,
the  data  are  less  compelling  than  data  that  demonstrate  the  increased  risk  for
pneumococcal  disease  in  patients  with  asplenia  (29).  Antecedent  viral  infection,
household  crowding,  chronic  underlying  illness,  and  both  active  and  passive  smoking
are associated with increased risk for meningococcal disease (30–36). Early U.S. studies
of risk factors for meningococcal disease demonstrated that blacks and persons of low
socioeconomic status were at higher risk for meningococcal disease than other persons
(37,38); however, race and low socioeconomic status also are considered markers for
other  risk  factors  (e.g.,  smoking  and  household  crowding)  (31).  As  disease  incidence
has decreased, differences by race also have decreased, and no difference in disease
incidence  exists  now  between  blacks  and  whites  (15).  One  study  of  meningococcal
disease among clinical microbiologists who work routinely with N. meningitidis isolates
demonstrated  an  attack  rate  of  13  cases  per  100,000  microbiologists  and  increased
case-fatality  ratios.  Of  the  16  cases  identified,  15  occurred  in  clinical  microbiologists
who were not using respiratory protection at the time of exposure (39,40). Health-care
personnel in general are not identified as a high-risk group unless a person is exposed
to  respiratory  secretions  of  someone  with  meningococcal  disease.  Because  the
incidence  of  both  meningococcal  disease  and   HIV  infection  are  low  in  the  United
States,  studies  have  not  established  HIV  as  an  independent  risk  factor  for
meningococcal  infection  (32,41).  A  recent  study  in  the  ABCs  sites  demonstrated  that
the  cumulative  average  incidence  of  meningococcal  disease  among  patients  aged  25
through  64  years  who  meet  CDC's  surveillance  case  definition  for  acquired  immune
deficiency  syndrome  (AIDS)  was  3.5  cases  per  100,000  person  years  (CI  =  2.0–5.6),
compared with an incidence of 0.3 cases per 100,000 person years (CI = 0.2–0.3) for
persons  of  the  same  age  group  in  the  general  population  (rate  ratio:  12.6;  CI  =
7.9–20.2) (42). These incidence rates were not adjusted for potential confounding risk

factors such as smoking; however, the incidence of meningococcal disease is higher in
persons  with  AIDS  compared  with  the  general  adult  population.  Studies  conducted  in
the  1990s  that  focused  on  quantifying  the  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  among
college students demonstrated that the overall incidence among college students was
similar to or somewhat lower than that observed among persons of approximately the
same age in the general population (43). However, in a case-control study involving 50
cases  among  college  students  (44),  multivariate  analysis  indicated  that  first-year
college students living in residence halls were at higher risk for meningococcal disease
than other students (matched odds ratio [OR]: 3.6; CI = 1.6–8.5). Other studies in the
1990s  yielded  similar  results  (45,46).  In  2000,  before  licensure  of  meningococcal
conjugate  vaccines,  ACIP  recommended  that  first-year  college  students  living  in
residence
 halls
 consider
 vaccination
 with
 the
 quadrivalent
 meningococcal
polysaccharide vaccine (MPSV4), which was licensed in 1981 (47). Since the 2000 ACIP
recommendation,  many  colleges  have  required  all  matriculating  students  to  be
vaccinated.  Thirty-six  states  and  the  District  of  Columbia  have  mandates  requiring
education of college students about meningococcal vaccines or proof of meningococcal
vaccination
 for
 attendance
 (a
 list
 of
 these
 states
 is
 available
 at
http://www.immunize.org/laws/menin.asp).  When  the  first  meningococcal  conjugate
vaccine  was  licensed  in  2005,  ACIP  recommended  that  all  first-year  college  students
living  in  residence  halls  be  vaccinated  with  MenACWY-D  (1).   Four  meningococcal
vaccines that contain purified capsular polysaccharide(s) alone or that are conjugated
to a carrier protein are licensed and available in the United States for the prevention of
invasive  disease  caused  by  N.  meningitidis  serogroups  A,  C,  W  and  Y  (Table  1).  As
stated  in  the  package  inserts  (Table  1),  for  the  quadrivalent  meningococcal
polysaccharide  vaccine  (MPSV4),  effectiveness  of  the  vaccine  (A  and  C  components)
was supported by clinical efficacy data from studies with meningococcal monovalent A
and  C  and  bivalent  A/C  polysaccharide  vaccines,  and  inferred  by  use  of  serum

bactericidal antibody assay (SBA) (Y and W components) as an indicator of protection
against
 serogroup-specific
 meningococcal
 disease.
 Effectiveness
 of
 the
 three
meningococcal conjugate vaccines, which were licensed after MPSV4, was inferred by
comparing  SBA  measurements  of  the  new  vaccine  with  corresponding  antibody
responses of the U.S.-licensed meningococcal vaccine representing the standard of care
at the time (among persons aged 2 through 55 years) or by achieving a seroresponse at
or  above  a  predefined  bactericidal  antibody  titer  (among  children  aged  2  through  23
months).  Protection  against  invasive  meningococcal  disease  is  mediated  by  serum
bactericidal  antibodies  to  meningococcal  capsular  polysaccharides  or  to  protein
antigens. Studies have demonstrated that almost all persons who developed invasive
serogroup  C  meningococcal  disease  had  sera  that  lacked  bactericidal  activity  to  the
pathogenic  meningococcal  strain  (48,49).  In  contrast,  persons  with  detectable  SBA
against a specific strain rarely developed disease. Complement-dependent bactericidal
activity can be measured reliably by use of a serum bactericidal antibody assay with a
human  (hSBA)  or  baby  rabbit  (rSBA)  complement  source.  A  defined  bactericidal
antibody titer that is indicative of protection against invasive meningococcal disease is
assay-dependent. When sera are tested using a human complement source, SBA titers
≥1:4  are  considered  protective.  Because  of  greater  susceptibility  of  meningococci  to
lysis  by  rabbit  complement,  antibody  titers  measured  by  an  rSBA  assay  are  elevated
compared  with  titers  generated  by  an  hSBA  assay  (50–52).  Population-based
surveillance  data  from  the  United  Kingdom  indicate  that  following  mass  vaccination
with meningococcal serogroup C conjugate vaccine, bactericidal titers between 1:8 and
1:64, measured by rSBA, can be protective (53). Antibody titers measured by rSBA and
hSBA assays are not directly comparable. MPSV4, a quadrivalent (serogroups A, C, Y,
and  W)  meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine  (Menomune,  manufactured  by  Sanofi
Pasteur,  Inc.,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania),  was  licensed  in  1981.  MPSV4  is  approved  by
FDA for use as a single dose in persons aged ≥2 years. Each dose consists of 50 µg of

each  of  the  four  purified  capsular  polysaccharides  from  serogroups  A,  C,  W,  and  Y.
MPSV4 is available in single-dose (0.5-mL) and 10-dose (5-mL) vials and is administered
as  a  subcutaneous  injection.  Further  information  is  provided  in  the  package  insert
(available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
131653.pdf).  Conjugation  (i.e.,  covalent  coupling)  of  a  meningococcal  capsular
polysaccharide  to  a  protein  carrier  that  contains  T-lymphocyte  epitopes  changes  the
nature
 of
 the
 human
 immune
 response
 to
 the
 polysaccharide
 from
T-lymphocyte–independent  to  T-lymphocyte–dependent.  Conjugation  results  in  an
improved primary response to the polysaccharide antigen, especially in infants, and a
stronger anamnestic response (i.e., immunologic memory) at reexposure (54). As of July
2012, two quadrivalent (serogroups A, C, Y, and W) and one bivalent (serogroups C and
Y)  meningococcal  polysaccharide-protein  conjugate  vaccines  have  been  licensed  by
FDA:  MenACWY-D  (Menactra,  manufactured  by  sanofi  pasteur,  Inc.,  Swiftwater,
Pennsylvania),
 MenACWY-CRM
 (Menveo,
 manufactured
 by
 Novartis
 Vaccines,
Cambridge,
 Massachusetts),
 and
 Hib-MenCY-TT
 (MenHibrix,
 manufactured
 by
GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium).  MenACWY-D was licensed by FDA in
January  2005.  MenACWY-D  is  approved  by  FDA  as  a  single  dose  for  persons  aged  2
through 55 years and as a 2-dose series in children aged 9 through 23 months. A single
0.5-mL  dose  of  MenACWY-D  contains  4  µg  each  of  capsular  polysaccharide  from
serogroups  A,  C,  Y,  and  W  conjugated  to  approximately  48  µg  of  diphtheria  toxoid.
MenACWY-D  is  available  in  single-dose  vials  and  is  administered  as  an  intramuscular
injection.  More  information  is  provided  in  the  package  insert  (available  at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
131170.pdf). MenACWY-D often will be administered concomitantly with other vaccines
(e.g.,  with  typhoid  vaccines  in  international  travelers  or  with  other  routinely
recommended  vaccinations  in  adolescents  and  young  children).  As  stated  in  the

package  insert  (Table  1),  concomitant  administration  of  MenACWY-D  and  typhoid
vaccines  (Typhoid  Vi  Polysaccharide  Vaccine,  manufactured  by  Sanofi  Pasteur,  Inc.,
Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania)  was  evaluated  in  persons  aged  18  through  55  years,  and
concomitant  administration  of  MenACWY-D  and  Td  (Tetanus  and  Diphtheria  Toxoids
Adsorbed,  For  Adult  Use;  manufactured  by  Sanofi  Pasteur,  Inc.,  Swiftwater,
Pennsylvania)  vaccine  was  evaluated  in  persons  aged  11  through  17  years.
Concomitant  administration  of  typhoid  vaccine  and  MenACWY-D  did  not  affect  the
immunogenicity  of  either  vaccine.  The  proportion  of  participants  with  a  fourfold  or
greater  increase  in  rSBA  titer  to  meningococcal  serogroups  C,  Y,  and  W  was  higher
when  MenACWY-D  was  administered  with  Td  (86%–96%)  than  when  MenACWY-D  was
administered  1  month  following  administration  of  Td  (65%–91%).  Antitetanus  and
antidiphtheria  antibody  responses  were  similar  in  both  study  groups.   Affect  on
immunogenicity
 varied
 by
 vaccine
 administerd
 concomitantly.
 Concomitant
administration of MMRV (measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella combination vaccine)
and the fourth dose of PCV7 (7-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine) and a second
MenACWY-D dose was evaluated in children aged 12 months who had received the first
MenACWY-D  dose  at  age  9  months.  Lower  geometric  mean  concentrations  (GMCs)  of
IgG  antibodies  to  some  pneumococcal  serotypes  were  observed  compared  with
corresponding IgG GMCs when PCV7 was administered alone. The noninferiority criteria
(twofold differences in IgG GMC) for the prespecified pneumococcal endpoints were not
met for PCV7 serotypes 4, 6B, and 18C (10). However, the IgG antibody responses and
opsonophagocytic  responses  to  the  seven  pneumococcal  vaccine  serotypes  were  still
robust.  No  interference  with  immune  responses  to  antigens  contained  in  MMRV  was
observed.  Details  about  these  studies  are  provided  in  the  package  insert.
MenACWY-CRM was licensed by FDA in February 2010. MenACWY-CRM is approved by
FDA  as  a  single  dose  for  persons  aged  2  through  55  years.  A  single  0.5-mL  dose  of
vaccine  contains  10  µg  of  capsular  polysaccharide  from  serogroup  A  and  5  µg  of

capsular  polysaccharide  from  serogroups  C,  Y,  and  W  conjugated  to  approximately
33–64  µg  of  CRM197,  a  naturally  occurring,  nontoxic  form  of  diphtheria  toxin  from
Corynebacterium  diphtheriae.  MenACWY-CRM  must  be  prepared  by  reconstituting  the
lyophilized  serogroup  A  conjugate  with  the  liquid  serogroups  C,  W,  and  Y  conjugate
components.  More  information  is  provided  in  the  package  insert  (available  at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
201349.pdf).  MenACWY-CRM  is  likely  to  be  administered  concomitantly  with  tetanus
and  diphtheria  toxoids  and  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  absorbed  (Tdap)  because  both
vaccines
 are
 routinely
 recommended
 for
 adolescents.
 Concomitant
 use
 of
MenACWY-CRM and Tdap was evaluated in an open-label, randomized, controlled study
conducted  among  adolescents  aged  11  through  18  years.  Antibody  responses  to
pertussis  antigens  were  lower  when  MenACWY-CRM  and  Tdap  were  administered
concomitantly  than  when  MenACWY-CRM  was  administered  1  month  following  Tdap:
antipertussis  toxin  GMCs  were  51  versus  63  EIA  Units  (EU)/mL,  antifilamentous
hemagglutinin  GMCs  were  342  versus  511  EU/mL,  and  antipertactin  GMCs  were  819
versus  1,197  EU/mL,  respectively.  Because  no  serologic  correlates  of  protection  for
pertussis have been established, the clinical implications of the lower pertussis antigen
responses  are  unknown.  Immune  responses  to  MenACWY-CRM  and  to  diphtheria  and
tetanus toxoid antigens in Tdap were similar. Details about this study are provided in
the
 package
 insert
 (available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
201349.pdf).   Hib-MenCY-TT  was  licensed  by  FDA  in  June  2012.  Hib-MenCY-TT  is
approved  by  FDA  as  a  4-dose  series  for  children  aged  6  weeks  through  18  months.
Hib-MenCY-TT  is  supplied  as  a  sterile,  lyophilized  powder  that  is  reconstituted  at  the
time of use with the accompanying saline diluent for intramuscular injection. A single
0.5mL  dose  of  vaccine  contains  5  µg  of  capsular  polysaccharide  from  serogroups  C
conjugated  to  approximately  5  µg  of  tetanus  toxoid,  5  µg  of  capsular  polysaccharide

from serogroup Y conjugated to approximately 6.5 µg of tetanus toxoid, and 2.5 µg of
Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  capsular  polysaccharide  conjugated  to  approximately
6.25 µg of tetanus toxoid. More information is provided in the package insert (available
at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
308577.pdf).  Concomitant  administration  with  routinely  recommended  vaccines  is
anticipated.  Hib-MenCY-TT  was  co-administered  with  DTaP-HepB-IPV  and  7-valent
pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (PCV7)  at  ages  2,  4,  and  6  months,  and  with
measles-mumps-rubella, varicella, and PCV7 vaccines at age 12–15 months. In clinical
trials, no decreased immunogenicity of coadministered vaccines was observed (55,56).
A randomized, controlled, multicenter study evaluated the percentage of subjects with
hSBA titers ≥1:8 at 2 months after the second dose was administered at age 4 months.
In the group vaccinated with Hib-MenCY-TT, 94% and 83% of subjects achieved hSBA
antibody titers ≥1:8 for meningococcal serogroups C and Y, respectively, after dose 2
(57).  Rates  of  local  and  systemic  adverse  events  observed  after  administration  of
Hib-MenCY-TT were comparable to rates observed after administration of Hib-TT. Thus,
Hib-MenCY-TT was found to be safe and immunogenic for both Hib and meningococcal
serogroups  C  and  Y.  The  immunogenicity  and  clinical  efficacy  of  serogroups  A  and  C
meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccines  are  well-  established.  The  serogroup  A
polysaccharide induces antibody response among children as young as age 3 months,
although a response comparable with that occurring in adults is not achieved until age
4 to 5 years; the serogroup C component is poorly immunogenic among recipients aged
<24 months (58–60). The serogroups A and C vaccines have demonstrated estimated
clinical  efficacies  of  ≥85%  among  school-aged  children  and  adults  during  outbreaks
(61–64). Although clinical protection has not been documented, vaccination with Y and
W polysaccharides induces production of bactericidal antibodies (65–67). The antibody
responses  to  each  of  the  four  polysaccharides  in  the  quadrivalent  vaccine  are

serogroup specific and independent (i.e., there is no cross-protection). Reduced clinical
efficacy has not been demonstrated among persons who have received multiple doses
of  polysaccharide  vaccine.  However,  serologic  studies  have  indicated  that  multiple
doses  of  serogroup  A  and  C  polysaccharide  vaccine  can  cause  immunologic
hyporesponsiveness (i.e., a reduced antibody response after subsequent doses with the
same  polysaccharide  antigen)  to  group  A  (68,69)  and  C  polysaccharide  (70,71).
Hyporesponsiveness to serogroups C and A polysaccharides can be overcome partially
by vaccination with serogroup C or A conjugate vaccine (72).  An advantage of vaccines
in  which  proteins  are  conjugated  to  polysaccharide  antigens  is  their  ability  to  elicit
immunologic  memory.  Meningococcal  conjugate  vaccines  prime  the  immune  system,
and  immunologic  memory  persists  even  in  the  absence  of  detectable  bactericidal
antibodies. However, while vaccine-induced immunologic memory might be protective
against  infection  with  other  disease-causing  encapsulated  bacteria,  the  presence  of
detectable  circulating  antibody  appears  to  be  important  for  protection  against  N.
meningitidis. In most cases, meningococcal infection progresses rapidly, with fulminant
disease occurring within 1–4 days after invasion of normally sterile body sites.  Studies
of  antibody  response  kinetics  following  boosting  with  serogroup  C  meningococcal
vaccines  in  the  United  Kingdom  have  demonstrated  that  up  to  10  days  might  be
required to achieve protective rSBA titers ≥1:8 in healthy young adults (73). If antibody
is not present in sufficient quantity before colonization, this delay in antibody synthesis
might not be rapid enough to protect against infection with N. meningitidis. Analyses of
breakthrough  disease  among  previously  vaccinated  persons  in  the  United  Kingdom
identified evidence of immunologic priming but low SBA activity at the time of disease
onset. Although infected persons demonstrated a boost response to N. meningitidis and
bactericidal antibody levels increased, the response was not rapid enough to prevent
disease  (74).  Therefore,  circulating  bactericidal  antibody  at  the  time  of  exposure
appears  to  be  critical  for  protection  against  meningococcal  disease.  Meningococcal

vaccination  coverage  has  increased  in  the  United  States,  but  no  evidence  of  herd
protection  has  been  demonstrated  (75).  However,  herd  protection  has  been  an
important  component  associated  with  long-term  protection  with  use  of  serogroup  C
meningococcal  vaccine  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  other  countries.  Evidence  of  herd
protection after the MenC vaccine program was implemented in the United Kingdom,
where catch-up campaigns led rapidly to high coverage in all persons aged 2 months
through  22  years,  included  reduction  in  nasopharyngeal  carriage  of  serogroup  C  N.
meningitidis and reduction of serogroup C disease in unvaccinated age groups (infants
too  young  to  be  vaccinated  and  adults  aged  ≥25  years)  (76,77).  One  year  after
introduction of MenC vaccine in the United Kingdom, serogroup C carriage was reduced
66% among students aged 15 through 17 years (78). Attack rates among unvaccinated
children aged <1 year in the United Kingdom also declined 67% in the 4 years following
vaccine introduction.  During 1998–2009, the incidence of serogroup C disease in the
United Kingdom in persons aged >25 years decreased from 0.55 per 100,000 persons
to 0.02 per 100,000 persons, and the total number of cases in infants aged <3 months
decreased from 13 in 1998 to one in 2009 (79). The vaccination program in the United
Kingdom effectively eliminated a single highly virulent clone that had high expression
of  the  polysaccharide  capsule  (80).  Variability  of  strains,  different  vaccines,  and
different  target  populations  likely  account  for  the  differences  in  vaccine  impact
observed to date in the United States compared with the United Kingdom. Longitudinal
vaccine  effectiveness  studies  as  well  as  evaluation  of  persistence  of  antibody  after
vaccination  with  MenACWY  vaccines  are  critical  to  monitoring  duration  of  protection.
Persistence  of  detectable  bactericidal  antibodies  3  years  after  a  single  vaccination
(administered  at  age  11  through  18  years)  and  antibody  responses  consistent  with
immunologic boosting have been observed in adolescent MenACWY-D recipients. Lower
bactericidal antibody titers to each of the four serogroups were observed 3 to 5 years
postvaccination  relative  to  bactericidal  antibody  responses  observed  1  month  after  a

single MenACWY dose (81,82). For serogroup C, geometric mean antibody titers (GMTs)
declined by as much as 90% over 3 years. The proportion of adolescents vaccinated at
age 11 years with MenACWY-D determined to have protective antibodies 3 years later
was 71%–95% (81). Antibody persistence following MenACWY-CRM vaccination also has
been described. Among persons vaccinated with a single dose of MenACWY-CRM at age
11 through 18 years, approximately 65% maintained hSBA ≥1:8 for serogroups C and Y
at 21 months and 36 months postvaccination (83,84). These serologic data have been
summarized  (Table  4);  the  data  are  consistent  with  results  of  studies  discussed
previously  in  this  report  that  suggest  waning  vaccine  effectiveness.   Other  serologic
studies conducted among infants and young children demonstrate a similar decline in
hSBA  titers.  The  proportion  of  children  aged  2  years  with  hSBA  titers  ≥1:4  6  months
following a single vaccination with MenACWY-D was approximately 50% for serogroups
C, Y, and W-135 (85,86). In another study, approximately 60 infants were vaccinated at
age  9  months  and  at  age  12  or  15  months,  and  hSBA  titers  were  measured
approximately 3 years after the second dose. Fewer than half of the study subjects had
maintained  an  hSBA  titer  ≥1:8  for  any  of  the  meningococcal  serogroups  (ACIP,
unpublished data, 2011). Among infants who received a 4-dose series of Hib-MenCY-TT,
83% and 70% of subjects had persistence of bactericidal antibody for serogroups C and
Y,  respectively,  5  years  after  the  fourth  dose  (87).  In  three  separate  studies,
bactericidal antibody responses after a booster dose of MenACWY-D were evaluated in
adolescents 3 years after receiving a MenACWY-D primary dose (administered at age
11 through 18 years), in children 5 years after receiving a MenACWY-D primary dose
(administered at age 2 through 10 years) and after a booster dose of MenACWY-CRM in
adolescents  3  years  after  a  MenACWY-CRM  primary  dose  (administered  at  age  11
through 18 years) (ACIP, unpublished data, 2009), At both 3 and 5 years after the first
MenACWY  conjugate  vaccine  dose,  revaccination  with  the  same  MenACWY  conjugate
vaccine  elicited  substantially  higher  GMTs  compared  with  the  titers  elicited  after  a

single  primary  dose.  In  the  MenACWY-D  booster  studies,  when  rSBA  was  used  as  a
measure  of  immune  response,  a  dose  administered  5  years  after  the  first  dose
(administered  at  age  2  through  10  years)  elicited  a  GMT  for  serogroup  C  of  23,613
compared with 9,045 among meningococcal vaccine-naïve subjects aged 7 through 15
years who had received a single primary dose (ACIP, unpublished data, 2010).  In all of
the studies, local and systemic reactions following a booster dose of either MenACWY
conjugate vaccine were comparable with reactions in persons receiving a primary dose
of  the  same  vaccine.  The  duration  of  protection  after  a  booster  dose  in  adolescents,
when administered at ages 16 through 18 years, is not known, but expert members of
the Work Group expect protection to last through at least age 21 years. A booster dose
of  MenACWY-D  in  children  initially  vaccinated  with  MenACWY-D  at  age  9  months  and
then  at  age  12  or  15  months  was  evaluated  3  years  after  the  second  administered
dose. Following booster immunization, at least 98% of children achieved an hSBA titer
≥1:8  to  each  of  the  serogroups.  ACIP  evaluated  the  data  available  and  decided  to
recommend a booster dose of MenACWY for persons who remained at increased risk for
meningococcal disease and for adolescents at age 16 years.  Limited data suggest that
different  conjugate  vaccine  products  can  be  used  interchangeably.  The  safety  and
immunogenicity  of  MenACWY-CRM  vaccination  have  been  evaluated  in  adolescents  3
years after they received a single dose of MenACWY-CRM or MenACWY-D administered
at age 11 through 18 years (88). Following revaccination with MenACWY-CRM, ≥99% of
persons  previously  immunized  with  MenACWY-CRM  or  MenACWY-D  had  hSBA  titers
≥1:8.  The  solicited  adverse  event  rates  (including  injection-site  reactions)  reported
after revaccination were similar to the rates reported after primary immunization (88).
No  data  exist  on  the  use  of  MenACWY-D  following  primary  vaccination  with
MenACWY-CRM.  Asplenic persons are at increased risk for invasive infection caused by
many encapsulated bacteria, including N. meningitidis. Moreover, the mortality rate is
40%–70%  among  these  persons  when  they  become  infected  with  N.  meningitidis.

Asplenic persons achieve significantly lower geometric mean rSBA titers than healthy
persons  after  vaccination  with  a  meningococcal  C  conjugate  vaccine,  with  20%  not
achieving rSBA titers ≥1:8. This proportion was reduced to 7% when a second dose of
vaccine  was  administered  to  nonresponders  2  months  later  (2),  suggesting  that  a
2-dose primary series might be effective in achieving higher circulating antibody levels
and  persistence  of  bactericidal  antibodies.  The  complement  pathway  is  important  in
prevention  of  meningococcal  disease,  and  N.  meningitidis  is  the  primary  bacterial
pathogen  affecting  persons  with  inherited  late  component  complement  or  properidin
deficiency.  Although  persons  with  late-component  complement  deficiency  are  able  to
mount  an  overall  antibody  response  equal  to  or  greater  than  complement-sufficient
persons  after  vaccination  with  MPSV4,  antibody  titers  wane  more  rapidly  in  persons
with  complement  component  deficiency,  and  higher  antibody  levels  are  needed  for
other  clearance  mechanisms,  such  as  opsonization  to  function  (27,28).  Although
persons  with  HIV  infection  are  not  at  as  high  a  risk  for  meningococcal  disease  as
persons  with  persistent  complement  component  deficiency  or  asplenia,  reduced
antibody responses following meningococcal vaccination have been reported in persons
with  HIV  infection  (3,4).  Two  studies  have  investigated  the  response  rates  to
MenACWY-D  among  HIV-infected  adolescents  and  children  (3,4).  Among  HIV-infected
adolescents  and  young  adults  vaccinated  with  a  single  dose  at  age  11  through  24
years, response rates to vaccination measured by rSBA titers ≥1:128 were 86%, 55%,
73%,  and  72%  for  serogroups  A,  C,  Y,  and  W,  respectively.  Response  rates  were
significantly lower among patients with a CD4+ T-lymphocyte percentage of <15% (p =
0.003)  or  viral  loads  >10,000  copies/mL  (p  =  0.005)  (4).   Surveillance  for  adverse
events  following  receipt  of  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccines  has  been  performed
primarily  by  two  systems  in  the  United  States,  VAERS  and  VSD.  VAERS  is  a  national
passive surveillance system operated jointly by CDC and FDA that receives reports of
adverse  events  following  vaccination  from  health-care  personnel,  manufacturers,

vaccine  recipients,  and  others.  The  VAERS  reporting  form  collects  information  about
vaccine recipient demographics, vaccines administered, recipient medical history, and
signs  and  symptoms  of  adverse  events.  VAERS  can  generate,  but  not  test,  vaccine
safety hypotheses and is subject to several limitations, including reporting biases and
inconsistent  data  quality  (12.)  Passive  surveillance  data  from  VAERS  should  be
interpreted with caution. The VSD project is a collaborative effort between CDC and 10
managed  care  organizations.  The  VSD  project  allows  for  planned  vaccination  safety
studies  as  wells  as  timely  investigations  of  hypotheses  that  arise  from  review  of
medical  literature,  reports  to  VAERS,  changes  in  immunization  schedules,  or
introduction of new vaccines (13). From licensure of MenACWY-D in January 14, 2005,
through  September  30,  2011,  VAERS  received  8,592  reports  involving  receipt  of
MenACWY-D in the United States; 89.0% reports involved persons aged 11 through 19
years. MenACWY-D was administered alone in 22.5% of case reports. The median time
from vaccination to onset of an adverse event was 1 day. Males accounted for 40.6% of
the reported events. The most frequently reported adverse events were fever 16.8%,
headache  16.0%,  injection  site  erythema  14.6%,  and  dizziness  13.4%.  Syncope
previously  has  been  identified  as  an  adverse  event  following  any  vaccination,  with  a
higher proportion of syncope events reported to VAERS having occurred in adolescents
compared  with  other  age  groups  (89).  Syncope  was  reported  in  10.0%  of  reports
involving  MenACWY-D.  Among  all  MenACWY-D  reports,  563  (6.6%)  were  coded  as
serious  (i.e.,  resulted  in  death,  life-threatening  illness,  hospitalization,  prolongation  of
hospitalization,  or  permanent  disability).   Among  those  reports  coded  as  serious,  the
most  frequent  adverse  events  reported  included  headache  (37.5%),  fever  (32.5%),
vomiting  (23.6%),  and  nausea  (22.2%).  Cases  of  Guillain-Barré  Syndrome  (GBS)  were
recorded in 86 (15.3%) reports coded as serious, although the diagnosis has not been
validated by medical records for all reports. A total of 24 (0.3%) deaths were reported,
each  of  which  was  documented  by  autopsy  report  or  other  medical  records  and

occurred  in  persons  aged  10  through  23  years.   Among  the  24  reports  of  death,  11
(45.8%)  indicated  that  the  cause  of  death  was  meningococcal  infection  (nine  with  a
serogroup included in the vaccine and two with a nonvaccine serogroup). Among the
other 13 (54.2%) reports of death, which occurred from the day of vaccination to 127
days following vaccination, stated causes of death were cardiac (five), neurologic (two),
infectious (two), behavioral (i.e., suicide) (two), rheumatologic (one), and unexplained
(one). There was no pattern among these reports. Except for the finding of GBS, which
was further evaluated and is discussed below, no signals were identified in VAERS after
MenACWY-D  vaccination.  During  February  19,  2010–September  30,  2011,  VAERS
received  284  reports  of  adverse  events  following  receipt  of  MenACWY-CRM  in  the
United States. Approximately three fourths (78.9%) of the reported events concerned
persons aged 11 through 19 years. Males were the subject of 44.0% of reports; 45.4%
of reports involved other vaccines administered at the same time, and 4.2% of reports
were  coded  as  serious.  One  death  was  reported,  with  the  cause  of  death  stated  as
unexplained. The median time from vaccination to adverse event onset was 0 days (the
day  of  vaccination).  The  most  common  adverse  event  reported  was  injection-site
erythema (19.7%) followed by injection-site swelling (13.7%). Syncope was reported in
8.8%  of  reports.  No  cases  of  GBS  were  reported.  Administration  errors  (e.g.,  wrong
diluent  used  or   subcutaneous  injection)  without  adverse  events  were  described  in
15.5%  of  reports  involving  MenACWY-CRM.  In  2005,  shortly  after  licensure  of
MenACWY-D, several cases of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) were reported to VAERS
(90,91).  Symptom  onset  clustered  approximately  14  days  after  vaccination  with
MenACWY-D.  No  deaths  were  reported,  and  most  persons  recovered  fully.  ACIP
reviewed the data at the time and determined that the potential small increased risk for
GBS post-MenACWY-D vaccination was outweighed by the protection that the vaccine
offers against meningococcal disease (92). However, because the risk for recurrence of
GBS after meningococcal vaccination was unknown, FDA considered previous history of

GBS a contraindication for use of this vaccine (93). A large retrospective cohort study of
adolescents aged 11 through 21 years that was conducted during 2005–2008 included
approximately 1.4 million persons vaccinated with MenACWY-D (94). In an analysis that
took into account the missing data, estimates of the attributable risk for GBS ranged
from zero to 1.5 additional cases of GBS per 1 million vaccines within the 6-week period
following
 vaccination
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UC
M131170.pdf). VSD conducts near-real time surveillance for adverse events and tests
vaccine  safety  hypotheses  (13).  The  system  collects  medical  care  and  vaccination
information  on  approximately  9  million  members.  VSD  uses  Rapid  Cycle  Analysis  to
monitor  vaccine  safety  in  near  real-time.  Each  week,  the  number  of  outcomes  in
vaccinated  persons  is  compared  with  the  expected  number  of  outcomes  in  the
comparison group using maximized sequential probability ratio testing (95). No cases of
GBS were identified within 1–42 days following 889,684 vaccine doses of MenACWY-D
administered during January 2005–March 2010 (ACIP, unpublished data, 2010). In June
2010, after reviewing the two safety studies, ACIP voted to remove the precaution for
persons  with  a  history  of  GBS  because  the  benefits  of  meningococcal  vaccination
outweigh the risk for recurrent GBS in these persons. A history of GBS continues to be
listed  as  a  precaution  in  the  package  inserts  for  MenACWY-D  (available  at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
131170.pdf)
 and
 MenACWY-CRM
 (available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
201349.pdf). Since the June 2010 ACIP meeting, no specific concerns have been raised
about the risk for GBS in persons who both have a history of this condition and have
been  vaccinated  with  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (96).   During  January  1,
2005–June 30, 2010, a total of 80 reports were submitted to VAERS regarding pregnant
women  or  infants  born  to  women  who  received  MenACWY-D  during  pregnancy.  The

majority (57.5%) of women were vaccinated in the first trimester (0 through 13 weeks
of gestation). Thirty-three (41.3%) reports indicated no adverse events, and the reason
for submitting the report to VAERS was vaccine exposure during pregnancy (pregnancy
category C)†. No maternal deaths were reported. The most common pregnancy-specific
adverse  event  was  spontaneous  abortion  (12  cases;  15%)  and  the  most  common
nonpregnancy specific adverse event was nausea, with or without vomiting (four cases;
5%).  One  case  of  a  congenital  anomaly  (aqueductal  stenosis  with  severe
ventriculomegaly  in  a  newborn)  was  reported.  However,  no  concerning  patterns  of
adverse  events  after  MenACWY-D  in  pregnancy  were  identified.  Two  postlicensure
studies have evaluated use of Tdap when administered simultaneously or sequentially
with MenACWY (97,98). In a clinical trial to evaluate administration of one Tdap product
(Boostrix, GSK) and MenACWY-D, immune responses to the meningococcal serogroups
and  to  pertussis,  diphtheria,  and  tetanus  were  similar  regardless  of  whether  the  two
vaccines  were  administered  simultaneously  or  separated  by  30  days.  There  were  no
differences  in  the  safety  evaluation  in  either  of  the  groups.  In  a  postlicensure
surveillance study using VSD data, the risk for medically attended adverse events was
low (0–2.6 per 10,000 vaccinations) and similar regardless of whether persons received
Tdap and MenACWY simultaneously or sequentially (98).  As part of the evaluation of
the  adolescent  vaccination  program,  a  cost-effectiveness  analysis  was  performed  to
compare the cost-effectiveness of the following three vaccination strategies: 1) a single
dose at age 11 years, 2) a single dose at age 15 years, and 3) a dose at age 11 years
with  a  booster  dose  at  age  16  years  (ACIP,  unpublished  data,  2010).  The  economic
costs and benefits of these meningococcal vaccination strategies in adolescents were
assessed from a societal perspective (99,100). A multivariable analysis was performed
with a Monte Carlo simulation in which multiple parameters were varied simultaneously
over  specified  probability  distributions.  These  parameters  included  disease  incidence
(46%–120%  of  the  10-year  average),  case-fatality  ratio  (34%–131%  of  the  10-year

average),  rates  of  long-term  sequelae,  acute  meningococcal  disease  costs  (i.e.,
inpatient  care,  parents'  work  loss,  public  health  response,  and  premature  mortality
costs),  lifetime  direct  and  indirect  costs  of  meningococcal  disease  sequelae  (i.e.,
long-term special education and reduced productivity), and cost of vaccine and vaccine
administration (range: $64–$114). Vaccination coverage (37%–90%) and initial vaccine
efficacy  (39%–99%)  also  were  varied  for  evaluation  purposes.  The  vaccine  was
assumed to be 93% effective in the first year, and then waning immunity was modeled
as a linear decline over the next 9 years unless a booster dose was administered. The
vaccine effectiveness of the second dose was assumed to be higher with a slower rate
of  waning  immunity.  The  results  of  the  cost-effectiveness  analysis  indicate  that  a
2-dose series at ages 11 years and 16 years has a similar cost-effectiveness compared
with moving the single dose to age 15 years or maintaining the single dose at 11 years.
However,  the  number  of  cases  and  deaths  prevented  is  substantially  higher  with  the
2-dose  strategy  (Table  5).  Meningococcal  disease  can  cause  severe  and  devastating
illness.  Disease  incidence  is  low  and  has  decreased  since  the  late  1990s  before
widespread vaccination of adolescents with MenACWY. Meningococcal disease occurs in
all age groups, with an overall incidence in 2011 of 0.2 cases per 100,000 population.
The burden of disease is highest among infants aged <1 year (2.6 cases per 100,000
persons), young adults aged 16 through 21 years (0.4 cases per 100,000 persons), and
persons  aged  ≥65  years  (0.3  cases  per  100,000  persons)  (CDC,  unpublished  data,
2012).  Among  infants,  disease  incidence  peaks  within  the  first  6  months  of  life,  and
most  cases  in  this  age  group  are  caused  by  serogroup  B  (see  Future  Meningococcal
Vaccines, Areas for Research, and Public Education). Rates of nasopharyngeal carriage
are  highest  in  adolescents  and  young  adults  (16,17),  and  adolescents  are  likely  the
main  source  of  transmission  of  the  organism  to  persons  in  other  age  groups.  The
vaccines  licensed  currently  are  recommended  routinely  for  adolescents  and  other
persons  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease.  After  licensure  of  the  first

MenACWY vaccine in 2005, the initial supply of vaccine was not sufficient to vaccinate
all adolescents. ACIP prioritized vaccination for persons aged 11 or 12 years, persons
entering high school, and first-year college students living in residence halls. Two years
later,  in  2007,  after  reviewing  information  on  the  adequacy  of  vaccine  supply,  ACIP
expanded its recommendation for routine 1-dose vaccination at the earliest opportunity
for all adolescents aged 11 through 18 years. At the time, some experts predicted that
the  vaccine  would  be  effective  for  up  to  10  years,  providing  protection  through  the
period  of  highest  risk  in  late  adolescence  and  early  adulthood.  Since  the  2005  ACIP
recommendations,
 additional
 data
 have
 led
 to
 improved
 understanding
 of
meningococcal conjugate vaccines, including new data on duration of vaccine-induced
immunity. Antibody persistence studies indicate that circulating antibody declines 3 to
5  years  after  a  single  dose  of  MenACWY.  In  addition,  results  from  a  vaccine
effectiveness study demonstrate waning effectiveness, and many adolescents are not
protected  5  years  after  vaccination.  ACIP  concluded  that  a  single  dose  of
meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  administered  at  age  11  or  12  years  is  unlikely  to
protect most adolescents through the period of increased risk at ages 16 through 21
years.  On  the  basis  of  this  information,  in  2010,  ACIP  considered  two  options  to
optimize protection through late adolescence into early adulthood: 1) moving the single
recommended dose to age 15 years or 2) retaining the recommended dose at ages 11
or  12  years  and  adding  a  booster  dose  at  age  16  years.  The  benefits  of  the  booster
dose  and  a  desire  to  continue  to  protect  younger  adolescents  prompted  the
recommendation for a routine booster dose at age 16 years (7). In 2010, ACIP revised
the recommendations for dosing regimens (e.g., primary series and booster doses) for
persons  who  have  functional  or  anatomic  asplenia,  who  have  persistent  complement
component deficiencies, or who have HIV infection and are otherwise recommended to
be  vaccinated.  For  these  immunosuppressed  persons,  a  2-dose  primary  series  was
recommended  instead  of  a  single  dose  (7).  For  persons  with  persistent  complement

component deficiency, a 2-dose primary series will help achieve the high levels of SBA
needed to confer protection in the absence of effective opsonization. For persons with
asplenia  or  HIV,  a  2-dose  primary  series  will  increase  the  likelihood  of  a  sufficient
primary  immune  response.  Booster  doses  after  primary  vaccination  are  important  for
persons with prolonged increased risk (persons with asplenia, persons with complement
component  deficiencies,  and  microbiologists)  to  ensure  high  levels  of  SBA  are
maintained over time.  In 2011 and 2012, ACIP voted to recommend meningococcal 
vaccination  for  children  aged  2  through  23  months  who  are  at  increased  risk  for
disease. ACIP does not recommend routine vaccination of children aged ≤10 years. The
number  of  infants  and  young  children  who  are  or  will  be  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal disease is limited. ACIP reviewed the burden of meningococcal disease
among infants and children aged ≤10 years. In the United States, during 1993–2011,
average annual rates of meningococcal disease were higher among children aged ≤59
months. However, approximately 60% of disease among children aged ≤59 months is
caused  by  serogroup  B  N.  meningitidis  which  is  not  prevented  by  Hib-MenCY-TT  or
MenACWY-D.  In  addition,  the  highest  incidence  in  the  first  5  years  of  life  occurs  in
infants aged 0 through 6 months, many of whom are too young to have received the
minimum 2 or 3 doses of vaccine that likely are needed to provide protection. Of the
205 cases of meningococcal disease in children aged <59 months that occur annually,
it  is  estimated  that  a  universal  infant  meningococcal  vaccination  program  would
prevent 40–50 cases (approximately 25% of cases in this age group) (CDC, unpublished
data,  2012).  The  epidemiology  of  meningococcal  disease  is  dynamic,  and  rates  of
disease could increase in the future requiring a reassessment of immunization strategy.
 ACIP recommends routine administration of a MenACWY vaccine for all persons aged
11 through 18 years (Table 6). A single dose of vaccine should be administered at age
11  or  12  years,  and  a  booster  dose  should  be  administered  at  age  16  years.
Adolescents who receive their first dose at age 13 through 15 years should receive a

booster  dose  at  age  16  through18  years.  The  minimum  interval  between  doses  of
MenACWY is 8 weeks. Adolescents who receive a first dose after their 16th birthday do
not  need  a  booster  dose  unless  they  become  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal
disease. Persons aged 19 through 21 years are not recommended routinely to receive
MenACWY. MenACWY may be administered up to age 21 years as catch-up vaccination
for those who have not received a dose after their 16th birthday. Health-care personnel
should use every opportunity to provide the booster dose when indicated, regardless of
the  vaccine  brand  used  for  the  previous  dose  or  doses.  Persons  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal  disease  also  are  recommended  for  routine  meningococcal  vaccination
(Tables
 6
 and
 7).
 Vaccine
 product,
 number
 of
 doses,
 and
 booster
 dose
recommendations are based on age and risk factor and are described below in detail for
each  risk  group.  In  general:  MenACWY  or  Hib-MenCYTT  is  recommended  for  use  in
control of outbreaks caused by vaccine-preventable serogroups (A, C, Y, and W-135) of
N. meningitidis (Appendix B). An outbreak is defined by the occurrence of at least three
confirmed  or  probable  primary  cases  of  meningococcal  disease  caused  by  the  same
serogroup in ≤3 months, with a resulting primary attack rate of ≥10 cases per 100,000
population.  For  calculation  of  this  threshold,  population-based  rates  are  used  rather
than  age-specific  attack  rates.  MenACWY  is  preferred  if  the  population  targeted  for
vaccination includes age groups for which MenACWY is licensed (i.e., 9 months through
55  years).  Detailed  recommendations  on  evaluation  and  management  of  suspected
outbreaks  of  meningococcal  disease  are  provided  (Appendix  B).   Routine  vaccination
against  meningococcal  disease  is  not  recommended  for  children  aged  2  months
through 10 years. Hib-MenCY-TT is licensed as a 4-dose primary series for children aged
6  weeks  through  18  months.  Hib-MenCY-TT  can  be  administered  in  any  infant  for
routine vaccination against Hib and will offer some protection against serogroups C and
Y meningococcal disease; 4 doses of Hib-MenCY-TT fulfill the primary series and booster
dose  Hib  immunization  recommendations.  If  the  reason  for  use  of  Hib-MenCY-TT

vaccine is to achieve protection against serogroups C and Y, it should be used for all 4
doses  of  Hib  vaccine.  Infants  and  children  who  received  Hib-MenCY-TT  and  are
travelling  to  areas  with  high  endemic  rates  of  meningococcal  disease  such  as  the
"meningitis belt" are not protected against serogroups A and W-135 and should receive
a quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine licensed for children aged ≥9 months
before  travel.  MenACWY-D  is  licensed  as  a  2-dose  primary  series  for  children  aged  9
through  23  months  and  as  a  single  dose  for  children  ages  2  through  10  years.
MenACWY-CRM  is  licensed  as  a  single  dose  for  children  aged  2  through  10  years.
Children  who  receive  Hib-MenCY-TT,  MenACWY,  or  both  Hib-MenCY-TT  and  MenACWY
before their 10th birthday should receive the routinely recommended doses at age 11
or  12  years  and  at  age  16  years.  MenACWY-D,  MenACWY-CRM,  and  Hib-MenCY-TT
vaccines are administered intramuscularly, and MPSV4 is administered subcutaneously.
Individual  doses  of  all  vaccines  are  0.5  mL.  In  persons  aged  2  through  55  years,
MenACWY and MPSV4 vaccines can be administered concomitantly with other vaccines,
but  at  a  different  anatomic  site,  if  feasible.  Because  of  limited  data  suggesting
immunologic  blunting  of  the  meningococcal  vaccine,  MenACWY-D  should  be
administered  to  children  aged  2  through  6  years  either  before,  at  the  same  time,  or
more than 6 months after receipt of DTaP. If MenACWY-D is administered inadvertently
in  the  6  months  after  receipt  of  DTaP,  the  dose  does  not  need  to  be  repeated.
MenACWY-CRM may be administered at any time in relation to DTaP administration. If a
child  is  traveling  to  a  high-risk  area  or  is  part  of  a  community  outbreak,  waiting  to
administer  MenACWY-D  following  receipt  of  DTaP  is  not  recommended,  even  if  there
may  be  blunting.  There  is  no  evidence  of  immunologic  blunting  between  Tdap  and
MenACWY  when  either  MenACWY-D  or  MenACWY-CRM  is  administered  following
administration  of  Tdap.  In  children  aged  2  through  18  months,  Hib-MenCY-TT  can  be
administered  concomitantly  with  other  vaccines,  but  at  a  different  anatomic  site,  if
feasible. In children aged 9 through 23 months, MenACWY-D can be administered with

other vaccines concomitantly in healthy children at different anatomic sites, if feasible.
Children  with  asplenia  should  not  receive  MenACWY-D  concomitantly  with  PCV13;  if
MenACWY-D  is  used  in  persons  with  asplenia,  it  should  be  administered  at  least  4
weeks  after  completion  of  all  PCV13  doses.  All  health-care  personnel  administering
vaccinations should be aware of the potential for syncope after vaccination, especially
among  adolescents,  and  should  take  appropriate  measures  to  prevent  potential
injuries.  If  syncope  occurs,  the  vaccine  recipient  should  be  observed  until  symptoms
resolve. Providers should strongly consider observing patients for 15 minutes after they
are  vaccinated  (97).  Vaccination  with  MenACWY,  MPSV4,  or  Hib-MenCY-TT  is
contraindicated  among  persons  known  to  have  a  severe  allergic  reaction  to  any
component  of  the  vaccine,  including  diphtheria  or  tetanus  toxoid.  ACIP  does  not
consider  a  history  of  GBS  to  be  a  contraindication  or  precaution  for  meningococcal
vaccination.  Recommended  vaccinations  can  be  administered  to  persons  with  minor
acute illness (e.g., diarrhea or mild upper-respiratory tract infection with or without low
grade fever). Vaccination should be deferred for persons with moderate or severe acute
illness  until  the  person's  condition  improves  (101).  Because  MenACWY,  MPSV4,  and
Hib-MenCY-TT are inactivated vaccines, they can be administered to persons who are
immunosuppressed  as  a  result  of  disease  or  medications;  however,  response  to  the
vaccine might be less than optimal.  To date, no randomized, controlled clinical trials
have  been  conducted  primarily  to  evaluate  use  of  MPSV4  or  MenACWY  vaccines  in
pregnant or lactating women. VAERS reports of exposure to MPSV4 during pregnancy
have  not  identified  adverse  effects  among  either  pregnant  women  or  newborns  of
women vaccinated during pregnancy. From VAERS reports available for women found to
be  pregnant  at  the  time  of  MenACWY-D  vaccination,  no  major  safety  concerns
associated  with  vaccination  have  been  identified  in  the  mother  or  fetus.  Pregnancy
should  not  preclude  vaccination  with  MenACWY  or  MPSV4,  if  indicated.  Women  of
childbearing age who become aware that they were pregnant at the time of MenACWY

vaccination  should  contact  their  health-care  provider  or  the  vaccine  manufacturer  so
that their experience might be captured in the manufacturer's registry of vaccination
during  pregnancy.  Any  adverse  event  following  receipt  of  MenACWY,  MPSV4  or
Hib-MenCY-TT vaccine should be reported to VAERS at telephone 1-800-822-7967 or at
http://vaers.hhs.gov/index.   MenACWY  vaccines  were  licensed  on  the  basis  of  data
regarding safety and short-term immunogenicity. However, immunogenicity data alone
are  insufficient  to  predict  vaccine  effectiveness  and  herd  immunity  effect,  which
depends  largely  on  the  ability  of  vaccine  to  alter  transmission  patterns.  Multiple
changes  to  the  recommendations  have  been  made  since  2005  (Box  1);  the  effect  of
these changes needs to be monitored over time for their effectiveness and impact on
disease  to  be  assessed.  Because  serogroup  B  capsular  polysaccharide  is  poorly
immunogenic  in  humans,  vaccine  development  for  serogroup  B  N.  meningitidis  has
focused on common proteins, including the outer membrane vessicles (OMV) of specific
epidemic  strains.  Efficacy  of  OMV  vaccines  has  been  demonstrated  among  older
children and adults but not among infants and young children, in whom rates of disease
are  highest  (102–105).  In  addition,  the  variability  in  OMV  strains  causing  endemic
disease  will  likely  limit  their  usefulness  in  the  United  States  (106,107).  Two  vaccines
developed to prevent serogroup B vaccine are in late-stage clinical development in the
United  States.  A  multicomponent  serogroup  B  meningococcal  vaccine  (4CMenB),
approved  for  use  in  Europe  by  the  European  Medicines  Agency  in  January  2013,  was
developed by sequencing the meningococcal B genome and testing surface antigens for
their ability to elicit an immunogenic response. Three novel antigens identified, factor-H
binding  protein  (fHbp),  Neisserial  adhesion  A  (NadA),  and  Neisseria  heparin  binding
antigen  (NHBA),  were  combined  with  OMV  from  the  New  Zealand  epidemic  strain
NZ98/254  (108).  The  second  vaccine,  bivalent  recombinant  lipoprotein  2086  vaccine,
contains two families of the same protein, fHbp, as 4CMenB (109). When these vaccines
are  licensed,  vaccines  to  prevent  all  five  serogroups  that  cause  most  meningococcal

disease  worldwide  will  be  available  for  the  first  time.  However,  extensive  research  is
needed  to  understand  better  how  to  conduct  optimal  implementation  of  noncapsular
based  meningococcal  vaccines.  Although  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  meningococcal
disease  are  frequently  nonspecific,  increasing  awareness  for  meningococcal  disease
can result in earlier medical care-seeking behavior and improved clinical outcomes. In
addition,  educating  adolescents  and  their  parents  about  the  benefits  of  receiving
MenACWY is key to preventing a substantial number of cases of meningococcal disease.
Finally, educating policy makers and the general public about the benefits of receiving
MenACWY  vaccine  might  improve  vaccination  coverage  rates  and  substantially
decrease  the  burden  of  meningococcal  disease  in  the  United  States.   *A  list  of  the
Work  Group  appears  on  Page  28.  †FDA  classification  categories  available  at
http://chemm.nlm.nih.gov/pregnancycategories.htm  ACIP  Membership  List  As  of  June
2012  Chair:  Carol  Baker,  MD,  Baylor  College  of  Medicine,  Houston,  Texas.  Executive
Secretary:  Larry  Pickering,  MD,  National  Center  for  Immunization  and  Respiratory
Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia. Members: Nancy Bennett, MD, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York; Joseph Bocchini, MD, Louisiana
State
 University
 Health
 Sciences
 Center,
 Shreveport,
 Louisiana;
 Douglas
Campos-Outcalt,  MD,  University  of  Arizona  College  of  Medicine,  Phoenix,  Arizona;
Tamera  Coyne-Beasley,  MD,  University  of  North  Carolina,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina;
Jeffrey Duchin, MD, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Kristen Ehresmann,
MPH, Minnesota Department of Health, St. Paul, Minnesota; Renée Jenkins, MD, Howard
University School of Medicine, District of Columbia; Wendy Keitel, MD, Baylor College of
Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;  Michael  Marcy,  MD,  UCLA  Center  for  Vaccine  Research,
Torrance, California; Cody Meissner, MD, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts;
Sara  Rosenbaum,  JD,  Georgetown  University,  District  of  Columbia;  Mark  Sawyer,  MD,
University  of  California  at  San  Diego,  California;  Jonathan  Temte,  MD,  University  of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin; Marietta Vázquez,

MD, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. Ex Officio Members:
Geoffrey  S.  Evans,  MD,  Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration,  Rockville,
Maryland;  Jesse  Geibe,  MD,  Department  of  Defense,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Bruce
Gellin, MD, National Vaccine Program Office, District of Columba; Richard Gorman, MD,
National  Institutes  of  Health,  Bethesda,  Maryland;  Amy  Groom,  MPH,  Indian  Health
Service,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico;  Mary  Beth  Hance,  Centers  for  Medicare  and
Medicaid Services, Baltimore, Maryland; Linda Kinsinger, MD, Department of Veterans
Affairs,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  Wellington  Sun,  MD,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,
Bethesda, Maryland. Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians,
Jamie  Loehr,  MD,  Ithaca,  New  York;  American  Academy  of  Pediatrics,  Michael  Brady,
MD, Columbus, Ohio, David Kimberlin, MD, Birmingham, Alabama; American Academy
of  Physician  Assistants,  Marie-Michèle  Léger,  MPH,  Alexandria,  Virgina;  American
College  Health  Association,  James  C.  Turner,  MD,  Charlottesville,  Virginia;  American
College  of  Obstetricians  and  Gynecologists,  Laura  Riley,  MD,  Boston,  Massachusetts;
American College of Physicians, Gregory Poland, MD, Rochester, Minnesota; American
Geriatrics  Society,  Kenneth  Schmader,  MD,  Durham,  North  Carolina;  America's  Health
Insurance  Plans,  Mark  Netoskie,  MD,  Houston,  Texas;  American  Medical  Association,
Litjen  Tan,  PhD,  Chicago,  Illinois;  American  Nurses  Association,  Katie  Brewer,  MSN,
Silver Springs, Maryland; American Osteopathic Association, Stanley Grogg, DO, Tulsa,
Oklahoma;  American  Pharmacists  Association,  Stephan  L.  Foster,  PharmD,  Memphis,
Tennessee;  Association  of  Immunization  Managers,  Kelly  Moore,  MD,  Nashville,
Tennessee; Association for Prevention Teaching and Research, W. Paul McKinney, MD,
Louisville, Kentucky; Association of State and Territorial Health Officials, José Montero,
MD,  Concord,  New  Hampshire;  Biotechnology  Industry  Organization,  Clement  Lewin,
PhD,
 Cambridge,
 Massachusetts;
 Canadian
 National
 Advisory
 Committee
 on
Immunization,  Bryna  Warshawsky,  MDCM,  Ontario,  Canada;  Council  of  State  and
Territorial  Epidemiologists,  Christine  Hahn,  MD,  Boise,  Idaho;  Department  of  Health,

United Kingdom, David M. Salisbury, MD, London, United Kingdom; Healthcare Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee, Alexis Elward, MD, St. Louis, Missouri; Infectious
Diseases  Society  of  America,  Kathleen  Neuzil,  MD,  Seattle,  Washington;  National
Association of County and City Health Officials, Matthew Zahn, MD, Louisville, Kentucky;
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners, Patricia Stinchfield, MPH, St. Paul,
Minnesota;  National  Foundation  for  Infectious  Diseases,  William  Schaffner,  MD,
Nashville, Tennessee; National Immunization Council and Child Health Program, Mexico,
Vesta  Richardson,  MD,  Mexico  City,  Mexico;  National  Medical  Association,  Patricia
Whitley-Williams,  MD,  New  Brunswick,  New  Jersey;  National  Vaccine  Advisory
Committee,  Walter  Orenstein,  MD,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Pharmaceutical  Research  and
Manufacturers  of  America,  Damian  A.  Braga,  Swiftwater,  Pennsylvania,;  Society  for
Adolescent  Health  and  Medicine,  Amy  Middleman,  MD,  Houston,  Texas;  Society  for
Healthcare  Epidemiology  of  America,  Harry  Keyserling,  MD,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  
Meningococcal  Vaccines  Work  Group  Chair:  Lorry  Rubin,  MD,  Steven  and  Alexandra
Cohen  Children's  Medical  Center  of  New  York,  New  Hyde  Park,  New  York.  Members:
Carol Baker, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Michael Brady, MD, Ohio
State  University,  Columbus,  Ohio;  Douglas  Campos-Outcalt,  MD,  University  of  Arizona
College  of  Medicine,  Phoenix,  Arizona;  Richard  Clover,  MD,  University  of  Louisville
School  of  Public  Health,  Lousiville,  Kentucky;  Kristen  Ehresmann,  MPH,  Minnesota
Department  of  Health,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota;  Lucia  Lee,  MD,  Food  and  Drug
Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Martin  Luta,  MD,  Delaware  Division  of  Public
Health,  Dover,  Delaware;  Michael  Marcy,  MD,  UCLA  Center  for  Vaccine  Research,
Torrence,  California;  W.  Paul  McKinney,  MD,  Association  for  Prevention  Teaching  and
Research, Louisville, Kentucky; Cody Meissner, MD, Tufts University School of Medicine,
Boston,  Massachusetts;  Amy  Middleman,  MD,  Society  for  Adolescent  Health  and
Medicine,  Houston,  Texas;  Karen  O'Brien,  MD,  US  Army  Training  and  Doctrine
Command,  Fort  Monroe,  Virginia;  Paul  Offit,  MD,  Children's  Hospital  of  Philadelphia,

Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania;  Georges  Peter,  MD,   Rhode  Island  Hospital,  Providence,
Rhode  Island;  William  Schaffner,  MD,  National  Foundation  for  Infectious  Diseases,
Nashville,  Tennessee;  David  Stephens,  MD,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,
Atlanta,  Georgia;  James  C.  Turner,  MD,  American  College  Health  Association,
Charlottesville, Virginia; Marietta Vázquez, MD, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut. Contributors:  William Atkinson, MD; Elizabeth Briere, MD; Thomas
Clark, MD; Jonathan Duffy, MD;  Jessica MacNeil, MPH; Nancy E. Messonnier, MD; Ismael
R.  Ortega-Sanchez,  PhD;  Shannon  Stokley,  MPH,  CDC,  Atlanta,  Georgia.  Secretariat
(CDC): Amanda C. Cohn, MD, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia. BOX 1. Timeline of meningococcal
conjugate  vaccine  ACIP  recommendations,  2005  —  2012  2005:  Licensure  of  and  first
recommendation  for  routine  vaccination  of  adolescents  with  MenACWY-D.*  2006:
Because of limited vaccine supply, vaccination was first limited to cohorts of children
entering high school and entering college and persons aged 11–55 years at increased
risk  for  meningococcal  disease.†   2007:  After  vaccine  supply  became  sufficient,  ACIP
recommended vaccination for all adolescents aged 11–18 years.§ ACIP recommended
vaccination of children aged 2–10 years at increased risk for meningococcal disease.¶ 
2009:  ACIP  recommended  booster  dose  for  persons  who  remain  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal  disease,  administered  every  5  years  except  for  children  who  received
their  previous  dose  prior  to  their  seventh  birthday;  these  children  should  receive  a
booster  dose  3  years  after  their  previous  dose.**   2010:  The  Food  and  Drug
Administration  licensed  a  second  vaccine  product,  MenACWY-CRM.††  ACIP  added  a
booster dose at age 16 years and recommended a 2-dose primary series for all persons
with  asplenia,  persistent  complement  component  deficiency,  and  for  persons  with
human immunodeficiency virus infection.§§  2011: ACIP recommended a 2-dose primary
series  for  children  aged  9–23  months  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease.¶¶
2012:  ACIP  recommended  a  4-dose  primary  series  of  Hib-MenCY-TT  for  children  aged
2–18  months  at  increased  risk  for  meningococcal  disease.***   *Source:  CDC

Prevention  and  control  of  meningococcal  disease:  recommendations  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP).  MMWR  2005;54(No.  RR-7).    †  Source:
CDC.  Notice  to  readers:  limited  supply  of  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine,
recommendation  to  defer  vaccination  of  persons  aged  11–12  years.   MMWR
2006:55;567–8.  § Source: CDC. Revised recommendations of the Advisory Committee
on  Immunization  Practices  to  vaccinate  all  persons  aged  11–18  years  with
meningococcal
 conjugate
 vaccine.
 MMWR
 2007;56:794–5.
 
 ¶
 Source:
 CDC.
Recommendation  from  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  for
use  of  quadrivalent  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccine  (MCV4)  in  children  aged  2–10
years at increased risk for invasive meningococcal disease. MMWR 2007;56:1265–6.  **
Source: CDC. Updated recommendation from the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices  (ACIP)  for  revaccination  of  persons  at  prolonged  increased  risk  for
meningococcal  disease.  MMWR  2009;58:1042–3.   ††  Source:  CDC.  Licensure  of  a
meningococcal conjugate vaccine (Menveo) and guidance for use—Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2010. MMWR 2010;59:273.  §§ Source: CDC. Updated
recommendations  for  use  of  meningococcal  conjugate  vaccines—Advisory  Committee
on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP),  2010.  MMWR  2011;60:72–6.   ¶¶  Source:  CDC.
Recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) for use
of quadrivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MenACWY-D) among children aged 9
through  23  months  at  increased  risk  for  invasive  meningococcal  disease.  MMWR
2011;60:1391–2.   ***Source:  CDC.  Infant  meningococcal  vaccination:  Advisory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices  (ACIP)  recommendations  and  rationale.  MMWR
2013;62:52–4. TABLE 1. Licensed meningococcal vaccines — United States, 1981–2012
Formulation  Type  Trade  name   Manufacturer  Licensed  (yr)  Age  group  Dose(s)
Serogroups  MPSV4* Polysaccharide Menomune Sanofi Pasteur 1981 ≥2 yrs Single dose
A, C, W, and Y MenACWY-D† Conjugate Menactra Sanofi Pasteur 2005 11–55 yrs Single
dose  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  MenACWY-D†  Conjugate  Menactra  Sanofi  Pasteur  2007  2–10  yrs

Single dose A, C, W, and Y MenACWY-D† Conjugate Menactra Sanofi Pasteur 2011 9–23
mos  2-dose  series  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  MenACWY-CRM§  Conjugate  Menveo   Novartis  2010
11–55 yrs Single dose A, C, W, and Y MenACWY-CRM§ Conjugate Menveo Novartis 2011
2–10  yrs  Single  dose  A,  C,  W,  and  Y  Hib-MenCY-TT¶  Conjugate  MenHibrix
GlaxoSmithKline 2012 6 wks–18 mos 4-dose series C and Y *Package insert available
at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
308370.pdf.
 
 †Package
 insert
 available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM1
31170.pdf.
 
 §Package
 insert
 available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
201349.pdf.
 
 ¶Package
 insert
 available
 at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM
308577.pdf.   BOX  2.  Meningococcal  vaccination  recommendations  —  Advistory
Committee  on  Immunization  Practices,  2013   ACIP  recommends  meningococcal
vaccination for the following groups: FIGURE 1. Rate* of meningococcal disease, by year
—  United  States,  1970–2011†  Source:  CDC,  Unpublished  data,  National  Notifiable
Diseases  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS)  for  1970–1996  and  Active  Bacterial  Core
surveillance  (ABCs)  system  for  1997–2011.  *  Per  100,000  population.  †ABCs  cases
from 1997–2011 estimated to the U.S. population. In 2010, estimated case counts from
ABCs  were  lower  than  cases  reported  to  NNDSS  and  might  not  be  representative.
Alternate  Text:  This  figure  shows  the  rate  per  100,000  population  of  meningococcal
disease in the United States during 1970-2011 by year, using data from the National
Notifiable  Diseases  Surveillance  System  for  1970-1996  and  from  the  Active  Bacterial
Core surveillance system for 1997-2011. Incidence has declined annually since a peak
of disease in the late 1990s. TABLE 2. Average annual estimated number and rate* of
cases  of  meningococcal  disease,  by  age  group  and  serogroup  —  United  States,

2002–2011† Age group Serogroup B Serogroup C Serogroup Y Other§ Total No.  (Rate)
No.  (Rate) No.  (Rate) No. (Rate) No. (Rate) < 1 yr 117 (2.8) 14  (0.3) 38  (0.9) 8  (0.2)
177  (4.3)  0–5 mos 74 (3.6) 5  (0.3) 23  (1.1) 6  (0.3) 108  (5.3) 6–11 mos 43 (2.1) 9 
(0.4) 15  (0.7) 2  (0.1) 69  (3.4) 1 yr 28 (0.7) 9  (0.2) 2  (0.1) 3  (0.1) 42  (1.0) 2–4 yrs 38
(0.3) 16  (0.1) 8  (0.1) 7  (0.1) 69  (0.6) 5–10 yrs 31 (0.1) 16  (0.1) 12 (0) 3 (0) 62  (0.3)
11–18 yrs 28 (0.1) 43  (0.1) 43  (0.1) 10 (0) 124  (0.4) 19–21 yrs 26 (0.2) 23  (0.2) 16 
(0.1) 3 (0) 68  (0.5) 22–24 yrs 21 (0.2) 22  (0.2) 7  (0.1) 1 (0) 51  (0.4) 25–64 yrs 93
(0.1) 129  (0.1) 125  (0.1) 21 (0) 368  (0.2) ≥65 yrs 20 (0.1) 33  (0.1) 114  (0.3) 19  (0.1)
186   (0.5)  Total  402  (0.1)  305  (0.1)  365  (0.1)  76  (0)  1,146  (0.4)  Source:  CDC,
Unpublished data, Active Bacterial Core surveillance (ABCs) system, 2002–2011. *Per
100,000  population.  †ABCs  cases  from  2002–2011  estimated  to  the  U.S.  population
with 18% correction for underreporting. In 2010, estimated case counts from ABCs were
lower than cases reported to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System and
might  not  be  representative.  §Includes  serogroup  W135,  nongroupable,  and  other
serogroups. FIGURE 2. Rate* of meningococcal disease, by age group — United States,
2002–2011†  Source:  Unpublished  data,  Active  Bacterial  Core  surveillance  (ABCs)
system. *Per 100,000 population. †ABCs cases from 2002–2011 estimated to the U.S.
population with 18% correction for nonculture-confirmed cases. In 2010, estimated case
counts from ABCs were lower than cases reported to the National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System  and might not be representative. Alternate Text: This figure shows
the rate per 100,000 population of meningococcal disease in the United States during
2002-2011 by age group, using data from the Active Bacterial Core surveillance system.
Incidence of meningococcal disease peaks among persons in three age groups: infants
and children aged <5 years, adolescents and young adults aged 16 through 21 years,
and adults aged ≥65 years.  TABLE 3. Rate* of meningococcal disease, by age group
and serogroup — United States, 1998–2011† Years Serogroup C, Y, W  Serogroup B  <1
yr 11–19 yrs ≥20 yrs <1 yr 11–19 yrs ≥20 yrs Rate (CI) Rate (CI) Rate (CI) Rate (CI)

Rate (CI) Rate (CI) 1998–1999 5.86 (4.24–7.90) 1.13 (0.90–1.41) 0.47 (0.41–0.54) 3.32
(2.21–4.86)  0.22  (0.13–0.36)  0.14  (0.11–0.19)  2000–2001  2.32  (1.45–3.55)  0.71
(0.54–0.91)  0.38  (0.33–0.44)  4.30  (3.02–5.95)  0.27  (0.17–0.41)  0.13  (0.10–0.17)
2002–2003  2.06  (1.23–3.26)  0.55  (0.40–0.73)  0.25  (0.21–0.30)  4.30  (3.06–5.90)  0.20
(0.12–0.32)  0.11  (0.09–0.15)  2004–2005  0.77  (0.33–1.55)  0.27  (0.17–0.39)  0.17
(0.14–0.21)  3.10  (2.10–4.42)  0.11  (0.06–0.20)  0.07  (0.05–0.09)  2006–2007  1.20
(0.61–2.11)  0.31  (0.21–0.45)  0.23  (0.19–0.28)  2.11  (1.32–3.22)  0.05  (0.02–0.12)  0.06
(0.04–0.09)  2008–2009  0.93  (0.48–1.69)  0.15  (0.08–0.26)  0.23  (0.19–0.27)  2.92
(1.99–4.18)  0.10  (0.04–0.18)  0.07  (0.05–0.10)  2010–2011  1.37  (0.74–2.33)  0.05
(0.02–0.12)  0.14  (0.11–0.18)  1.33  (0.72–2.29)  0.00  (0.00–0.05)  0.03  (0.02–0.05)
Abbreviation:  CI  =  95%  confidence  interval.  Source:  CDC,  Unpublished  data,  Active
Bacterial  Core  surveillance  (ABCs)  system,  1998–2011.  *Per  100,000  population.
†ABCs cases from 1998–2011 estimated to the U.S. population with 18% correction for
nonculture-confirmed cases. In 2010, estimated case counts from ABCs were lower than
cases reported to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System and might not
be representative. TABLE 4. Summary of serogroup C bactericidal antibody persistence
as determined by serum bactericidal antibody assay (SBA) 2–5 years after vaccination
with  meningococcal  vaccines  —  United  States,  2006–2010  Age  group  at  vaccination
(yrs)  Yrs post- vaccination  Serogroup C SBA Vaccine  Vaccine recepients No.  % with
protective antibody levels  11–18*  2  % hSBA ≥1:8 Menveo  273  62 Menactra 185 58
11–18†  3   %  rSBA  ≥1:128  Menactra   71  75  MPSV4  72  60  2–10†  5   %  rSBA  ≥1:128
Menactra  161 55 MPSV4 207 42 11–18† 5  % rSBA ≥1:128 Menactra 50 56 MPSV4 68
62  11–17§  5  %  hSBA  ≥1:8  Menveo  50  72  MPSV4  50  62  Abbreviations:  hSBA  =  SBA
using  human  complement;  rSBA  =  SBA  using  baby  rabbit  complement;  MPSV4  =
quadrivalent  meningococcal  polysaccharide  vaccine.  *Source:  Gill  C,  Baxter  R,
Anemona A, Ciavarro G, Dull P. Persistence of immune responses after a single dose of
Novartis  meningococcal  serogroup  A,  C,  W-135  and  Y  CRM-197  conjugate  vaccine

(Menveo)  or  Menactra  among  healthy  adolescents.  Human  Vaccines  2010;6:881–7.
†Source:  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization  Practices,  unpublished  data,  2009.
§Source:  Jacobson  RM,  Jackson  LA,  Reisinger  K,  Izu  A,  Odrljin  T,  Dull  T.  Antibody
persistence  and  response  to  a  booster  dose  of  a  quadrivalent  conjugate  vaccine  for
meningococcal disease in adolescents. Pediatr Infect Dis J [Epublished ahead of print].
DOI:  10.1097/INF.0b013e318279ac38.  TABLE  5.  Summary  of  cost-effectiveness
analyses  of  different  strategies  for  adolescent  vaccination  —  United  States  Dosage
Cases averted Deaths averted QALY saved Cost per QALY saved ($)  No. (Range) No. 
(Range)  No.   (Range)  No.   (Range)  1  dose  at  11  yrs  94  (43–165)  11  (5–20)  736
(330–1,130)  256,000  (84,000–650,000)  1  dose  at  15  yrs  115  (51–205)  14  (6–25)  850
(390–1,380) 219,000 (63,000–600,000) 1 dose at 11 yrs with booster dose at 16 yrs 184
(92–308) 22 (11–40) 1,442 (610– 2,130) 212,000 (67,000–535,000) Abbreviation: QALY
=  quality-adjusted  life  years.  Source:  Unpublished  data  with  updated  estimates,
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) meeting, October 2010. Methods
described  in  Shepard  CW,  Ortega-Sanchez  IR,  Scott  RD  2nd,  Rosenstein  NE.
Cost-effectiveness  of  conjugate  meningococcal  vaccination  strategies  in  the  United
States. Pediatrics 2005;115:1220–32. TABLE 6. Recommended meningococcal vaccines
for use in children and adults — Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP),
United  States,  2012  Age  group  Vaccine  Status  2  mos–10  yrs  MenACWY-D  (Menactra,
Sanofi)*  Not  routinely  recommended;  see  Table  7  for  persons  at  increased  risk
MenACWY-CRM  (Menveo,  Novartis)†  Not  routinely  recommended;  see  Table  7  for
persons at increased risk HibMenCY-TT (MenHibrix, GSK)§ Not routinely recommended;
see  Table  7  for  persons  at  increased  risk  11–21  yrs  MenACWY-D  or  MenACWY-CRM
Primary:
 Booster:
 22–55
 yrs
 MenACWY-D
 or
 MenACWY-CRM
 Not
 routinely
recommended; see Table 7 for persons at increased risk ≥56 yrs MPSV4, MenACWY-D,
or  MenACWY-CRM  Not  routinely  recommended;  see  Table  7  for  persons  at  increased
risk Source: Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics. Meningococcal infections.

In: Pickering LK, Baker CJ, Kimberlin DW, Long SS, eds. Red book: 2012 report of the
Committee  on  Infectious  Diseases.  29th  ed.  Elk  Grove,  IL:  American  Academy  of
Pediatrics;  2012:500–9.  *Licensed  only  for  persons  aged  9  months–55  years.
†Licensed only for persons aged 2–55 years. Under investigation for use at ages 2, 4,
6, and 12–15 months. §Licensed only for children aged 6 weeks–18 months. TABLE 7.
Recommended  immunization  schedule  and  intervals  for  persons  at  increased  risk  for
meningococcal disease — Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), United
States,  2012*  Age  group  Subgroup  Primary  vaccination  Booster  dose†  2–18  mos  with
high-risk  conditions§   Children  who:  4  doses  of  Hib-MenCY-TT  (MenHibrix),  at  2,  4,  6,
and 12–15 months Person remains at increased risk and completed the primary dose or
series at age: 9–23 mos with high-risk conditions¶ Children who: 2 doses of MenACWY-D
(Menactra),  12  weeks  apart**  2–55  yrs  with  high-risk  conditions  and  not  vaccinated
previously Persons who: 2 doses of MenACWY, 8–12 weeks apart†† Persons who: 1 dose
of MenACWY†† Source: Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics. Meningococcal
infections.  In:  Pickering  LK,  Baker  CJ,  Kimberlin  DW,  Long  SS,  eds.  Red  book:  2012
report  of  the  Committee  on  Infectious  Diseases.  29th  ed.  Elk  Grove,  IL:  American
Academy  of  Pediatrics;  2012:  500–9.  *Includes  persons  who  have  persistent
complement deficiencies (e.g., C5–C9, properdin, factor H, or factor D), and anatomic or
functional  asplenia;  travelers  to  or  residents  of  countries  in  which  meningococcal
disease  is  hyperendemic  or  epidemic;  and  persons  who  are  part  of  a  community
outbreak of a vaccine-preventable serogroup.  †If the person remains at increased risk
for meningococcal disease.  §Infants and children who received Hib-MenCY-TT and are
travelling  to  areas  with  high  endemic  rates  of  meningococcal  disease  such  as  the
African "meningitis belt" are not protected against serogroups A and W-135 and should
receive a quadrivalent meningococcal vaccination licensed for children aged ≥9 months
prior to travel.  ¶Because of high risk for invasive pneumococcal disease, children with
functional or anatomic asplenia should not be immunized with MenACWY-D (Menactra)

before  age  2  years  to  avoid  interference  with  the  immune  response  to  the
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) series. **If an infant is receiving the vaccine
prior  to  travel,  2  doses  may  be  administered  as  early  as  8  weeks  apart.   ††If
MenACWY-D is used, it should be administered at least 4 weeks after completion of all
PCV doses. Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and
does  not  imply  endorsement  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers
and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations or their programs by
CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for
the content of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current
as  of  the  date  of  publication.  All  MMWR  HTML  versions  of  articles  are  electronic
conversions  from  typeset  documents.  This  conversion  might  result  in  character
translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML  version.  Users  are  referred  to  the  electronic
PDF  version  (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr)  and/or  the  original  MMWR  paper  copy  for
printable  versions  of  official  text,  figures,  and  tables.  An  original  paper  copy  of  this
issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. 
Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;  telephone:  (202)
512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions  or  messages  regarding  errors  in  formatting  should  be  addressed  to
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6202a1.htm
