Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Guidelines and Recommendations As the signs and symptoms
of  influenza-like-illness  can  be  similar  to  SARS-CoV-2  infection  and  other  respiratory
infections,
 please
 refer
 to
 the
 Interim
 Infection
 Prevention
 and
 Control
Recommendations  for  Healthcare  Personnel  During  the  Coronavirus  Disease  2019
(COVID-19)  Pandemic.   Additional  guidance  for  SARS-CoV-2,  including  diagnostic
considerations,  guidance  for  specific  healthcare  settings  (e.g.,  long  term  care),
assessing  risk  among  potentially  exposed  healthcare  personnel,  healthcare  personnel
work  restrictions  and  criteria  for  return  to  work,  and  recommendations  on  the
administration  of  SARS-CoV-2  immunization  can  be  found  on  the  COVID-19  website.
This  updated  guidance  continues  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  a  comprehensive
influenza  prevention  strategy  that  can  be  applied  across  the  entire  spectrum  of
healthcare  settings.  CDC  will  continue  to  evaluate  new  information  as  it  becomes
available  and  will  update  or  expand  this  guidance  as  needed.  Additional  information
on  influenza  immunization,  prevention,  treatment,  and  control  can  be  found  on
Seasonal Influenza (Flu) web site. For the purposes of this guidance, healthcare settings
include, but are not limited to, acute-care hospitals; long-term care facilities, such as
nursing  homes  and  skilled  nursing  facilities;  physicians’  offices;  urgent-care  centers,
outpatient clinics; and home healthcare. This guidance is not intended to apply to other
settings  whose  primary  purpose  is  not  healthcare,  such  as  schools  or  worksites,
because  many  of  the  aspects  of  the  populations  and  feasible  countermeasures  will
differ  substantially  across  settings.  However,  elements  of  this  guidance  may  be
applicable  to  specific  sites  within  non-healthcare  settings  where  care  is  routinely
delivered (e.g. a medical clinic embedded within a workplace or school). HCP refers to
all persons, paid and unpaid, working in healthcare settings who have the potential for

exposure  to  patients  and/or  to  infectious  materials,  including  body  substances,
contaminated medical supplies and equipment, contaminated environmental surfaces,
or  contaminated  air.  HCP  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  physicians,  nurses,  nursing
assistants,  therapists,  technicians,  emergency  medical  service  personnel,  dental
personnel,  pharmacists,  laboratory  personnel,  autopsy  personnel,  students  and
trainees,  contractual  personnel,  home  healthcare  personnel,  and  persons  not  directly
involved  in  patient  care  (e.g.,  clerical,  dietary,  house-keeping,  laundry,  security,
maintenance,  billing,  chaplains,  and  volunteers)  but  potentially  exposed  to  infectious
agents  that  can  be  transmitted  to  and  from  HCP  and  patients.  This  guidance  is  not
intended to apply to persons outside of healthcare settings for reasons discussed in the
previous section. Influenza is primarily a community-based infection that is transmitted
in households and community settings. Each year, 5% to 20% of U.S. residents acquire
an influenza virus infection, and many will seek medical care in ambulatory healthcare
settings (e.g., pediatricians’ offices, urgent-care clinics). In addition, more than 200,000
persons,  on  average,  are  hospitalized  each  year  for  influenza-related  complications.
Healthcare-associated influenza infections can occur in any healthcare setting and are
most  common  when  influenza  is  also  circulating  in  the  community.  Therefore,  the
influenza prevention measures outlined in this guidance should be implemented in all
healthcare  settings.  Supplemental  measures  may  need  to  be  implemented  during
influenza  season  if  outbreaks  of  healthcare-associated  influenza  occur  within  certain
facilities,  such  as  long-term  care  facilities  and  hospitals  [refs:  Infection  Control
Measures  for  Preventing  and  Controlling  Influenza  Transmission  in  Long-Term  Care
Facilities]. Traditionally, influenza viruses have been thought to spread from person to
person primarily through large-particle respiratory droplet transmission (e.g., when an
infected  person  coughs  or  sneezes  near  a  susceptible  person).  Transmission  via
large-particle  droplets  requires  close  contact  between  source  and  recipient  persons,
because  droplets  generally  travel  only  short  distances  (approximately  6  feet  or  less)

through the air. Indirect contact transmission via hand transfer of influenza virus from
virus-contaminated  surfaces  or  objects  to  mucosal  surfaces  of  the  face  (e.g.,  nose,
mouth) may also occur. Airborne transmission via small particle aerosols in the vicinity
of  the  infectious  individual  may  also  occur;  however,  the  relative  contribution  of  the
different modes of influenza transmission is unclear. Airborne transmission over longer
distances, such as from one patient room to another has not been documented and is
thought  not  to  occur.  All  respiratory  secretions  and  bodily  fluids,  including  diarrheal
stools, of patients with influenza are considered to be potentially infectious; however,
the risk may vary by strain. Detection of influenza virus in blood or stool in influenza
infected  patients  is  very  uncommon.  Preventing  transmission  of  influenza  virus  and
other  infectious  agents  within  healthcare  settings  requires  a  multi-faceted  approach.
Spread of influenza virus can occur among patients, HCP, and visitors; in addition, HCP
may  acquire  influenza  from  persons  in  their  household  or  community.  The  core
prevention  strategies  include:  Successful  implementation  of  many,  if  not  all,  of  these
strategies  is  dependent  on  the  presence  of  clear  administrative  policies  and
organizational
 leadership
 that
 promote
 and
 facilitate
 adherence
 to
 these
recommendations  among  the  various  people  within  the  healthcare  setting,  including
patients,  visitors,  and  HCP.  These  administrative  measures  are  included  within  each
recommendation
 where
 appropriate.
 Furthermore,
 this
 guidance
 should
 be
implemented  in  the  context  of  a  comprehensive  infection  prevention  program  to
prevent transmission of all infectious agents among patients and HCP. 1. Promote and
administer  seasonal  influenza  vaccine  Annual  vaccination  is  the  most  important
measure to prevent seasonal influenza infection. Achieving high influenza vaccination
rates  of  HCP  and  patients  is  a  critical  step  in  preventing  healthcare  transmission  of
influenza from HCP to patients and from patients to HCP. According to current national
guidelines,  unless  contraindicated,  vaccinate  all  people  aged  6  months  and  older,
including HCP, patients and residents of long-term care facilities [refs: Prevention and

Control  of  Influenza  with  Vaccines  and  Seasonal  Influenza  Vaccination  Resources  for
Health Professionals]. Systematic strategies employed by some institutions to improve
HCP vaccination rates have included providing incentives, providing vaccine at no cost
to  HCP,  improving  access  (e.g.,  offering  vaccination  at  work  and  during  work  hours),
requiring  personnel  to  sign  declination  forms  to  acknowledge  that  they  have  been
educated  about  the  benefits  and  risks  of  vaccination,  and  mandating  influenza
vaccination for all HCP without contraindication. Many of these approaches have been
shown  to  increase  vaccination  rates;  tracking  influenza  vaccination  coverage  among
HCP can be an important component of a systematic approach to protecting patients
and  HCP.  Regardless  of  the  strategy  used,  strong  organizational  leadership  and  an
infrastructure  for  clear  and  timely  communication  and  education,  and  for  program
implementation,  have  been  common  elements  in  successful  programs.  More
information  on  different  HCP  vaccination  strategies  can  be  found  in  the  Appendix:
Influenza Vaccination Strategies. 2. Take Steps to Minimize Potential Exposures A range
of  administrative  policies  and  practices  can  be  used  to  minimize  influenza  exposures
before arrival, upon arrival, and throughout the duration of the visit to the healthcare
setting.  Measures  include  screening  and  triage  of  symptomatic  patients  and
implementation  of  respiratory  hygiene  and  cough  etiquette.  Respiratory  hygiene  and
cough  etiquette  are  measures  designed  to  minimize  potential  exposures  of  all
respiratory  pathogens,  including  influenza  virus,  in  healthcare  settings  and  should  be
adhered to by everyone – patients, visitors, and HCP – upon entry and continued for the
entire  duration  of  stay  in  healthcare  settings.  Before  Arrival  to  a  Healthcare  Setting
Upon  Entry  and  During  Visit  to  a  Healthcare  Setting  3.  Monitor  and  Manage  Ill
Healthcare Personnel HCP who develop fever and respiratory symptoms should be: HCP
who  develop  acute  respiratory  symptoms  without  fever  may  still  have  influenza
infection  and  should  be:  Facilities  and  organizations  providing  healthcare  services
should:  4.  Adhere  to  Standard  Precautions  During  the  care  of  any  patient,  all  HCP  in

every  healthcare  setting  should  adhere  to  standard  precautions,  which  are  the
foundation  for  preventing  transmission  of  infectious  agents  in  all  healthcare  settings.
Standard precautions assume that every person is potentially infected or colonized with
a pathogen that could be transmitted in the healthcare setting. Elements of standard
precautions that apply to patients with respiratory infections, including those caused by
the  influenza  virus,  are  summarized  below.  All  aspects  of  standard  precautions  (e.g.,
injection  safety)  are  not  emphasized  in  this  document  but  can  be  found  in  the  CDC
Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC)  guideline
titled Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents
in
 Healthcare
 Settings,
 Guidelines
 for
 Preventing
 Healthcare-Associated
Pneumonia and Guidelines for Hand Hygiene in Healthcare Settings Published 2002 pdf
icon[495 KB, 56 pages]. Hand Hygiene Gloves Gowns 5. Adhere to Droplet Precautions
6.  Use  Caution  when  Performing  Aerosol-Generating  Procedures  Some  procedures
performed  on  patients  with  suspected  or  confirmed  influenza  infection  may  be  more
likely  to  generate  higher  concentrations  of  infectious  respiratory  aerosols  than
coughing, sneezing, talking, or breathing. These procedures potentially put HCP at an
increased  risk  for  influenza  exposure.  Although  there  are  limited  data  available  on
influenza  transmission  related  to  such  aerosols,  many  authorities  [refs:  WHO,
recommend that additional precautions be used when such procedures are performed.
These  include  some  procedures  that  are  usually  planned  ahead  of  time,  such  as
bronchoscopy,  sputum  induction,  elective  intubation  and  extubation,  and  autopsies;
and  some  procedures  that  often  occur  in  unplanned,  emergent  settings  and  can  be
life-saving,  such  as  cardiopulmonary  resuscitation,  emergent  intubation  and  open
suctioning  of  airways.  Ideally,  a  combination  of  measures  should  be  used  to  reduce
exposures from these aerosol-generating procedures when performed on patients with
suspected  or  confirmed  influenza.  However,  it  is  appropriate  to  take  feasibility  into
account, especially in challenging emergent situations, where timeliness in performing

a  procedure  can  be  critical  to  achieving  a  good  patient  outcome.  Precautions  for
aerosol-generating procedures include: 7. Manage Visitor Access and Movement Within
the  Facility  Limit  visitors  for  patients  in  isolation  for  influenza  to  persons  who  are
necessary  for  the  patient’s  emotional  well-being  and  care.  Visitors  who  have  been  in
contact  with  the  patient  before  and  during  hospitalization  are  a  possible  source  of
influenza  for  other  patients,  visitors,  and  staff.  For  persons  with  acute  respiratory
symptoms, facilities should develop visitor restriction policies that consider location of
patient  being  visited  (e.g.,  oncology  units)  and  circumstances,  such  as  end-of-life
situations, where exemptions to the restriction may be considered at the discretion of
the facility. Regardless of restriction policy, all visitors should follow precautions listed
in the respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette section. Visits to patients in isolation for
influenza should be scheduled and controlled to allow for: 8. Monitor Influenza Activity
Healthcare  settings  should  establish  mechanisms  and  policies  by  which  HCP  are
promptly alerted about increased influenza activity in the community or if an outbreak
occurs within the facility and when collection of clinical specimens for viral culture may
help to inform public health efforts. Close communication and collaboration with local
and  state  health  authorities  is  recommended.  Policies  should  include  designations  of
specific  persons  within  the  healthcare  facility  who  are  responsible  for  communication
with  public  health  officials  and  dissemination  of  information  to  HCP.  9.  Implement
Environmental  Infection  Control  Detailed  information  on  environmental  cleaning  in
healthcare  settings  can  be  found  in  CDC’s  Guidelines  for  Environmental  Infection
Control  in  Health-Care  Facilities  and  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing
Transmission  of  Infectious  Agents  in  Healthcare  Settings  [section  IV.F.  Care  of  the
environment. Standard cleaning and disinfection procedures (e.g., using cleaners and
water  to  preclean  surfaces  prior  to  applying  disinfectants  to  frequently  touched
surfaces  or  objects  for  indicated  contact  times)  are  adequate  for  influenza  virus
environmental  control  in  all  settings  within  the  healthcare  facility,  including  those

patient-care areas in which aerosol-generating procedures are performed. Management
of  laundry,  food  service  utensils,  and  medical  waste  should  also  be  performed  in
accordance  with  standard  procedures.  There  are  no  data  suggesting  these  items  are
associated with influenza virus transmission when these items are properly managed.
Laundry and food service utensils should first be cleaned, then sanitized as appropriate.
Some  medical  waste  may  be  designated  as  regulated  or  biohazardous  waste  and
require special handling and disposal methods approved by the State authorities. 10.
Implement Engineering Controls Consider designing and installing engineering controls
to  reduce  or  eliminate  exposures  by  shielding  HCP  and  other  patients  from  infected
individuals. Examples of engineering controls include installing physical barriers such as
partitions in triage areas or curtains that are drawn between patients in shared areas.
Engineering  controls  may  also  be  important  to  reduce  exposures  related  to  specific
procedures  such  as  using  closed  suctioning  systems  for  airways  suction  in  intubated
patients.  Another  important  engineering  control  is  ensuring  that  appropriate
air-handling systems are installed and maintained in healthcare facilities. 11. Train and
Educate  Healthcare  Personnel  Healthcare  administrators  should  ensure  that  all  HCP
receive  job-  or  task-specific  education  and  training  on  preventing  transmission  of
infectious agents, including influenza, associated with healthcare during orientation to
the healthcare setting. This information should be updated periodically during ongoing
education  and  training  programs.  Competency  should  be  documented  initially  and
repeatedly, as appropriate, for the specific staff positions. A system should be in place
to ensure that HCP employed by outside employers meet these education and training
requirements through programs offered by the outside employer or by participation in
the
 healthcare
 facility’s
 program.
 12.
 Administer
 Antiviral
 Treatment
 and
Chemoprophylaxis of Patients and Healthcare Personnel when Appropriate Refer to the
CDC web site for the most current recommendations on the use of antiviral agents for
treatment  and  chemoprophylaxis.  Both  HCP  and  patients  should  be  reminded  that

persons  treated  with  influenza  antiviral  medications  continue  to  shed  influenza  virus
while  on  treatment.  Thus,  hand  hygiene,  respiratory  hygiene  and  cough  etiquette
practices  should  continue  while  on  treatment.  13.  Considerations  for  Healthcare
Personnel  at  Higher  Risk  for  Complications  of  Influenza  HCP  at  higher  risk  for
complications  from  influenza  infection  include  pregnant  women  and  women  up  to  2
weeks postpartum, persons 65 years old and older, and persons with chronic diseases
such as asthma, heart disease, diabetes, diseases that suppress the immune system,
certain  other  chronic  medical  conditions,  and  morbid  obesity.  Vaccination  and  early
treatment  with  antiviral  medications  are  very  important  for  HCP  at  higher  risk  for
influenza  complications  because  they  can  decrease  the  risk  of  hospitalizations  and
deaths. HCP at higher risk for complications should check with their healthcare provider
if  they  become  ill  so  that  they  can  receive  early  treatment.  Some  HCP  may  identify
themselves as being at higher risk of complications, and express concerns about their
risks. These concerns should be discussed and the importance of careful adherence to
these  guidelines  should  be  emphasized.  Work  accommodations  to  avoid  potentially
high-risk  exposure  scenarios,  such  as  performing  or  assisting  with  aerosol-generating
procedures  on  patients  with  suspected  or  confirmed  influenza,  may  be  considered  in
some settings, particularly for HCP with more severe or unstable underlying disease.1
Information about Facemasks: Information about Respirators: Key Facts about Influenza
Clinical Information (signs and symptoms, modes of transmission, viral shedding) World
Health Organization (WHO). Epidemic- and pandemic-prone acute respiratory diseases –
Infection  prevention  and  control  in  health  care  Infection  Control  Measures  for
Preventing  and  Controlling  Influenza  Transmission  in  Long-Term  Care  Facilities
Preventing Opportunistic Infections in HSCT/Bone Marrow Transplant Recipients (p. 18)
Seasonal  Influenza  Vaccination  Resources  for  Health  Professionals  Guidance  for
Prevention  and  Control  of  Influenza  in  the  Peri-  and  Postpartum  Settings  Clinical
Description  &  Lab  Diagnosis  of  Influenza  Treatment  (Antiviral  Drugs)  Influenza

Vaccination  Strategies  Veterans  Health  Administration  Influenza  Manualpdf  icon  ¹In
considering this guidance, employers should familiarize themselves with the Americans
with  Disabilities  Act  of  1990  (Pub.  L.  101-336)  (ADA),  which  may  impact  how  they
implement  this  guidance.  Details  specific  to  the  ADA  and  influenza  preparedness  are
provided on the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission web site. To receive
weekly email updates about Seasonal Flu, enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/infectioncontrol/healthcaresettings.htm
