Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  More  than  800,000  people  in  the  U.S.  live  with  end-stage
kidney disease, and more than half of them belong to a racial or ethnic minority group.
High blood pressure and diabetes are medical conditions that increase a person’s risk of
developing end-stage kidney disease. Some people with end-stage kidney disease have
a  kidney  transplant,  but  most  receive  dialysis  treatments  (a  process  of  filtering  and
removing  waste  products  and  excess  fluid  from  the  body).  Dialysis  treatment  puts
patients at higher risk for serious infections because it requires frequent access to the
bloodstream using needles or catheters (soft plastic tubes inserted into large veins). If
germs  get  into  a  patient’s  blood,  they  can  cause  serious  infections  that  may  lead  to
sepsis (a potentially life-threatening immune system response) and even death. Many
germs can cause dialysis bloodstream infections. The most common is a group of germs
called Staphylococcus aureus (staph). Staph infections can be difficult to treat and may
be deadly. More than 14,000 bloodstream infections occurred in patients on dialysis in
the U.S. in 2020, and more than one in three were caused by staph. The risk for staph
bloodstream  infection  is  strongly  affected  by  how  a  person’s  blood  circulation  is
connected to the dialysis machine, known as vascular access type. Staph bloodstream
infections  happen  more  often  in  Black  and  Hispanic  patients  on  dialysis  than  White
patients on dialysis, although other factors besides race and ethnicity may be involved.
There are more staph bloodstream infections in areas of the U.S. with higher poverty,
more  household  crowding,  and  lower  education  levels  (from  U.S.  census  data).  The
good news is that bloodstream infections in patients on dialysis have gone down since
2014  with  the  widespread  use  of  proven  practices  to  prevent  and  control  infections.
Preventing infections among patients receiving dialysis requires a broad and equitable
approach to prevention and care of kidney disease for people from all racial, ethnic, and

socioeconomic*  groups,  including:  *A  way  of  describing  people  often  based  on  their
level of education, income, place of residence, and job type.  People on dialysis are at
risk for staph bloodstream infections, which can be serious or fatal.  Remove barriers to
chronic kidney disease care for all people.  Increase use of lower-risk vascular access
types for dialysis, such as fistulas and grafts.  People on dialysis are at risk for staph
bloodstream  infections,  which  can  be  serious  or  fatal.    Remove  barriers  to  chronic
kidney disease care for all people.   Increase use of lower-risk vascular access types for
dialysis,  such  as  fistulas  and  grafts.   More  than  800,000  people  in  the  U.S.  live  with
end-stage  kidney  disease,  and  more  than  half  of  them  belong  to  a  racial  or  ethnic
minority group. High blood pressure and diabetes are medical conditions that increase
a  person’s  risk  of  developing  end-stage  kidney  disease.  Some  people  with  end-stage
kidney  disease  have  a  kidney  transplant,  but  most  receive  dialysis  treatments  (a
process  of  filtering  and  removing  waste  products  and  excess  fluid  from  the  body).
Dialysis treatment puts patients at higher risk for serious infections because it requires
frequent  access  to  the  bloodstream  using  needles  or  catheters  (soft  plastic  tubes
inserted into large veins). If germs get into a patient’s blood, they can cause serious
infections  that  may  lead  to  sepsis  (a  potentially  life-threatening  immune  system
response) and even death. Many germs can cause dialysis bloodstream infections. The
most  common  is  a  group  of  germs  called  Staphylococcus  aureus  (staph).  Staph
infections can be difficult to treat and may be deadly. More than 14,000 bloodstream
infections  occurred  in  patients  on  dialysis  in  the  U.S.  in  2020,  and  more  than  one  in
three  were  caused  by  staph.  The  risk  for  staph  bloodstream  infection  is  strongly
affected  by  how  a  person’s  blood  circulation  is  connected  to  the  dialysis  machine,
known  as  vascular  access  type.  Staph  bloodstream  infections  happen  more  often  in
Black and Hispanic patients on dialysis than White patients on dialysis, although other
factors besides race and ethnicity may be involved. There are more staph bloodstream
infections in areas of the U.S. with higher poverty, more household crowding, and lower

education levels (from U.S. census data). The good news is that bloodstream infections
in patients on dialysis have gone down since 2014 with the widespread use of proven
practices  to  prevent  and  control  infections.  Preventing  infections  among  patients
receiving  dialysis  requires  a  broad  and  equitable  approach  to  prevention  and  care  of
kidney disease for people from all racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic* groups, including:
*A way of describing people often based on their level of education, income, place of
residence, and job type. High risk for infection: Infections are common among patients
on  dialysis.  These  patients  are  more  likely  to  get  a  staph  bloodstream  infection  than
people not on dialysis. Staph bloodstream infections can be serious or lead to death,
and some infections are resistant to some of the most common antibiotics used to treat
them, making the drugs ineffective. Racial and ethnic gaps: End-stage kidney disease
affects Black and Hispanic people more than White people. Black and Hispanic people
have greater numbers of medical conditions, such as high blood pressure and diabetes,
which  increase  their  risk  of  developing  end-stage  kidney  disease.  There  are  also
differences in the types of therapies and treatments that Black and Hispanic patients
receive for end-stage kidney disease. In addition, more Black and Hispanic patients on
dialysis  get  staph  bloodstream  infections  than  White  patients  on  dialysis.  Social  and
economic  factors:  Lack  of  prevention  and  care  of  kidney  disease,  socioeconomic  and
insurance status, and lack of patient education about treatment options are all factors
in end-stage kidney disease treatment differences. Catheter use: Vascular access type
is  the  major  risk  factor  for  bloodstream  infections  regardless  of  race,  ethnicity,  or
socioeconomic status. There are three access types: fistula, graft, and central venous
catheter. People with any access type can develop an infection, but fistulas have the
lowest risk of infection and central venous catheters have the highest risk of infection.
Adults on dialysis are 100 times more likely to have a staph bloodstream infection than
adults  not  on  dialysis.  Rate  per  100,000  people  per  year  Adults  not  on  dialysis:  42  
Adults on dialysis (100 times more likely to have a staph bloodstream infection): 4,248 

Race,  ethnicity,  and  socioeconomic  factors  can  lead  to  more  dialysis  bloodstream
infections.  Socioeconomic  Factors:   Poverty   Household  Crowding   Limited  Education  
Staph  Bloodstream  Infection  Rates  by  Race/Ethnicity*   Rate  per  100,000  patients  on
dialysis  per  year  Black:  4,751   Hispanic:  4,500   White:  3,866  *2017–2020  Emerging
Infections  Program  surveillance  data   Adults  on  dialysis  are  100  times  more  likely  to
have a staph bloodstream infection than adults not on dialysis. Rate per 100,000 people
per year Adults not on dialysis: 42  Adults on dialysis (100 times more likely to have a
staph  bloodstream  infection):  4,248   Race,  ethnicity,  and  socioeconomic  factors  can
lead  to  more  dialysis  bloodstream  infections.  Socioeconomic  Factors:   Poverty  
Household  Crowding   Limited  Education   Staph  Bloodstream  Infection  Rates  by
Race/Ethnicity*  Rate per 100,000 patients on dialysis per year Black: 4,751  Hispanic:
4,500   White:  3,866  *2017–2020  Emerging  Infections  Program  surveillance  data  
Reducing the use of central venous catheters for people on dialysis can help prevent
bloodstream infections. Risk of Bloodstream Infections  Low Risk: Fistula  Medium Risk:
Graft  High Risk: Central Venous Catheter  Bloodstream infections are preventable in all
patients on dialysis. Actions by healthcare providers, dialysis providers, dialysis partner
organizations, and public health professionals can help prevent these infections. Extra
attention  should  be  focused  on  people  from  groups  experiencing  racial,  ethnic,  and
socioeconomic  differences  in  staph  bloodstream  infections.  Actions  include:  Better
information  can  lead  to  more  effective  infection  prevention  programs  and  catheter
reduction  policies  that  will  benefit  everyone  on  dialysis.  More  data  about  dialysis
bloodstream  infections  in  patients  of  different  races,  ethnicities,  and  socioeconomic
statuses  can  be  gained  by:  Bloodstream  infections  are  preventable  in  all  patients  on
dialysis.  Actions  by  healthcare  providers,  dialysis  providers,  dialysis  partner
organizations, and public health professionals can help prevent these infections. Extra
attention  should  be  focused  on  people  from  groups  experiencing  racial,  ethnic,  and
socioeconomic  differences  in  staph  bloodstream  infections.  Actions  include:  Better

information  can  lead  to  more  effective  infection  prevention  programs  and  catheter
reduction  policies  that  will  benefit  everyone  on  dialysis.  More  data  about  dialysis
bloodstream  infections  in  patients  of  different  races,  ethnicities,  and  socioeconomic
statuses can be gained by: *A way of describing people often based on their level of
education,  income,  place  of  residence,  and  job  type.  Get  email  updates  about  Vital
Signs VITAL SIGNS RESOURCES

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/dialysis-infections/index.html
