Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  July  15,  2022  /  71(28);889–893  Jayden  McCall1;
Laura Rothfeldt, DVM2; Kelly Giesbrecht, DVM3; Amanda Hunt3; Leah Bauck, MPH4; Joni
Scheftel,  DVM4;  Rachael  Birn,  MPH5,6;  Bryan  Buss,  DVM5,7;  Betsy  Schroeder,  DVM8;
Thomas  E.  Haupt,  MS9;  Rachel  Klos,  DVM9;  Anne  Straily,  DVM10  (View  author
affiliations) What is already known about this topic? Toxoplasmosis, a zoonotic parasitic
disease that can result in severe adverse outcomes, is not a nationally notifiable illness
in the United States; no national level surveillance data are available. What is added by
this  report?  In  2021,  toxoplasmosis  was  reportable  in  eight  states.  Among  six  states
that participated in a surveillance evaluation, case definitions varied considerably, and
a  need  for  development  and  implementation  of  a  standardized  case  definition  was
identified.  What  are  the  implications  for  public  health  practice?  Implementing  a
standardized  case  definition  would  help  ensure  that  cases  are  counted  consistently.
Toxoplasmosis  surveillance  could  increase  awareness  among  physicians  and  public
health personnel but is dependent upon health department resources. Identifying newly
acquired  cases  is  important  for  surveillance  but  is  challenging  because  most  acute
cases
 among
 immunocompetent
 persons
 (including
 pregnant
 women)
 are
asymptomatic, disease among immunocompromised persons are likely reactivations of
latent  disease,  and  congenital  infections  might  not  manifest  until  later  in  life.  Views
equals page views plus PDF downloads Toxoplasmosis is caused by infection with the
zoonotic  parasite  Toxoplasma  gondii.  Although  disease  tends  to  be  mild  (e.g.,
self-limiting  influenza-like  symptoms)  or  asymptomatic  in  immunocompetent  persons,
toxoplasmosis  is  more  severe  in  immunocompromised  persons,  who  can  develop
potentially  fatal  encephalopathy  (1).  In  addition,  primary  infections  acquired  during
pregnancy might result in a range of adverse outcomes, including fetal ocular infection,

cranial and neurologic deformities, stillbirth, and miscarriage (1,2). An estimated 11%
of  the  U.S.  population  aged  ≥6  years  are  seropositive  for  toxoplasmosis,  based  on
analysis of sera collected through the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
during 2011–2014 (3). Toxoplasmosis is not a nationally notifiable disease in the United
States, and currently no national public health surveillance data are available; however,
it is reportable in eight states. To better understand how surveillance data are collected
and  used,  reviews  of  state-level  toxoplasmosis  surveillance  were  conducted  during
June–July  2021  using  semistructured  interviews  with  health  officials  in  six  states
(Arkansas,  Kentucky,  Minnesota,  Nebraska,  Pennsylvania,  and  Wisconsin)  where
toxoplasmosis is currently reportable. Why or when toxoplasmosis became reportable
could  not  be  determined,  and  many  of  the  states  had  limited  capacity  to  respond  to
reported  cases.  Case  definitions  varied  considerably  in  terms  of  clinical  description,
laboratory  criteria,  and  case  classification  (i.e.,  confirmed,  probable,  or  suspect),
limiting  disease  estimates  and  comparisons  among  states.  Implementation  of  a
standardized  case  definition  would  help  ensure  that  cases  are  counted  consistently,
enabling  better  use  of  surveillance  data  to  characterize  disease.  Identifying  newly
acquired  cases  is  challenging  because  most  acute  cases  among  immunocompetent
persons
 (including
 pregnant
 women)
 are
 asymptomatic,
 disease
 among
immunocompromised  persons  is  likely  reactivation  of  latent  disease,  and  congenital
infections might not manifest until later in life. Members of the family Felidae (cats) are
definitive hosts for T. gondii. Humans can be infected through various routes, including
fecal-oral  contamination  from  cats;  consumption  of  undercooked  contaminated  meat,
contaminated  unwashed  fruits  or  vegetables,  contaminated  water,  and  unpasteurized
milk;  vertical  transmission  from  an  infected  mother;  and  organ  transplantation.
Toxoplasmosis  is  likely  underdiagnosed  in  the  United  States:  approximately  90%  of
infections  among  immunocompetent  persons  are  asymptomatic  or  nonspecific  and
self-limiting  (1);  when  symptoms  are  present,  they  can  potentially  mimic  other  more

frequently  encountered  illnesses,  including  influenza  and  tickborne-diseases  such  as
Lyme  disease  or  anaplasmosis;  thus,  physician  awareness  and  clinical  suspicion  of
toxoplasmosis might be low, resulting in delays in or missed opportunities for diagnosis
and  case  identification  (4,5).  No  national  maternal  toxoplasmosis  screening  program
currently exists, and most infants born with congenital toxoplasmosis appear normal at
birth  (1,2).  Because  reactivation  of  toxoplasmosis  during  immunocompromise  can  be
rapidly  fatal,  and  outcomes  of  congenital  infection  can  be  severe,  toxoplasmosis
surveillance  could  help  improve  awareness  and  understanding  of  disease  prevalence
and  transmission  routes  and  identify  opportunities  for  prevention  and  control.  States
where toxoplasmosis is reportable were identified using the State Reportable Conditions
Assessment  query  tool  on  the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists  (CSTE)
website* and supplemented by reviewing reportable diseases lists accessed from state
health  department  websites  for  inclusion  of  toxoplasmosis.  A  modified  version  of  a
qualitative  questionnaire  used  for  Chagas  disease  surveillance  (6)  was  developed  to
identify  why  toxoplasmosis  was  designated  a  reportable  condition  in  the  state,  how
cases are reported and by whom, what actions are taken after case identification, how
surveillance  data  are  used  and  disseminated,  whether  nonhuman  data  are  collected
and used, and whether formal toxoplasmosis maternal screening programs are in place
(6). State public health veterinarians were contacted by email and invited to participate
either by telephone or virtual interview or to complete the questionnaire. The purpose
and scope of the project, as well as a copy of the questionnaire, were included in this
initial  email.  This  activity  was  reviewed  by  CDC  and  was  conducted  consistent  with
applicable federal law and policy.† As of April 2021, toxoplasmosis is reportable in eight
states (Arkansas, Delaware, Hawaii, Kentucky, Minnesota, Nebraska, Pennsylvania, and
Wisconsin); among these states, public health personnel from six (Arkansas, Kentucky,
Minnesota,  Nebraska,  Pennsylvania,  and  Wisconsin)  agreed  to  participate  and  were
interviewed. The historic dates when toxoplasmosis became reportable and the reasons

for initiating surveillance could not be determined. Toxoplasmosis had been reportable
for as long as could be remembered and reviewing historical case data could not further
elucidate  a  starting  date.  Several  possible  reasons  were  suggested  for  why
toxoplasmosis was made reportable, including monitoring disease prevalence, a need
to identify the source of infection, the effect of toxoplasmosis on pregnancy, congenital
transmission, and outbreak identification. In addition, whether any substantial changes
had  occurred  in  how  surveillance  data  were  collected  since  toxoplasmosis  became
reportable also could not be determined. Case definitions were provided by the states
and  varied  considerably  in  both  clinical  and  laboratory  criteria  and  how  cases  are
classified (Table). Variations in clinical descriptions included a separate description for
immunocompromised persons (all states except Arkansas and Minnesota); a separate
description  for  infection  acquired  during  pregnancy  (Kentucky,  Nebraska,  and
Wisconsin);  further  separation  based  on  timing  of  infection  during  pregnancy  (early
versus  late;  Pennsylvania);  and  a  category  for  chronic  infection  status  (Minnesota).
Signs  and  symptoms  used  in  each  clinical  description  category  were  similar  but  not
consistent.  Variations  in  laboratory  criteria  included  whether  paired  or  sequential
antibody testing was confirmatory (all states except Arkansas and Pennsylvania); single
antibody titers as presumptive/suggestive criteria (Arkansas and Kentucky); criteria for
congenital infection in infants (Kentucky, Nebraska, and Wisconsin); and a criterion that
included  testing  at  a  reference  laboratory  (Minnesota).  Among  the  variations  in  case
classification  were  that  Nebraska  and  Wisconsin  had  only  a  “confirmed”  case
classification and no “probable” classification, Pennsylvania also included a “suspect”
classification,  and  Minnesota’s  case  classifications  specified  “confirmed,”  “probable,”
and “chronic.” After notification of a case, all states attempt to investigate to determine
exposure and clinical history; however, investigation depends on resource availability.
Laboratories are the primary reporting source in all states, although physicians might
also  report  cases.  No  state  reported  having  formal  maternal  screening  programs  for

toxoplasmosis;  however,  maternal  screening  is  frequently  recorded  as  the  reason  for
testing on case report forms submitted to the state health department (Minnesota). No
states  collected  nonhuman  data  as  a  routine  part  of  toxoplasmosis  surveillance.  The
Nebraska state public health veterinarian indicated that their office receives data from
the  state  veterinary  diagnostic  laboratory  about  toxoplasmosis  diagnosed  in  animals.
Although such reports contain the animal owner’s city and zip code, they do not name
the owner and are not formally integrated with the human case surveillance program.
Dissemination of surveillance data occurs through public reports posted to state health
department
 websites
 (Arkansas,
 Minnesota,
 and
 Wisconsin)
 or
 updates
 to
toxoplasmosis  case  counts  in  annual  disease  tables  available  on  the  state  health
department website (Kentucky). In two states (Nebraska and Pennsylvania), reports are
distributed  internally  within  the  agency,  but  not  externally.  Top  Standardized
surveillance case definitions provide a common, accepted set of criteria to ensure that
cases  of  disease  are  classified  and  counted  consistently,  irrespective  of  jurisdiction.§
Surveillance data provide an evidence base about disease prevalence, including who is
affected,  where,  and  how,  to  guide  the  development,  implementation,  funding,
monitoring, and evaluation of disease control activities¶ (7). Important differences were
identified in case classifications and laboratory and clinical criteria used in surveillance
case  definitions,  making  it  difficult  to  compare  case  counts  or  disease  prevalence
among  states.  Toxoplasmosis  poses  unique  challenges  for  public  health  surveillance,
primarily in identifying acute illnesses, which are the more important target for public
health  action  (e.g.,  identifying  and  mitigating  the  source  of  infection).  Once  infected,
persons  are  presumed  to  remain  infected  for  life  (even  with  treatment**)  and  likely
maintain  detectable  antibody  levels,  even  without  reverting  to  or  showing  signs  of
active
 disease
 (latent
 or
 chronic
 infections)
 (1).
 Toxoplasmosis
 among
immunocompromised  persons  more  commonly  represents  reactivation  of  latent
infection  rather  than  newly  acquired  infection  (1).  Congenital  infections  might  not

manifest  until  later  in  life.  Commercially  available  serology  assays,  which  typically
examine  immunoglobulin  (Ig)  G  and  IgM  antibody  levels,  cannot  reliably  differentiate
between  acute  and  chronic  infection:  IgM  antibodies  might  remain  elevated  for  ≥18
months  after  infection  (8),  and  IgG  might  be  present  during  acute  infections  (9).  A
combination  of  advanced  serologic  tests,  such  as  IgG  avidity  testing  or  IgA  or  IgE
antibody  levels,  available  only  through  a  reference  laboratory,††  are  necessary  to
serologically  differentiate  between  acute  and  chronic  infection.  Direct  detection
methods such as polymerase chain reaction or histologic examination of tissue sections
or  smears  of  body  fluid  are  more  definitive  in  demonstrating  active  infection  but  are
most useful in immunocompromised patients (1). The findings in this report are subject
to at least two limitations. First, only six of the eight states that conduct toxoplasmosis
surveillance  participated  in  the  assessment;  case  definitions  or  processes  for
toxoplasmosis  surveillance  in  Delaware  or  Hawaii  were  not  able  to  be  reviewed.
Because of the length of time toxoplasmosis has been reportable in these states, most
historic questions could not be answered. Second, this evaluation was conducted during
the  SARS-CoV-2  B.1.617.2  (Delta)  variant  surge  of  the  ongoing  COVID-19  pandemic,
which might have affected staff member availability to gather historical information on
procedures
 for
 toxoplasmosis
 investigation
 and
 response.
 Developing
 and
implementing  a  standardized  case  definition  in  states  where  toxoplasmosis  is
reportable could help ensure that surveillance data are collected in a standardized way
and establish common goals for surveillance. As a result of this review, the participating
states  have  decided  to  proactively  develop  a  CSTE  position  statement  for  a
standardized  surveillance  case  definition  for  toxoplasmosis.  Top  Ruth  Lynfield,
Minnesota
 Department
 of
 Health.
 Top
 Corresponding
 author:
 Anne
 Straily,
astraily@cdc.gov,
 404-718-1422.
 Top
 1Department
 of
 Diagnostic
Medicine/Pathobiology,  College  of  Veterinary  Medicine,  Kansas  State  University,
Manhattan,  Kansas;  2Zoonotic  Diseases  Section,  Arkansas  Department  of  Health;

3Kentucky Department for Public Health; 4Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Prevention
and  Control  Division,  Minnesota  Department  of  Health;  5Nebraska  Department  of
Health and Human Services; 6Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, Atlanta,
Georgia;  7Division  of  State  and  Local  Readiness,  Center  for  Preparedness  and
Response, CDC; 8Pennsylvania Department of Health; 9Wisconsin Department of Health
Services; 10Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, CDC.
Top All authors have completed and submitted the International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential conflicts
of interest were disclosed. Top * https://www.cste.org/group/SRCAQueryRes † 45 C.F.R.
part 46; 21 C.F.R. part 56. § https://ndc.services.cdc.gov/ (Accessed March 2, 2022). ¶
https://www.cdc.gov/nndss/about/index.html
 (Accessed
 March
 2,
 2022).
 **
https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/toxoplasmosis/prevent.html;
https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/toxoplasmosis/health_professionals/index.html
 ††
https://www.sutterhealth.org/services/lab-pathology/toxoplasma-serology-laboratory
Top  Top  Abbreviations:  Ig  =  immunoglobulin;  PCR  =  polymerase  chain  reaction;  T.
gondii = Toxoplasmosis gondii.
* Asymptomatic persons with laboratory evidence of presumptive infection are counted
as a probable case at the time of initial report.
† Demonstration of IgM antibody in adults does not meet case definition. Top Suggested
citation  for  this  article:  McCall  J,  Rothfeldt  L,  Giesbrecht  K,  et  al.  Public  Health
Surveillance and Reporting for Human Toxoplasmosis — Six States, 2021. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2022;71:889–893. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm7128a1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 

provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7128a1.htm
