Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  The  following  statement
supplements and updates certain
 sections of two
previous statements on hepatitis B virus prophylaxis (MMWR
 1981;30:423-35 and
MMWR 1982;31:317-28 {1,2}). Those statements should be consulted
 regarding
preexposure use of hepatitis B vaccine and prophylaxis of hepatitis
 A.  INTRODUCTION  Prophylactic treatment to prevent hepatitis B (HB) infection
 after
exposure to hepatitis B virus (HBV) should be considered in several
situations: perinatal exposure of an infant born to a hepatitis B
 surface
antigen (HBsAg)-positive mother, accidental percutaneous or
 permucosal
exposure to HBsAg-positive blood, or sexual exposure to an
 HBsAg-positive
person. In each of these settings, the risk of HB infection is
 known to be
high and justifies preventive measures. Previous recommendations
 for
postexposure prophylaxis have relied on passive immunization with
 specific
hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) (1). However, the recent

 demonstration of
high efficacy of HB vaccine combined with HBIG in preventing
 chronic HB
infection in infants of HBsAg-positive mothers requires the
 revision of
recommendations  for  postexposure  prophylaxis  (3)  (Table  1).   Passive  immunization
with HBIG alone has been partially
 effective in
preventing clinical HB in studies of medical personnel after
 needlestick
accidents (4) and sexual exposure to partners with acute HB (5). In
 addition,
HBIG prophylaxis has been shown to significantly reduce the
 percentage of
infants who become chronic HBV carriers after perinatal exposure to
 HBsAg-
positive mothers (6). For perinatal and needlestick exposures,
 however, HBIG
alone is only about 75% effective even when given very soon after
 exposure,
may provide only temporary protection, and is costly (over $150 per
 adult
dose).  With the development of HB vaccine, the possibility arose that
 HB
vaccine, alone or in combination with HBIG, might be useful for
 postexposure
prophylaxis. Studies have shown that response to HB vaccine is not

 impaired
by concurrent administration of HBIG and that the combination of HB
 vaccine
and one dose of HBIG produces immediate and sustained high levels
 of
protective antibody to the hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs)
 (7). A
recent study examining the efficacy of HB vaccine combined with a
 single dose
of HBIG in preventing perinatal transmission from HBsAg carrier
 mothers who
were also positive for hepatitis B "e" antigen (HBeAg) showed this
combination to be highly effective in preventing the HBV carrier
 state in
infants and significantly more effective than multiple doses of
 HBIG alone
(3).  PERINATAL TRANSMISSION  Transmission from mother to infant during birth is one
of the
 most
efficient modes of HBV transmission. If the mother is positive for
 both HBsAg
and HBeAg, about 80%-90% of infants will become infected. Although
 infection
is rarely symptomatic in the acute phase, approximately 90% of
 these infected
infants will become chronic HBV carriers. It has been estimated
 that 25% of

these chronic carriers may die of cirrhosis or primary
 hepatocellular
carcinoma (3). In addition, such persons are infectious, and female
 carriers
may subsequently perpetuate the cycle of perinatal transmission. If
 the
HBsAg-positive carrier mother is HBeAg-negative or if anti-HBe is
 present,
transmission occurs in less than 25% and 12% of cases,
 respectively. Such
transmission rarely leads to chronic HBV carriage; however, severe
 acute
disease, including fatal fulminant hepatitis in the neonate, has
 been
reported (8,9). Even if perinatal infection does not occur, the
 infant may be
at risk of subsequent infection from other family contacts. For
 these
reasons, prophylaxis of infants from all HBsAg-positive mothers is
 recom-
mended,  regardless  of  the  mother's  HBeAg  or  anti-HBe  status.   The  primary  goal  of
postexposure prophylaxis for exposed
 infants is
prevention of HBV carrier state. In addition, there is a need to
 prevent the
rare occurrence of severe clinical hepatitis in some of these
 infants. Admin-

istration of 0.5 ml HBIG to an infant of an HBsAg, HBeAg-positive
 mother soon
after birth and repeated at 3 months and 6 months reduces the
 probability of
chronic infection from about 90% to about 25% (efficacy about 75%).
 The con-
current use of HB vaccine and various combinations of HBIG
 increases the
efficacy to close to 90%. Since approximately 5% of perinatal
 infection may
occur in utero, it appears likely that no form of postnatal
 prophylaxis will
be 100% effective in this circumstance.  Concurrent HBIG and vaccine administration
does not appear to
 interfere
with vaccine efficacy. HB vaccine has been shown to be equally
 immunogenic in
neonates, whether given in 10-ug or 20-ug doses. The use of HB
 vaccine in
combination with HBIG in the perinatal setting has the advantages
 of
increasing efficacy, eliminating the need for the second and third
 doses of
HBIG, and providing long-term immunity to those who are not
 infected during
the  perinatal  period.   Maternal  Screening   Since  efficacy  of  this  regimen  depends  on
administering HBIG on

 the day
of birth, it is vital that HBsAg-positive mothers be identified
 before
delivery. Mothers belonging to groups known to be at high risk of
 HB
infection (Table 2) should be tested routinely for HBsAg during a
 prenatal
visit. If a mother belonging to a high-risk group has not been
 screened
prenatally, HBsAg screening should be done at the time of delivery
 or as soon
as  possible  thereafter.   Management  of  HBsAg-Positive  Mothers  and  Their  Newborns  
The appropriate obstetric and pediatric staff should be
 notified directly
of HBsAg-positive mothers, so the staff may take appropriate
 precautions to
protect themselves and other patients from infectious material,
 blood, and
secretions, and so the neonate may receive therapy without delay
 after birth.  Recent studies in Taiwan and the United States have confirmed
 the
efficacy of the following regimen (Table 3). Other schedules have
 also been
effective (3,10,11). The major consideration for all these regimens
 is the
need to give HBIG as soon as possible after the infant has
 physiologically

stablized  after  delivery.   HBIG  (0.5  ml)  should  be  administered  intramuscularly  (IM)
after
physiologic stabilization of the infant and preferably within 12
 hours of
birth. HBIG efficacy decreases markedly if treatment is delayed
 beyond 48
hours. HB vaccine should be administered IM in three doses of 0.5
 ml of
vaccine (10 ug) each. The first dose should be given within 7 days
 of birth
and may be given concurrently with HBIG but at a separate site. The
 second
and third doses should be given 1 month and 6 months, respectively,
 after the
first (Table 1). HBsAg testing at 6 months may be done for
 counseling
purposes, since HBsAg-positivity at 6 months indicates a
 therapeutic failure,
and the third vaccine dose need not be given if HBsAg-positivity is
 found. If
a mother's HBsAg-positive status is not discovered until after
 delivery,
prophylaxis should still be administered if a venous (not cord)
 blood sample
from the infant is HBsAg-negative. Testing for HBsAg and anti-HBs
 is recom-

mended at 12-15 months to monitor the final success or failure of
 therapy. If
HBsAg is found, it is likely the child is a chronic carrier. If
 HBsAg is not
detectible, and anti-HBs is present, the child has been protected.
 Since
maternal antibody to the core antigen (anti-HBc) may persist for
 more than 1
year, testing for anti-HBc may be difficult to interpret during
 this period.
HB vaccine is an inactivated product, and it is presumed that it
 will not
interfere with other simultaneously administered childhood vaccines
 (12).
HBIG administered at birth should not interfere with oral polio and
diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccines administered at about 2
 months of age
(Table 3).  ACUTE EXPOSURE TO BLOOD CONTAINING HBsAg  There are no prospective
studies directly testing the efficacy
 of a
combination of HBIG and HB vaccine in preventing clinical HB
 following
percutaneous or mucous-membrane exposure to HBV. However, since
 health-care
workers at risk to such accidents are candidates for HB vaccine and
 since

combined HBIG plus vaccine is more effective than HBIG alone in
 perinatal
exposures, it is reasonable to recommend both HB vaccine and HBIG
 after such
exposure. This combination will provide prolonged immunity to
 subsequent
exposures and may also increase efficacy in preventing HB in such
 post-
exposure situations. In addition, because the second dose of HBIG
 is not
considered necessary if the vaccine is used, the cost of
 combination treat-
ment is usually less than that of two HBIG doses alone. If exposure
 to blood
occurs in situations where the HBsAg status of the blood is
 unknown, refer to
"Immune Globulins for Protection against Viral Hepatitis" (1). If
 HBsAg
testing reveals the source of the blood to be positive, the
 following
treatment  schedule  should  be  instituted  as  soon  as  possible.   For  percutaneous
(needlestick), ocular, or mucous-membrane
 exposure to
blood known to contain HBsAg and for human bites from HBsAg
 carriers that
penetrate the skin, a single dose of HBIG (0.06 ml/kg or 5.0 ml for
 adults)

should be given as soon as possible after exposure and within 24
 hours if
possible. HB vaccine 1 ml (20 ug) should be given IM at a separate
 site as
soon as possible, but within 7 days of exposure, with the second
 and third
doses given 1 month and 6 months, respectively, after the first
 (Table 1). If
HBIG is unavailable, immunoglobulin (IG {formerly ISG or "gamma
 globulin"})
may be given in an equivalent dosage (0.06 ml/kg or 5.0 ml for
 adults). If an
individual has received at least two doses of HB vaccine before an
 accidental
exposure, no treatment is necessary if serologic tests show
 adequate levels
(> 10 S/N by RIA) of anti-HBs. For persons who choose not to
 receive HB
vaccine, the previously recommended two-dose HBIG regimen may be
 used  (1).   HBIG  FOR  SEXUAL  CONTACTS  OF  PERSONS  WITH  ACUTE  HBV  INFECTION  
Sexual contacts of persons with acute HB infection are at
 increased risk
of acquiring HB infection. Two published studies have assessed the
 value of
postexposure prophylaxis for regular sexual contacts of persons
 with acute HB
infection. One showed that HBIG was significantly more effective

 than IG that
contained no measureable anti-HBs in preventing both HB infection
 and
clinical illness (5). The second study, however, showed comparable
 disease
rates in persons receiving HBIG and IG containing the increased
 levels of
anti-HBs found in currently available lots (13). Because data are
 limited,
the period after sexual exposure during which HBIG is effective is
 unknown,
but extrapolation from other settings makes it unlikely that this
 period
would exceed 14 days. The value of HB vaccine alone in this setting
 is
unknown. However, since about 90% of persons with acute HB
 infections become
HBsAg-negative within 15 weeks of diagnosis, the potential for
 repeated
exposure is usually self-limited. HB vaccine is not routinely
 recommended for
such exposures.  Prescreening sexual partners for susceptibility before HBIG
 treatment is
recommended if it does not delay HBIG administration beyond 14 days
 after
last exposure. In one study, 27% of regular sexual partners
 (heterosexual)

were positive for HBsAg or anti-HBs at the time they presented for
 evaluation
(5). Among homosexually active males, over 50% have markers
 indicating prior
infection, and 5%-6% are HBsAg positive (2). Testing for anti-HBc
 is the most
efficient prescreening test to use in this population group.  A single dose of HBIG (0.06
ml/kg or 5 ml for adults) is
 recommended for
susceptible individuals who have had sexual contact with an
 HBsAg-positive
persons if HBIG can be given within 14 days of the last sexual
 contact, and
for persons who will continue to have sexual contact with an
 individual with
acute HB before loss of HBsAg in that individual (Table 1). In
 exposures
between heterosexuals, a second HBIG dose should be given if the
 index
patient remains HBsAg-positive 3 months after detection. If the
 index patient
is a known HBV carrier or remains HBsAg-positive for 6 months, HB
 vaccine
should be offered to regular sexual contacts. For exposures among
 homosexual
men, the HB vaccine series should be initiated at the time HBIG is
 given

following a sexual exposure, since HB vaccine is recommended for
 all sus-
ceptible homosexual men (2). Additional doses of HBIG are
 unnecessary if
vaccine is given. Because current lots of IG contain anti-HBs, it
 remains an
important alternative to HBIG when HBIG is unavailable.  References  
    ACIP. Immune globulins for protection against viral hepatitis.
 MMWR
    1981;30:423-8, 433-5.  
    ACIP. Inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR
 1982;31:317-22, 327-8.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang L-Y, Lee GC, et al. Prevention of perinatally
    transmitted hepatitis B virus infections with hepatitis B
 immune globulin
    and hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1983;II:1099-102.  
    Seeff LB, Wright EC, Zimmerman HJ, et al. Type B hepatitis
 after needle-
    stick exposure: prevention with hepatitis B immune globulin.
 Final report
    of the Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. Ann Intern
 Med
    1978;88:285-93.  
    Redeker AG, Mosley JW, Gocke DJ, McKee AP, Pollack W. Hepatitis
 B immune
    globulin as a prophylactic measure for spouses exposed to acute

 type B
    hepatitis. N Engl J Med 1975;293:1055-9.  
    Beasley RP, Hwang LY, Stevens CE, et al. Efficacy of hepatitis
 B immune
    globulin for prevention of perinatal transmission of the
 hepatitis B
    virus carrier state: final report of a randomized double-blind,
 placebo-
    controlled trial. Hepatology 1983;3:135-41.  
    Szmuness W, Stevens CE, Oleszko WR, Goodman A. Passive-active
 immuni-
    sation against hepatitis B: immunogenicity studies in adult
 Americans.
    Lancet 1981;I:575-7.  
    Sinatra FR, Shah P, Weissman JY, Thomas DW, Merritt RJ, Tong
 MJ. Peri-
    natal transmitted acute icteric hepatitis B in infants born to
 hepatitis
    B surface antigen-positive and anti-hepatitis Be-positive
 carrier
    mothers. Pediatrics 1982;70:557-9.  
    Delaplane D, Yogev R, Crussi F, Schulman ST. Fatal hepatitis B
 in early
    infancy: the importance of identifying HBsAg-positive pregnant
 women and
    providing immunoprophylaxis to their newborns. Pediatrics
 1983;72:176-80.  

    Stevens CE, Toy P, Tong MJ, et al. Perinatal hepatitis B virus
 treatment
    in the U.S.: prevention by passive-active immunization.
 Submitted for
    publication.  
    Wong VCW, Ip HMH, Reesink HW, et al. Prevention of the HBsAg
 carrier
    status in newborn infants in mothers who are chronic carriers
 of HBsAg
    and HBeAg by administration of hepatitis B vaccine and
 hepatitis B immune
    globulin: double-blind randomized placebo-controlled study.
 Lancet
    1984;I:921-6.  
    Chiron JP, Coursaget P, Yvonnet B, et al. Simultaneous
 administration of
    hepatitis B and diphtheria/tetanus/polio vaccines {Letter}.
 Lancet
    1984;I:623-4.  
    Perrillo RP, Campbell CR, Strang S, Bodicky CJ, Costigan DJ.
 Immune
    globulin and hepatitis B immune globulin: prophylactic measures
 for
    intimate contacts exposed to acute type B hepatitis. Arch
 Intern Med
    1984;144:81-5.  
Disclaimer

   All MMWR HTML documents published before January 1993 are electronic conversions
from ASCII text into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation
or format errors in the HTML version.  Users should not rely on this HTML document, but
are referred to the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO),  Washington,  DC  20402-9371;
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices. Page converted: 08/05/98 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services This page last reviewed 5/2/01 

 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00022736.htm
