A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. 
Related Topics:
 Systematic  reviews  are  a  type  of  literature  review  that  uses  systematic  methods  to
collect  data,  critically  appraise  research  studies,  and  synthesize  results.  These
documents are not to be considered guidelines or guidance documents. CDC requests
input from HICPAC on a variety of topics. In response, HICPAC can form workgroups to
develop input for the committee to consider. Final HICPAC products are presented and
voted on at HICPAC meetings. Guidance documents written by the HICPAC for use and
distribution  by  CDC.  The  CDC  infection  control  guidelines  that  were  developed  with
input from HICPAC have moved to the infection control website.  This systematic review
is designed to evaluate the available evidence on C. difficile in the NICU. The results of
this  review  highlight  the  paucity  of  evidence  on  this  topic  and  the  persistent
uncertainties  in  the  epidemiology  of  C.  difficile  in  this  vulnerable  population.  This
systematic  review  is  designed  to  evaluate  the  available  evidence  on  prophylaxis  and
screening to prevent transmission of viral respiratory illness in the NICU. The results of
this  review  highlight  the  paucity  of  evidence  on  this  topic  and  the  persistent
uncertainties  in  the  epidemiology  of  viral  respiratory  illnesses  in  this  vulnerable
population.    How  to  incorporate  stewardship  in  treatment  guidelines.  Healthcare
facilities should have a reliable, high-quality system for endoscope reprocessing which
minimizes infection risks. To achieve this goal, all reprocessing programs must have an
infrastructure  that  supports  training  and  competencies,  quality  measurement,  and
management.  The  following  guidance  is  provided  to  assist  healthcare  facilities,
including  clinical  and  administrative  staff,  to  achieve  a  reliable,  high-quality

reprocessing program. Healthcare facilities can use sample documents to incorporate
the  Essential  Elements  of  Flexible  Endoscope  Reprocessing  into  their  reprocessing
program.  These  tools  can  be  modified  to  meet  your  facility’s  specific  needs.
Recommended  standards  for  the  use  of  HAI  surveillance  data  for  external  facility
assessment to ensure valid comparisons of data between facilities. Guidelines for public
health  and  HAI  reporting  systems  based  on  established  principles.  This  document  is
intended to assist with the design and implementation of public HAI reporting systems.
HICPAC  provides  infection  control,  surveillance,  prevention  and  healthcare-associated
infection  (HAI)  guidance  and  advice.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/php/products/index.html
