 Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. Prepared by
Bernard M. Branson, MD1
H. Hunter Handsfield, MD2
Margaret A. Lampe, MPH1
Robert S. Janssen, MD1
Allan W. Taylor, MD1
Sheryl B. Lyss, MD1
Jill E. Clark, MPH3
1Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and
TB Prevention (proposed)
2Division of STD Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB
Prevention (proposed) and University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
3Northrup Grumman Information Technology (contractor with CDC)
 The  material  in  this  report  originated  in  the  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral

Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), Kevin A. Fenton, 
MD,  PhD,  Director;  and  the  Division  of  HIV/AIDS  Prevention,  Timothy  D.  Mastro,  MD,
(Acting) Director.
 Corresponding  preparer:  Bernard  M.  Branson,  MD,  Division  of  HIV/AIDS  Prevention,
National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and 
TB  Prevention  (proposed),  1600  Clifton  Road,  N.E.,  MS  D-21,  Atlanta,  GA  30333.
Telephone: 404-639-0900; Fax: 404-639-0897; E-mail:
bbranson@cdc.gov. 
Summary
 These recommendations for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing are intended
for all health-care providers 
in  the  public  and  private  sectors,  including  those  working  in  hospital  emergency
departments, urgent care clinics, 
inpatient services, substance abuse treatment clinics, public health clinics, community
clinics, correctional health-care facilities, 
and  primary  care  settings.  The  recommendations  address  HIV  testing  in  health-care
settings only. They do not modify 
existing guidelines concerning HIV counseling, testing, and referral for persons at high
risk for HIV who seek or receive 
HIV  testing  in  nonclinical  settings  (e.g.,  community-based  organizations,  outreach
settings, or mobile vans). The objectives 
of these recommendations are to increase HIV screening of patients, including pregnant
women, in health-care settings; 
foster earlier detection of HIV infection; identify and counsel persons with unrecognized

HIV infection and link them to 
clinical and prevention services; and further reduce perinatal transmission of HIV in the
United States. These 
revised  recommendations  update  previous  recommendations  for  HIV  testing  in
health-care settings and for screening of 
pregnant  women  (CDC.  Recommendations  for  HIV  testing  services  for  inpatients  and
outpatients in acute-care 
hospital  settings.  MMWR  1993;42[No.  RR-2]:1--10;  CDC.  Revised  guidelines  for  HIV
counseling, testing, and 
referral. MMWR 2001;50[No. RR-19]:1--62; and CDC. Revised recommendations for HIV
screening of 
pregnant women. MMWR 2001;50[No. RR-19]:63--85).
 Major revisions from previously published guidelines are as follows:
 For patients in all health-care settings
 For pregnant women
 Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) remain 
leading causes of illness and death in the United States. As of 
December 2004, an estimated 944,306 persons had received 
a diagnosis of AIDS, and of these, 529,113 (56%) had died 
(1). The annual number of AIDS cases and deaths 
declined substantially after 1994 but stabilized during 1999--2004 
(1). However, since 1994, the annual number of cases 
among  blacks,  members  of  other  racial/ethnic  minority  populations,  and  persons
exposed through heterosexual contact 
has increased. The number of children reported with AIDS 
attributed to perinatal HIV transmission peaked at 945 in 

1992  and  declined  95%  to  48  in  2004  (1),  primarily  because  of  the  identification  of
HIV-infected pregnant women and 
the effectiveness of antiretroviral prophylaxis in reducing mother-to-child transmission
of HIV 
(2).
 By 2002, an estimated 38%--44% of all adults in the United States had been tested for
HIV; 16--22 million 
persons aged 18--64 years are tested annually for HIV 
(3). However, at the end of 2003, of the approximately 1.0--1.2 
million persons estimated to be living with HIV in the United States, an estimated one
quarter (252,000--312,000 
persons) were unaware of their infection and therefore unable to benefit from clinical
care to reduce morbidity and mortality 
(4). A number of these persons are likely to have transmitted HIV unknowingly 
(5).
 Treatment has improved survival rates dramatically, especially since the introduction
of highly active 
antiretroviral  therapy  (HAART)  in  1995  (6).  However,  progress  in  effecting  earlier
diagnosis has been insufficient. During 
1990--1992, the proportion of persons who first tested positive for HIV <1 year before
receiving a diagnosis of AIDS was 
51% (7); during 1993--2004, this proportion declined only modestly, to 39% in 2004 
(1). Persons tested late in the course of their infection were more likely to be black or
Hispanic and to have been exposed through heterosexual contact; 
87%  received  their  first  positive  HIV  test  result  at  an  acute  or  referral  medical  care
setting, and 65% were tested for 
HIV antibody because of illness (8).

 These  recommendations  update  previous  recommendations  for  HIV  testing  in
health-care settings 
(9,10) and for screening of pregnant women 
(11). The objectives of these recommendations are to increase HIV screening of 
patients, including pregnant women, in health-care settings; foster earlier detection of
HIV infection; identify and 
counsel persons with unrecognized HIV infection and link them to 
clinical and prevention services; and further reduce 
perinatal transmission of HIV in the United States.
 Single copies of this report are available free of charge from CDC's 
National  Prevention  Information  Network,  telephone  800-458-5231  (Mondays--Fridays,
9:00 a.m.--8:00 p.m. ET).
Background
 
Definitions
 Diagnostic testing. Performing an HIV test for persons 
with clinical signs or symptoms consistent with HIV infection.
 Screening. Performing an HIV test for all persons in a 
defined population (12).
 Targeted testing. Performing an HIV test for subpopulations of persons at higher risk,
typically defined on the 
basis of behavior, clinical, or demographic characteristics 
(9).
 Informed consent. A process of communication between patient and provider through
which an informed patient 

can choose whether to undergo HIV testing or decline to do so. Elements of informed
consent typically include 
providing oral or written information regarding HIV, the risks and benefits of testing, the
implications of HIV test results, 
how test results will be communicated, and the opportunity to ask 
questions.
 Opt-out screening. Performing HIV screening after 
notifying the patient that 1) the test will be performed and 2) 
the patient may elect to decline or defer testing. Assent is 
inferred unless the patient declines testing.
 HIV-prevention counseling. An interactive process of 
assessing risk, recognizing specific behaviors that increase 
the risk for acquiring or transmitting HIV, and developing a plan to take specific steps to
reduce risks 
(13).
Evolution of HIV Testing Recommendations in Health-Care Settings and for 
Pregnant Women
 In 1985, when HIV testing first became available, the main goal of such testing was to
protect the blood 
supply. Alternative test sites were established to deter persons from using blood bank
testing to learn their HIV status. At 
that  time,  professional  opinion  was  divided  regarding  the  value  of  HIV  testing  and
whether HIV testing should 
be  encouraged  because  no  consensus  existed  regarding  whether  a  positive  test
predicted transmission to sex partners or 

from  mother  to  infant  (14).  No  effective  treatment  existed,  and  counseling  was
designed in part to ensure that persons 
tested were aware that the meaning of positive test results was 
uncertain. 
 During the next 2 years, the implications of positive HIV serology became evident, and
in 1987, the United 
States  Public  Health  Service  (USPHS)  issued  guidelines  making  HIV  counseling  and
testing a priority as a prevention 
strategy for persons most likely to be infected or who practiced high-risk behaviors and
recommended routine testing of 
all persons seeking treatment for STDs, regardless of health-care setting 
(15). "Routine" was defined as a policy to 
provide these services to all clients after informing them that testing would be 
conducted (15).
 In  1993,  CDC  recommendations  for  voluntary  HIV  counseling  and  testing  were
extended to include 
hospitalized  patients  and  persons  obtaining  health  care  as  outpatients  in  acute-care
hospital settings, including 
emergency departments (EDs) (10). Hospitals with HIV seroprevalence rates of >1% or
AIDS diagnosis rates of >1 per 
1,000  discharges  were  encouraged  to  adopt  a  policy  of  offering  voluntary  HIV
counseling and testing routinely to all 
patients  aged  15--54  years.  Health-care  providers  in  acute-care  settings  were
encouraged to structure counseling and 
testing procedures to facilitate confidential, voluntary participation and to include basic
information 
regarding the medical implications of the test, the option to receive more information,

and documentation of informed consent 
(10).  In  1994,  guidelines  for  counseling  and  testing  persons  with  high-risk  behaviors
specified prevention 
counseling  to  develop  specific  prevention  goals  and  strategies  for  each  person
(client-centered counseling) 
(16). In 1995, after perinatal transmission 
of HIV was demonstrated to be substantially reduced by administration of zidovudine to
HIV-infected pregnant 
women  and  their  newborns,  USPHS  recommended  that  all  pregnant  women  be
counseled and 
encouraged to undergo voluntary testing for HIV 
(17,18).
 In  2001,  CDC  modified  the  recommendations  for  pregnant  women  to  emphasize  HIV
screening as a routine part 
of prenatal care, simplification of the testing process so pretest counseling would not
pose a barrier, and flexibility of the 
consent process to allow multiple types of informed consent 
(11). In addition, the 2001 recommendations for HIV testing in 
health-care settings were extended to include multiple additional clinical venues in both
private and public health-care 
sectors, encouraging providers to make HIV counseling and testing more accessible and
acknowledging their need for flexibility 
(9). CDC recommended that HIV testing be offered routinely to all 
patients in high HIV-prevalence health-care settings. In 
low prevalence settings, in which the majority of clients are at minimal risk, targeted
HIV testing on the basis of risk screening 

was considered more feasible for identifying limited numbers of HIV-infected persons 
(9).
 In 2003, CDC introduced the initiative Advancing HIV Prevention: New Strategies for a
Changing Epidemic 
(19). Two key strategies of this initiative are 1) to make HIV testing a routine part of
medical care on the same voluntary 
basis as other diagnostic and screening tests and 2) to reduce perinatal transmission of
HIV further by universal testing of 
all pregnant women and by using rapid tests during labor and delivery or postpartum if
the mother was not 
screened prenatally (19). In its technical guidance, CDC acknowledged that prevention
counseling is desirable for all persons 
at risk for HIV but recognized that such counseling might not be appropriate or feasible
in all settings 
(20).  Because  time  constraints  or  discomfort  with  discussing  their  patients'  risk
behaviors caused some providers to perceive requirements 
for prevention counseling and written informed consent as a barrier 
(12,21--23), the initiative advocated 
streamlined approaches.
 In March 2004, CDC convened a meeting of health-care providers, representatives from
professional associations, 
and local health officials to obtain advice concerning how best to expand HIV testing,
especially in high-volume, 
high-prevalence  acute-care  settings.  Consultants  recommended  simplifying  the  HIV
screening process to make it more 
feasible and less costly and advocated more frequent diagnostic testing of patients with
symptoms. In April 2005, CDC 

initiated a comprehensive review of the literature regarding HIV testing in health-care
settings and, on the basis of 
published evidence and lessons learned from CDC-sponsored demonstration projects of
HIV screening in health-care 
facilities, began to prepare recommendations to implement these strategies. In August
2005, CDC invited health-care 
providers, 
representatives from public health agencies and community organizations, and persons
living with HIV to review 
an outline of proposed recommendations. In November 2005, CDC convened a meeting
of researchers, representatives 
of  professional  health-care  provider  organizations,  clinicians,  persons  living  with  HIV,
and representatives from 
community  organizations  and  agencies  overseeing  care  of  HIV-infected  persons  to
review CDC's proposed recommendations. 
Before  final  revision  of  these  recommendations,  CDC  described  the  proposals  at
national meetings of researchers and 
health-care  providers  and,  in  March  2006,  solicited  peer  review  by  health-care
professionals, in compliance with 
requirements  of  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  for  influential  scientific
assessments, and invited comment from 
multiple professional and community organizations. The final recommendations were 
further refined on the basis of comments from these constituents.
Rationale for Routine Screening for HIV Infection
 Previous  CDC  and  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force  guidelines  for  HIV  testing

recommended routine 
counseling  and  testing  for  persons  at  high  risk  for  HIV  and  for  those  in  acute-care
settings in which HIV prevalence was 
>1% (9,10,24). These guidelines proved difficult to implement because 1) the cost of
HIV screening often is not 
reimbursed, 2) providers in busy health-care settings often lack the time necessary to
conduct risk assessments and might 
perceive  counseling  requirements  as  a  barrier  to  testing,  and  3)  explicit  information
regarding HIV prevalence typically is 
not available to guide selection of specific settings 
for screening (25--29).
 These  revised  CDC  recommendations  advocate  routine  voluntary  HIV  screening  as  a
normal part of medical 
practice, similar to screening for other treatable conditions. Screening is a basic public
health tool used to 
identify unrecognized health conditions so treatment can be offered before symptoms
develop and, for communicable diseases, 
so interventions can be implemented to reduce the likelihood of continued transmission
(30).
 HIV infection is consistent with all generally accepted criteria that justify screening: 1)
HIV infection is a 
serious health disorder that can be diagnosed before symptoms develop; 2) HIV can be
detected by reliable, inexpensive, 
and  noninvasive  screening  tests;  3)  infected  patients  have  years  of  life  to  gain  if
treatment is initiated early, before 
symptoms  develop;  and  4)  the  costs  of  screening  are  reasonable  in  relation  to  the

anticipated benefits 
(30). Among pregnant women, screening has proven substantially more effective than
risk-based testing for detecting unsuspected 
maternal HIV infection and preventing perinatal transmission 
(31--33).
Rationale for New Recommendations
 Often, persons with HIV infection visit health-care settings (e.g., hospitals, acute-care
clinics, and sexually 
transmitted disease [STD] clinics) years before receiving a diagnosis but are not tested
for HIV 
(34--36).  Since  the  1980s,  the  demographics  of  the  HIV/AIDS  epidemic  in  the  United
States have changed; increasing proportions of infected 
persons are aged <20 years, women, members of racial or ethnic minority populations,
persons who reside outside 
metropolitan  areas,  and  heterosexual  men  and  women  who  frequently  are  unaware
that they are at risk for HIV 
(37). As a result, the effectiveness of using risk-based testing to identify HIV-infected
persons has diminished 
(34,35,38,39).
 Prevention  strategies  that  incorporate  universal  HIV  screening  have  been  highly
effective. For example, screening 
blood donors for HIV has nearly eliminated transfusion-associated HIV infection in the
United States 
(40). In addition, incidence of pediatric HIV/AIDS in the United States has 
declined substantially since the 1990s, when 

prevention strategies began to include specific recommendations for routine HIV testing
of pregnant women 
(18,41). Perinatal transmission rates can be reduced to <2% with universal screening of
pregnant women in combination 
with prophylactic administration of antiretroviral drugs 
(42,43), scheduled cesarean delivery when indicated 
(44,45), and avoidance of breast feeding 
(46).
 These  successes  contrast  with  a  relative  lack  of  progress  in  preventing  sexual
transmission of HIV, for which 
screening rarely is performed. Declines in HIV incidence 
observed in the early 1990s have leveled and might even have reversed 
in certain populations in recent years 
(47,48). Since 1998, the estimated number of new infections has remained stable 
at  approximately  40,000  annually  (49).  In  2001,  the  Institute  of  Medicine  (IOM)
emphasized prevention services 
for HIV-infected persons and recommended policies for 
diagnosing HIV infections earlier to increase the number of 
HIV-infected persons who were aware of their infections and who were offered clinical
and prevention services 
(37). The 
majority of persons who are aware of their HIV infections substantially reduce sexual
behaviors that might transmit 
HIV after they become aware they are infected 
(5). In a meta-analysis of findings from eight studies, the prevalence 
of  unprotected  anal  or  vaginal  intercourse  with  uninfected  partners  was  on  average
68% lower for HIV-infected 

persons who were aware of their status than it was for HIV-infected persons who were 
unaware of their status (5). To increase diagnosis of HIV 
infection,  destigmatize  the  testing  process,  link  clinical  care  with  prevention,  and
ensure 
immediate access to clinical care for persons with newly identified HIV infection, IOM
and other health-care professionals 
with  expertise  (25,37,50,51)  have  encouraged  adoption  of  routine  HIV  testing  in  all
health-care settings.
 Routine prenatal HIV testing with streamlined counseling and consent procedures has
increased the number 
of pregnant women tested substantially (52). By contrast, the number of persons at risk
for HIV infection who 
are screened in acute-care settings remains low, despite repeated recommendations in
support of routine risk-based 
testing in health-care settings 
(9,10,15,34,53,54). In a survey of 154 health-care providers in 10 hospital EDs, 
providers  reported  caring  for  an  average  of  13  patients  per  week  suspected  to  have
STDs, but only 10% of these 
providers encouraged such patients to be tested for HIV while they were in the ED 
(54). Another 35% referred patients to confidential HIV testing sites in the community;
however, such referrals have proven ineffective because of 
poor compliance by patients (55). Reasons cited for not offering HIV testing in the ED
included lack of 
established mechanisms to ensure follow-up (51%), lack of the certification perceived
as necessary to provide counseling (45%), 
and belief that the testing process was too time-consuming (19%) 
(54).

 With the institution of HIV screening in certain hospitals and EDs, the percentage of
patients who test positive 
(2%--7%)  often  has  exceeded  that  observed  nationally  at  publicly  funded  HIV
counseling and testing sites (1.5%) and 
STD clinics (2%) serving persons at high risk for HIV 
(53,56--59). Because patients rarely were seeking testing 
when  screening  was  offered  at  these  hospitals,  HIV  infections  often  were  identified
earlier than they might otherwise have 
been  (29).  Targeted  testing  programs  also  have  been  implemented  in  acute-care
settings; nearly two thirds of patients in 
these settings accept testing, but because risk assessment and prevention counseling
are time-consuming, only a 
limited proportion of eligible patients can be tested 
(29). Targeted testing on the basis of risk behaviors fails to identify 
a substantial number of persons who are HIV infected 
(34,35,39). A substantial number of persons, including 
persons with HIV infection, do not perceive themselves to be at risk for HIV or do not
disclose their risks 
(53,56,59). Routine HIV testing reduces the stigma associated with testing that 
requires assessment of risk behaviors 
(60--63). More patients accept recommended HIV testing when it is 
offered routinely to everyone, without a risk assessment 
(54,56).
 In  1999,  to  increase  the  proportion  of  women  tested  for  HIV,  IOM  recommended  1)
adopting a national policy 
of universal HIV testing of pregnant women with patient notification (opt-out screening)
as a routine component 

of  prenatal  care,  2)  eliminating  requirements  for  extensive  pretest  counseling  while
requiring provision of basic 
information regarding HIV, and 3) not requiring explicit written consent to be tested for
HIV 
(12).  Subsequent  studies  have  indicated  that  these  policies,  as  proposed  by  IOM  and
other professional organizations 
(12,64,65), reflect an ethical balance among public health goals, justice, and individual
rights 
(66,67). Rates of HIV screening are consistently 
higher at settings that provide prenatal and STD services using opt-out screening than
at opt-in programs, which require 
pre-test counseling and explicit written consent 
(52,68--74). Pregnant women express less anxiety with opt-out 
HIV screening and do not find it difficult to decline a test 
(68,74). In 2006, approximately 65% of U.S. adults 
surveyed concurred that HIV testing should be treated the same as screening for any
other disease, without special 
procedures such as written permission from the patient 
(75).
 Adolescents  aged  13--19  years  represent  new  cohorts  of  persons  at  risk,  and
prevention efforts need to be repeated 
for each succeeding generation of young persons 
(63). The 2005 Youth Risk Behavior Survey indicated that 47% of 
high school students reported that they had had sexual intercourse at least once, and
37% of sexually active students had 
not used a condom during their most recent act of sexual intercourse 
(76). More than half of all HIV-infected adolescents 

are estimated not to have been tested and are unaware of their infection 
(77,78). Among young (aged 18--24 years) 
men who have sex with men (MSM) surveyed during 2004--2005 in five U.S. cities, 14%
were infected with HIV; 79% 
of these HIV-infected MSM were unaware of their infection 
(56). The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends 
that  clinicians  obtain  information  from  adolescent  patients  regarding  their  sexual
activity and inform them how to 
prevent  HIV  infection  (79).  Evidence  indicates  that  adolescents  prefer  to  receive  this
information from their 
health-care providers rather than from their parents, teachers, or friends 
(80). However, fewer than half of clinicians provide 
such 
guidance  (81).  Health-care  providers'  recommendations  also  influence  adolescents'
decision to be tested. Among 
reasons for HIV testing provided by 528 adolescents who had primary care providers,
58% cited their 
provider's recommendation as their reason for testing 
(82).
 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recently recommended that clinicians screen
for HIV all adults and 
adolescents  at  increased  risk  for  HIV,  on  the  basis  that  when  HIV  is  diagnosed  early,
appropriately timed interventions, 
particularly  HAART,  can  lead  to  improved  health  outcomes,  including  slower  clinical
progression and reduced mortality 
(24). The Task Force also recommended screening all pregnant women, regardless of
risk, but made no recommendation for 

or against routinely screening asymptomatic adults and adolescents with no identifiable
risk factors for HIV. The Task 
Force concluded that such screening would detect additional patients with HIV, but the
overall number would be 
limited, and the potential benefits did not clearly outweigh the burden on primary care
practices or the potential harms of 
a general HIV screening program (24,83). In making these recommendations, the Task
Force considered how 
many patients would need to be screened to prevent one clinical progression or death
during the 3-year period after 
screening. On the basis of evidence available for its review, the Task Force was unable
to calculate benefits attributable to 
the prevention of secondary HIV transmission to partners 
(84). However, a recent meta-analysis indicated that 
HIV-infected persons reduced high-risk behavior substantially when they became aware
of their infection 
(5). Because viral load is the chief biologic predictor of HIV transmission 
(85), reduction in viral load through timely initiation of HAART 
might reduce transmission, even for HIV-infected patients who do not change their risk
behavior 
(86).  Estimated  transmission  is  3.5  times  higher  among  persons  who  are  unaware  of
their infection than among persons who are aware of 
their infection and contributes disproportionately to the number of new HIV infections
each year in the United States 
(87).  In  theory,  new  sexual  HIV  infections  could  be  reduced  >30%  per  year  if  all
infected persons could learn their HIV 
status and adopt changes in behavior similar to those adopted by persons 

already aware of their infection (87).
 Recent  studies  demonstrate  that  voluntary  HIV  screening  is  cost-effective  even  in
health-care settings in which 
HIV prevalence is low (26,27,86). In populations for which 
prevalence of undiagnosed HIV infection is 
>0.1%, HIV screening is as cost-effective as other established screening programs for
chronic diseases (e.g., hypertension, 
colon cancer, and breast cancer) (27,86). Because of the substantial survival advantage
resulting from earlier diagnosis of 
HIV infection when therapy can be initiated before 
severe immunologic compromise occurs, screening reaches 
conventional  benchmarks  for  cost-effectiveness  even  before  including  the  important
public health benefit from reduced 
transmission to sex partners (86).
 Linking patients who have received a diagnosis of HIV 
infection to prevention and care is essential. HIV 
screening without such linkage confers little or no benefit to the 
patient. Although moving patients into care incurs 
substantial costs, it also triggers sufficient survival benefits that justify the additional
costs. Even if only a limited fraction of 
patients  who  receive  HIV-positive  results  are  linked  to  care,  the  survival  benefits  per
dollar spent on screening represent 
good comparative value (26,27,88).
 The benefit of providing prevention counseling in conjunction with HIV testing is less
clear. HIV counseling 
with  testing  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  an  effective  intervention  for  HIV-infected
participants, who increased their 

safer  behaviors  and  decreased  their  risk  behaviors;  HIV  counseling  and  testing  as
implemented in the studies had little 
effect  on  HIV-negative  participants  (89).  However,  randomized  controlled  trials  have
demonstrated that the nature 
and duration of prevention counseling might influence its effectiveness 
(90,91).  Carefully  controlled,  theory-based  prevention  counseling  in  STD  clinics  has
helped HIV-negative participants reduce their risk behaviors compared 
with  participants  who  received  only  a  didactic  prevention  message  from  health-care
providers 
(90). A more intensive intervention among HIV-negative MSM at high risk, consisting of
10 theory-based individual counseling 
sessions followed by maintenance sessions every 3 
months, resulted in reductions in unprotected sex with partners who 
were HIV infected or of unknown status, compared with MSM who received structured
prevention counseling only 
twice yearly (91).
 Timely access to diagnostic HIV test results also improves health outcomes. Diagnostic
testing in health-care 
settings continues to be the mechanism by which nearly half of new HIV infections are
identified. During 2000--2003, 
of persons reported with HIV/AIDS who were interviewed in 16 states, 44% were tested
for HIV because of illness 
(8). Compared with HIV testing after patients were admitted to the hospital, expedited
diagnosis by rapid HIV testing 
in  the  ED  before  admission  led  to  shorter  hospital  stays,  increased  the  number  of
patients aware of their HIV status 
before 

discharge, and improved entry into outpatient care 
(92). However, at least 28 states have laws or regulations that 
limit  health-care  providers'  ability  to  order  diagnostic  testing  for  HIV  infection  if  the
patient is unable to give consent 
for HIV testing, even when the test results are likely to alter the patient's diagnostic or
therapeutic management 
(93).
 Of the 40,000 persons who acquire HIV infection each year, an estimated 40%--90%
will experience symptoms 
of  acute  HIV  infection  (94--96),  and  a  substantial  number  will  seek  medical  care.
However, acute HIV infection often 
is not recognized by primary care clinicians because the symptoms 
resemble those of influenza, infectious 
mononucleosis, and other viral illnesses 
(97). Acute HIV infection can be diagnosed by detecting HIV RNA in plasma from 
persons  with  a  negative  or  indeterminate  HIV  antibody  test.  One  study  based  on
national ambulatory medical care 
surveys  estimated  that  the  prevalence  of  acute  HIV  infection  was  0.5%--0.7%  among
ambulatory patients who sought care 
for  fever  or  rash  (98).  Although  the  long-term  benefit  of  HAART  during  acute  HIV
infection has not been 
established conclusively (99), identifying primary HIV infection can reduce the spread of
HIV that might otherwise occur 
during the acute phase of HIV disease 
(100,101).
 Perinatal  HIV  transmission  continues  to  occur,  primarily  among  women  who  lack
prenatal care or who were 

not  offered  voluntary  HIV  counseling  and  testing  during  pregnancy.  A  substantial
proportion of the estimated 
144--236 perinatal HIV infections in the United States each year can be attributed to the
lack of timely HIV testing 
and  treatment  of  pregnant  women  (102).  Multiple  barriers  to  HIV  testing  have  been
identified, including language 
barriers;  late  entry  into  prenatal  care;  health-care  providers'  perceptions  that  their
patients are at low risk for HIV; lack of time 
for counseling and testing, particularly for rapid testing during labor and delivery; and
state regulations 
requiring counseling and separate informed consent 
(103). A survey of 653 obstetrical providers in North Carolina suggested 
that  not  all  health-care  providers  embrace  universal  testing  of  pregnant  women;  the
strength with which 
providers recommended prenatal testing to their patients and the numbers of women
tested 
depended largely on the providers' perception of the patients' risk behaviors 
(21). Data confirm that testing rates are higher when HIV tests are included 
in the standard panel of screening tests for all pregnant women 
(52,69,104). Women also are much more likely to 
be  tested  if  they  perceive  that  their  health-care  provider  strongly  recommends  HIV
testing 
(105).  As  universal  prenatal  screening  has  become  more  widespread,  an  increasing
proportion of pregnant women who had undiagnosed 
HIV  infection  at  the  time  of  delivery  were  found  to  have  seroconverted  during
pregnancy 
(106). A second HIV test during the third trimester for women in settings with 

elevated HIV incidence (>17 cases per 100,000 person-years) is 
cost-effective  and  might  result  in  substantial  reductions  in  mother-to-child  HIV
transmission 
(107).
 Every perinatal HIV transmission is a sentinel health event, signaling either a missed
opportunity for prevention 
or, more rarely, a failure of interventions to prevent perinatal transmission. When these
infections occur, they underscore 
the  need  for  improved  strategies  to  ensure  that  all  pregnant  women  undergo  HIV
testing and, if found to be HIV 
positive,  receive  proper  interventions  to  reduce  their  transmission  risk  and  safeguard
their health and the health of their infants.
Recommendations for Adults and Adolescents
 CDC recommends that diagnostic HIV testing and opt-out HIV screening be a part of
routine clinical care in 
all health-care settings while also preserving the patient's option to decline HIV testing
and ensuring a 
provider-patient  relationship  conducive  to  optimal  clinical  and  preventive  care.  The
recommendations are intended for providers in 
all  health-care  settings,  including  hospital  EDs,  urgent-care  clinics,  inpatient  services,
STD clinics or other 
venues  offering  clinical  STD  services,  tuberculosis  (TB)  clinics,  substance  abuse
treatment clinics, other public health 
clinics, community clinics, correctional health-care facilities, and primary care settings.
The guidelines address HIV testing 

in  health-care  settings  only;  they  do  not  modify  existing  guidelines  concerning  HIV
counseling, testing, and referral 
for persons at high risk for HIV who seek or receive HIV testing in nonclinical settings
(e.g., 
community-based organizations, outreach settings, or mobile vans) 
(9).
Screening for HIV Infection
In all health-care settings, screening for HIV infection should be performed routinely for
all patients aged 
13--64  years.  Health-care  providers  should  initiate  screening  unless  prevalence  of
undiagnosed HIV infection in 
their patients has been documented to be <0.1%. In the 
absence of existing data for HIV prevalence, 
health-care 
providers should initiate voluntary HIV screening until they establish that the diagnostic
yield is <1 per 
1,000 patients screened, at which point such screening is no longer warranted. 
All patients initiating treatment for TB should be screened routinely for HIV infection 
(108).
All  patients  seeking  treatment  for  STDs,  including  all  patients  attending  STD  clinics,
should be 
screened routinely for HIV during each visit for a new complaint, regardless of whether
the patient is known or suspected 
to have specific behavior risks for HIV infection.

Repeat Screening
 Aspects  of  these  recommendations  that  remain  unchanged  from  previous
recommendations are as follows:
 Aspects of these recommendations that differ from previous recommendations are as
follows:
 These  guidelines  reiterate  the  recommendation  for  universal  HIV  screening  early  in
pregnancy but advise 
simplifying the screening process to maximize opportunities for women to learn their
HIV status during pregnancy, preserving 
the woman's option to decline HIV testing, and ensuring a 
provider-patient relationship conducive to optimal clinical 
and  preventive  care.  All  women  should  receive  HIV  screening  consistent  with  the
recommendations for adults 
and adolescents. HIV screening should be a routine component of preconception care,
maximizing opportunities for 
all women to know their HIV status before conception 
(109). In addition, screening early in pregnancy enables 
HIV-infected  women  and  their  infants  to  benefit  from  appropriate  and  timely
interventions (e.g., antiretroviral 
medications [43], scheduled cesarean delivery 
[44], and avoidance of breastfeeding* 
[46]). These recommendations are intended 
for clinicians who provide care to pregnant women and newborns and for health policy
makers who have responsibility 
for these populations.

HIV Screening for Pregnant Women and Their Infants
 
Universal Opt-Out Screening
 
Addressing Reasons for Declining Testing
 
Timing of HIV Testing
 
Rapid Testing During Labor
 
Postpartum/Newborn Testing
 
Confirmatory Testing
 Aspects  of  these  recommendations  that  remain  unchanged  from  previous
recommendations are as follows:
 Aspects of these recommendations that differ from previous recommendations are as
follows:
 Persons with a diagnosis of HIV infection need a thorough evaluation of their clinical
status and immune function 
to  determine  their  need  for  antiretroviral  treatment  or  other  therapy.  HIV-infected
persons should receive or be referred 
for  clinical  care  promptly,  consistent  with  USPHS  guidelines  for  management  of
HIV-infected persons 
(96).  HIV-exposed  infants  should  receive  appropriate  antiretroviral  prophylaxis  to
prevent perinatal HIV transmission as soon as 

possible  after  birth  (42)  and  begin  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole  prophylaxis  at  age
4--6 weeks to prevent 
Pneumocystis  pneumonia  (112).  They  should  receive  subsequent  clinical  monitoring
and diagnostic testing to determine their 
HIV infection status (113).
Partner Counseling and Referral
 When  HIV  infection  is  diagnosed,  health-care  providers  should  strongly  encourage
patients to disclose their 
HIV  status  to  their  spouses,  current  sex  partners,  and  previous  sex  partners  and
recommend that these partners be tested 
for HIV infection. Health departments can assist patients by notifying, counseling, and
providing HIV testing for 
partners without disclosing the patient's identity 
(114). Providers should inform patients who receive a new diagnosis of 
HIV infection that they might be contacted by health department staff for a voluntary
interview to discuss notification 
of their partners.
Special Considerations for Screening Adolescents
 Although  parental  involvement  in  an  adolescent's  health  care  is  usually  desirable,  it
typically is not required when 
the  adolescent  consents  to  HIV  testing.  However,  laws  concerning  consent  and
confidentiality for HIV care differ 
among states (79). Public health statutes and legal precedents allow for evaluation and

treatment of minors for STDs 
without parental knowledge or consent, but not every state has defined HIV infection
explicitly as a condition for which 
testing 
or  treatment  may  proceed  without  parental  consent.  Health-care  providers  should
endeavor to respect an 
adolescent's  request  for  privacy  (79).  HIV  screening  should  be  discussed  with  all
adolescents and encouraged for those who 
are  sexually  active.  Providing  information  regarding  HIV  infection,  HIV  testing,  HIV
transmission, and implications 
of infection should be regarded as an essential component of the anticipatory guidance 
provided to all adolescents as part of primary care 
(79).
Prevention Services for HIV-Negative Persons
 Recommended thresholds for screening are based on 
estimates of the prevalence of undiagnosed HIV infection in 
U.S.  health-care  settings,  for  which  no  accurate  recent  data  exist.  The  optimal
frequency for retesting is not yet known. 
Cost-effectiveness parameters for HIV screening were based on 
existing program models, all of which include a 
substantial  counseling  component,  and  did  not  consistently  consider  secondary
infections averted as a benefit of screening. To 
assess the need for revised thresholds for screening adults and adolescents or repeat
screening of pregnant women and 
to confirm their continued effectiveness, screening programs should monitor the yield

of new diagnoses of HIV 
infection, monitor costs, and evaluate whether patients with a diagnosis of HIV infection
are linked to and remain engaged in 
care.  With  minor  modifications,  laboratory  information  systems  might  provide  a
practical alternative for clinicians to use 
in determining HIV prevalence among their patients who are screened for HIV.
Primary Prevention and HIV Testing in Nonclinical Settings
 These revised recommendations are designed to increase HIV screening in health-care
settings. Often, however, 
the population most at risk for HIV includes persons who are least likely to interact with
the conventional 
health-care system (47,116). The need to maintain primary prevention 
activities, identify persons at high risk for HIV who 
could benefit from prevention services, and provide HIV testing for persons who are at
high risk for HIV in nonclinical 
venues  remains  undiminished.  New  approaches  (e.g.,  enlisting  HIV-infected  persons
and HIV-negative persons at high risk 
for  HIV  to  recruit  persons  from  their  social,  sexual,  and  drug-use  networks  for
counseling, testing, and referral) 
have  demonstrated  considerable  efficacy  for  identifying  persons  who  were  previously
unaware of their HIV infection 
(117).
Regulatory and Legal Considerations

 These public health recommendations are based on best practices and are intended to
comply fully with the 
ethical principles of informed consent (67). Legislation related to HIV and AIDS has been
enacted in every state and 
the District of Columbia (118), and specific requirements 
related to informed consent and pretest counseling differ 
among states (119). Certain states, local jurisdictions, or agencies might have statutory
or other regulatory impediments to 
opt-out  screening,  or  they  might  impose  other  specific  requirements  for  counseling,
written consent, confirmatory testing, 
or  communicating  HIV  test  results  that  conflict  with  these  recommendations.  Where
such policies exist, 
jurisdictions  should  consider  strategies  to  best  implement  these  recommendations
within current parameters and consider steps 
to resolve conflicts with these recommendations.
Other Guidelines
 Issues that fall outside the scope of these recommendations are addressed by other
USPHS guidelines (Box 1). 
Because  concepts  relevant  to  HIV  management  evolve  rapidly,  USPHS  updates
recommendations periodically. Current 
updates are available from the National Institutes of Health at 
http://AIDSinfo.nih.gov. Additional guidelines have 
been published by CDC and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office
for Civil Rights 

(Box 2).
Acknowledgment
 Ida M. Onorato, MD, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral
Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed), contributed to the writing and revision of this report.
References
 *  To  eliminate  the  risk  for  postnatal  transmission,  HIV-infected  women  in  the  United
States should not breastfeed. Support services for use of appropriate 
breast  milk  substitutes  should  be  provided  when  necessary.  In  international  settings,
UNAIDS and World Health Organization recommendations for HIV 
and breastfeeding should be followed (46).
 † A second HIV test in the third trimester is as cost-effective as other common health
interventions when HIV incidence among women of childbearing age is 
>17 HIV cases per 100,000 person-years 
(107). In 2004, in jurisdictions with available data on HIV case rates, a rate of 17 new
HIV diagnoses per year 
per  100,000  women  aged  15--45  years  was  associated  with  an  AIDS  case  rate  of  at
least nine AIDS diagnoses per year per 100,000 women aged 15--45 
years  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2005).  As  of  2004,  the  jurisdictions  listed  above
exceeded these thresholds. The list of specific jurisdictions where a second test in 
the third trimester is recommended will be updated periodically based on surveillance
data.
 Consultants

Membership  List,  November  2005  Chairpersons:  Bernard  M.  Branson,  MD,  National
Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC; 
H.  Hunter  Handsfield,  MD,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,  STD,  and  TB
Prevention (proposed) and University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington. 
Presenters:  Terje  Anderson,  National  Association  of  People  with  AIDS,  Silver  Spring,
Maryland; Yvette Calderon, MD, Albert Einstein College 
of  Medicine,  Bronx,  New  York;  Carlos  del  Rio,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South Carolina 
African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros, MA, New
York State Department of Health, Albany, New York; Howard 
A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC; Sara Guerry,
MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted Disease Program, 
Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott  D.  Halpern,  MD,  PhD,  University  of  Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, PhD, Department 
of  Veterans  Affairs,  Washington,  DC;  Scott  Kellerman,  MD,  New  York  City  Bureau  of
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control, New York, New York; James 
H.  Lee,  Texas  Department  of  State  Health  Services,  Austin,  Texas;  Jason  Leider,  MD,
PhD, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; A. 
David  Paltiel,  PhD,  Yale  University  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Liisa
Randall, PhD, Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Okemos, Michigan; Cornelis A. Rietmeijer, MD, PhD, Denver Public Health Department,
Denver, Colorado; Robert A. Weinstein, MD, Rush Medical 
College,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Noel  Zuniga,  Bienestar  Human  Services,  Inc.,  Los  Angeles,
California.
Moderators:  John  Blevins,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;

William C. Page, William C. Page, Inc., Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Consultants:  Chris  Aldridge,  National  Alliance  of  State  and  Territorial  AIDS  Directors,
Washington, DC; Terje Anderson, National Association of 
People with AIDS, Silver Spring, Maryland; Arlene Bardeguez, MD, University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Ronald 
Bayer, PhD, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York;
Guthrie Birkhead, MD, Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists and New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York;
Lora Branch, MS, Chicago Department of Public Health, 
Chicago, Illinois; Daniel Bush, North Jersey Community Research Initiative, Newark, New
Jersey; Ahmed Calvo, MD, Health Resources and 
Services  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Sheldon  Campbell,  MD,  PhD,  College  of
American Pathologists and Yale University School of Medicine, 
New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Suzanne  Carlberg-Racich,  MPH,  Midwest  AIDS  Training  and
Education Center, Chicago, Illinois; Sandra Chamblee, Glades 
Health  Initiative,  Belle  Glade,  Florida;  James  Coleman,  Whitman  Walker  Clinic,  Inc.,
Takoma Park, Maryland; Kevin DeCock, MD, Global AIDS 
Program, Nairobi, Kenya; Andrew De Los Reyes, Gay Men's Health Crisis, Inc., New York,
New York; Carlos del Rio, Emory University School of 
Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Marisa  Duarte,  MPH,  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid
Services, Atlanta, Georgia; Wayne Duffus, MD, PhD, South 
Carolina  Department  of  Health  and  Environmental  Control,  Columbia,  South  Carolina;
Enid Eck, Kaiser Permanente, Pasadena, California; Magdalena 
Esquivel,  Los  Angeles  Department  of  Health  Services,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Joe
Fuentes, Houston Area Community Services, Inc., Houston, Texas; 
Donna Futterman, MD, American Academy of Pediatrics and Albert Einstein College of

Medicine, Bronx, New York; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South 
Carolina African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros,
MA, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New 
York; Howard A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC;
Sara Guerry, MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted 
Disease  Program,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott  D.  Halpern,  MD,  PhD,  University  of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, 
PhD,  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  Washington,  DC;  Celine  Hanson,  MD,  Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Wilbert Jordan, MD, 
National  Medical  Association  and  Drew  University,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott
Kellerman, MD, New York City Bureau of HIV/AIDS Prevention and 
Control,  New  York,  New  York;  David  Lanier,  MD,  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research  and
Quality, Rockville, Maryland; James H. Lee, Texas Department of 
State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Jason Leider, MD, PhD, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York; Elisa Luna, MSW, Washington, 
DC; Robert Maupin, MD, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and LSU
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana; Jenny 
McFarlane, Texas Department of State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Lynne Mofenson,
MD, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Rockville, Maryland; Eve Mokotoff, MPH, Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists and Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Detroit, Michigan; Susan Moskosky, MS, Office of Population Affairs, Rockville, Maryland;
Doralba Muñoz, Union Positiva, Inc., Miami, Florida; 
George  Odongi,  Dorchester  Community  Health  Center,  Quincy,  Massachusetts;  Debra
Olesen, JSI Research and Training, Denver, Colorado; A. David 
Paltiel,  PhD,  Yale  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Paul  Palumbo,  MD,
Newark, New Jersey; Jim Pickett, AIDS Foundation of Chicago, 

Chicago,  Illinois;  Pam  Pitts,  MPH,  Tennessee  Department  of  Health,  Nashville,
Tennessee; Borris Powell, Gay Men of African Descent, New York, New York; 
Liisa  Randall,  PhD,  Michigan  Department  of  Community  Health,  Okemos,  Michigan;
Mobeen Rathore, MD, University of Florida, Jacksonville, 
Florida;  Cornelis  A.  Rietmeijer,  MD,  PhD,  Denver  Public  Health  Department,  Denver,
Colorado; Sam Rivera, Fortune Society, New York, New York; 
Ruth Roman, MPH, Health Resources and Services Administration, Rockville, Maryland;
Richard Rothman, MD, Johns Hopkins University and 
American  College  of  Emergency  Physicians,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Gale  Sampson-Lee,
National Black Leadership Commission on AIDS, New York, New York; 
John  Schneider,  MD,  PhD,  American  Medical  Association,  Flossmoor,  Illinois;  Deya
Smith-Starks, AIDS Healthcare Foundation, Los Angeles, 
California; Nilda Soto, PROCEED, Inc., Elizabeth, New Jersey; Alice Stek, MD, University
of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California;  Monica  Sweeney,  MD,  Bedford  Stuyvesant  Family  Health  Center,  Inc.,  and
National Association of Community Health Centers, Brooklyn, New 
York;  Donna  Sweet,  MD,  Wichita,  Kansas;  Wanda  Tabora,  Iniciativa  Communitaria  de
Investigacion, San Juan, Puerto Rico; Mark Thrun, MD, Denver 
Public  Health,  Denver,  Colorado;  Robert  A.  Weinstein,  MD,  Rush  Medical  College,
Chicago, Illinois; Carmen Zorilla, MD, University of Puerto Rico School 
of  Medicine,  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico;  Noel  Zuniga,  Bienestar  Human  Services,  Inc.,  Los
Angeles, California.
Peer  Reviewers:  Connie  Celum,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;
Daniel Kuritzkes, MD, HIV Medicine Association and Brigham 
and  Women's  Hospital,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Thomas  C.  Quinn,  MD,  National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and Johns 

Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. 
CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,
and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.

Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 Presenters:  Terje  Anderson,  National  Association  of  People  with  AIDS,  Silver  Spring,
Maryland; Yvette Calderon, MD, Albert Einstein College 
of  Medicine,  Bronx,  New  York;  Carlos  del  Rio,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South Carolina 
African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros, MA, New
York State Department of Health, Albany, New York; Howard 
A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC; Sara Guerry,
MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted Disease Program, 
Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott  D.  Halpern,  MD,  PhD,  University  of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, PhD, Department 
of  Veterans  Affairs,  Washington,  DC;  Scott  Kellerman,  MD,  New  York  City  Bureau  of
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control, New York, New York; James 
H.  Lee,  Texas  Department  of  State  Health  Services,  Austin,  Texas;  Jason  Leider,  MD,
PhD, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; A. 
David  Paltiel,  PhD,  Yale  University  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Liisa
Randall, PhD, Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Okemos, Michigan; Cornelis A. Rietmeijer, MD, PhD, Denver Public Health Department,
Denver, Colorado; Robert A. Weinstein, MD, Rush Medical 
College,  Chicago,  Illinois;  Noel  Zuniga,  Bienestar  Human  Services,  Inc.,  Los  Angeles,
California.
Moderators:  John  Blevins,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
William C. Page, William C. Page, Inc., Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Consultants:  Chris  Aldridge,  National  Alliance  of  State  and  Territorial  AIDS  Directors,
Washington, DC; Terje Anderson, National Association of 
People with AIDS, Silver Spring, Maryland; Arlene Bardeguez, MD, University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Ronald 
Bayer, PhD, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York;
Guthrie Birkhead, MD, Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists and New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York;
Lora Branch, MS, Chicago Department of Public Health, 
Chicago, Illinois; Daniel Bush, North Jersey Community Research Initiative, Newark, New
Jersey; Ahmed Calvo, MD, Health Resources and 
Services  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Sheldon  Campbell,  MD,  PhD,  College  of
American Pathologists and Yale University School of Medicine, 

New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Suzanne  Carlberg-Racich,  MPH,  Midwest  AIDS  Training  and
Education Center, Chicago, Illinois; Sandra Chamblee, Glades 
Health  Initiative,  Belle  Glade,  Florida;  James  Coleman,  Whitman  Walker  Clinic,  Inc.,
Takoma Park, Maryland; Kevin DeCock, MD, Global AIDS 
Program, Nairobi, Kenya; Andrew De Los Reyes, Gay Men's Health Crisis, Inc., New York,
New York; Carlos del Rio, Emory University School of 
Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Marisa  Duarte,  MPH,  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid
Services, Atlanta, Georgia; Wayne Duffus, MD, PhD, South 
Carolina  Department  of  Health  and  Environmental  Control,  Columbia,  South  Carolina;
Enid Eck, Kaiser Permanente, Pasadena, California; Magdalena 
Esquivel,  Los  Angeles  Department  of  Health  Services,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Joe
Fuentes, Houston Area Community Services, Inc., Houston, Texas; 
Donna Futterman, MD, American Academy of Pediatrics and Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South 
Carolina African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros,
MA, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New 
York; Howard A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC;
Sara Guerry, MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted 
Disease  Program,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott  D.  Halpern,  MD,  PhD,  University  of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, 
PhD,  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  Washington,  DC;  Celine  Hanson,  MD,  Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Wilbert Jordan, MD, 
National  Medical  Association  and  Drew  University,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott
Kellerman, MD, New York City Bureau of HIV/AIDS Prevention and 
Control,  New  York,  New  York;  David  Lanier,  MD,  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research  and
Quality, Rockville, Maryland; James H. Lee, Texas Department of 
State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Jason Leider, MD, PhD, Albert Einstein College of

Medicine, Bronx, New York; Elisa Luna, MSW, Washington, 
DC; Robert Maupin, MD, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and LSU
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana; Jenny 
McFarlane, Texas Department of State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Lynne Mofenson,
MD, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Rockville, Maryland; Eve Mokotoff, MPH, Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists and Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Detroit, Michigan; Susan Moskosky, MS, Office of Population Affairs, Rockville, Maryland;
Doralba Muñoz, Union Positiva, Inc., Miami, Florida; 
George  Odongi,  Dorchester  Community  Health  Center,  Quincy,  Massachusetts;  Debra
Olesen, JSI Research and Training, Denver, Colorado; A. David 
Paltiel,  PhD,  Yale  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Paul  Palumbo,  MD,
Newark, New Jersey; Jim Pickett, AIDS Foundation of Chicago, 
Chicago,  Illinois;  Pam  Pitts,  MPH,  Tennessee  Department  of  Health,  Nashville,
Tennessee; Borris Powell, Gay Men of African Descent, New York, New York; 
Liisa  Randall,  PhD,  Michigan  Department  of  Community  Health,  Okemos,  Michigan;
Mobeen Rathore, MD, University of Florida, Jacksonville, 
Florida;  Cornelis  A.  Rietmeijer,  MD,  PhD,  Denver  Public  Health  Department,  Denver,
Colorado; Sam Rivera, Fortune Society, New York, New York; 
Ruth Roman, MPH, Health Resources and Services Administration, Rockville, Maryland;
Richard Rothman, MD, Johns Hopkins University and 
American  College  of  Emergency  Physicians,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Gale  Sampson-Lee,
National Black Leadership Commission on AIDS, New York, New York; 
John  Schneider,  MD,  PhD,  American  Medical  Association,  Flossmoor,  Illinois;  Deya
Smith-Starks, AIDS Healthcare Foundation, Los Angeles, 
California; Nilda Soto, PROCEED, Inc., Elizabeth, New Jersey; Alice Stek, MD, University
of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 

California;  Monica  Sweeney,  MD,  Bedford  Stuyvesant  Family  Health  Center,  Inc.,  and
National Association of Community Health Centers, Brooklyn, New 
York;  Donna  Sweet,  MD,  Wichita,  Kansas;  Wanda  Tabora,  Iniciativa  Communitaria  de
Investigacion, San Juan, Puerto Rico; Mark Thrun, MD, Denver 
Public  Health,  Denver,  Colorado;  Robert  A.  Weinstein,  MD,  Rush  Medical  College,
Chicago, Illinois; Carmen Zorilla, MD, University of Puerto Rico School 
of  Medicine,  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico;  Noel  Zuniga,  Bienestar  Human  Services,  Inc.,  Los
Angeles, California.
Peer  Reviewers:  Connie  Celum,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;
Daniel Kuritzkes, MD, HIV Medicine Association and Brigham 
and  Women's  Hospital,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Thomas  C.  Quinn,  MD,  National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. 
CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,
and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 

Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 

mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 Moderators:  John  Blevins,  Emory  University  School  of  Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;
William C. Page, William C. Page, Inc., Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Consultants:  Chris  Aldridge,  National  Alliance  of  State  and  Territorial  AIDS  Directors,
Washington, DC; Terje Anderson, National Association of 
People with AIDS, Silver Spring, Maryland; Arlene Bardeguez, MD, University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Ronald 
Bayer, PhD, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York;
Guthrie Birkhead, MD, Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists and New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York;
Lora Branch, MS, Chicago Department of Public Health, 
Chicago, Illinois; Daniel Bush, North Jersey Community Research Initiative, Newark, New
Jersey; Ahmed Calvo, MD, Health Resources and 
Services  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Sheldon  Campbell,  MD,  PhD,  College  of
American Pathologists and Yale University School of Medicine, 
New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Suzanne  Carlberg-Racich,  MPH,  Midwest  AIDS  Training  and
Education Center, Chicago, Illinois; Sandra Chamblee, Glades 
Health  Initiative,  Belle  Glade,  Florida;  James  Coleman,  Whitman  Walker  Clinic,  Inc.,
Takoma Park, Maryland; Kevin DeCock, MD, Global AIDS 
Program, Nairobi, Kenya; Andrew De Los Reyes, Gay Men's Health Crisis, Inc., New York,
New York; Carlos del Rio, Emory University School of 
Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Marisa  Duarte,  MPH,  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid
Services, Atlanta, Georgia; Wayne Duffus, MD, PhD, South 

Carolina  Department  of  Health  and  Environmental  Control,  Columbia,  South  Carolina;
Enid Eck, Kaiser Permanente, Pasadena, California; Magdalena 
Esquivel,  Los  Angeles  Department  of  Health  Services,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Joe
Fuentes, Houston Area Community Services, Inc., Houston, Texas; 
Donna Futterman, MD, American Academy of Pediatrics and Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South 
Carolina African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros,
MA, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New 
York; Howard A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC;
Sara Guerry, MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted 
Disease  Program,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott  D.  Halpern,  MD,  PhD,  University  of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, 
PhD,  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  Washington,  DC;  Celine  Hanson,  MD,  Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Wilbert Jordan, MD, 
National  Medical  Association  and  Drew  University,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott
Kellerman, MD, New York City Bureau of HIV/AIDS Prevention and 
Control,  New  York,  New  York;  David  Lanier,  MD,  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research  and
Quality, Rockville, Maryland; James H. Lee, Texas Department of 
State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Jason Leider, MD, PhD, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York; Elisa Luna, MSW, Washington, 
DC; Robert Maupin, MD, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and LSU
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana; Jenny 
McFarlane, Texas Department of State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Lynne Mofenson,
MD, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Rockville, Maryland; Eve Mokotoff, MPH, Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists and Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Detroit, Michigan; Susan Moskosky, MS, Office of Population Affairs, Rockville, Maryland;

Doralba Muñoz, Union Positiva, Inc., Miami, Florida; 
George  Odongi,  Dorchester  Community  Health  Center,  Quincy,  Massachusetts;  Debra
Olesen, JSI Research and Training, Denver, Colorado; A. David 
Paltiel,  PhD,  Yale  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Paul  Palumbo,  MD,
Newark, New Jersey; Jim Pickett, AIDS Foundation of Chicago, 
Chicago,  Illinois;  Pam  Pitts,  MPH,  Tennessee  Department  of  Health,  Nashville,
Tennessee; Borris Powell, Gay Men of African Descent, New York, New York; 
Liisa  Randall,  PhD,  Michigan  Department  of  Community  Health,  Okemos,  Michigan;
Mobeen Rathore, MD, University of Florida, Jacksonville, 
Florida;  Cornelis  A.  Rietmeijer,  MD,  PhD,  Denver  Public  Health  Department,  Denver,
Colorado; Sam Rivera, Fortune Society, New York, New York; 
Ruth Roman, MPH, Health Resources and Services Administration, Rockville, Maryland;
Richard Rothman, MD, Johns Hopkins University and 
American  College  of  Emergency  Physicians,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Gale  Sampson-Lee,
National Black Leadership Commission on AIDS, New York, New York; 
John  Schneider,  MD,  PhD,  American  Medical  Association,  Flossmoor,  Illinois;  Deya
Smith-Starks, AIDS Healthcare Foundation, Los Angeles, 
California; Nilda Soto, PROCEED, Inc., Elizabeth, New Jersey; Alice Stek, MD, University
of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California;  Monica  Sweeney,  MD,  Bedford  Stuyvesant  Family  Health  Center,  Inc.,  and
National Association of Community Health Centers, Brooklyn, New 
York;  Donna  Sweet,  MD,  Wichita,  Kansas;  Wanda  Tabora,  Iniciativa  Communitaria  de
Investigacion, San Juan, Puerto Rico; Mark Thrun, MD, Denver 
Public  Health,  Denver,  Colorado;  Robert  A.  Weinstein,  MD,  Rush  Medical  College,
Chicago, Illinois; Carmen Zorilla, MD, University of Puerto Rico School 
of  Medicine,  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico;  Noel  Zuniga,  Bienestar  Human  Services,  Inc.,  Los
Angeles, California.

Peer  Reviewers:  Connie  Celum,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;
Daniel Kuritzkes, MD, HIV Medicine Association and Brigham 
and  Women's  Hospital,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Thomas  C.  Quinn,  MD,  National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. 
CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,
and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 

endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 Consultants:  Chris  Aldridge,  National  Alliance  of  State  and  Territorial  AIDS  Directors,
Washington, DC; Terje Anderson, National Association of 
People with AIDS, Silver Spring, Maryland; Arlene Bardeguez, MD, University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Ronald 

Bayer, PhD, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York;
Guthrie Birkhead, MD, Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists and New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York;
Lora Branch, MS, Chicago Department of Public Health, 
Chicago, Illinois; Daniel Bush, North Jersey Community Research Initiative, Newark, New
Jersey; Ahmed Calvo, MD, Health Resources and 
Services  Administration,  Rockville,  Maryland;  Sheldon  Campbell,  MD,  PhD,  College  of
American Pathologists and Yale University School of Medicine, 
New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Suzanne  Carlberg-Racich,  MPH,  Midwest  AIDS  Training  and
Education Center, Chicago, Illinois; Sandra Chamblee, Glades 
Health  Initiative,  Belle  Glade,  Florida;  James  Coleman,  Whitman  Walker  Clinic,  Inc.,
Takoma Park, Maryland; Kevin DeCock, MD, Global AIDS 
Program, Nairobi, Kenya; Andrew De Los Reyes, Gay Men's Health Crisis, Inc., New York,
New York; Carlos del Rio, Emory University School of 
Medicine,  Atlanta,  Georgia;  Marisa  Duarte,  MPH,  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid
Services, Atlanta, Georgia; Wayne Duffus, MD, PhD, South 
Carolina  Department  of  Health  and  Environmental  Control,  Columbia,  South  Carolina;
Enid Eck, Kaiser Permanente, Pasadena, California; Magdalena 
Esquivel,  Los  Angeles  Department  of  Health  Services,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Joe
Fuentes, Houston Area Community Services, Inc., Houston, Texas; 
Donna Futterman, MD, American Academy of Pediatrics and Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South 
Carolina African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros,
MA, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New 
York; Howard A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC;
Sara Guerry, MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted 
Disease  Program,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott  D.  Halpern,  MD,  PhD,  University  of

Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, 
PhD,  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  Washington,  DC;  Celine  Hanson,  MD,  Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Wilbert Jordan, MD, 
National  Medical  Association  and  Drew  University,  Los  Angeles,  California;  Scott
Kellerman, MD, New York City Bureau of HIV/AIDS Prevention and 
Control,  New  York,  New  York;  David  Lanier,  MD,  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research  and
Quality, Rockville, Maryland; James H. Lee, Texas Department of 
State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Jason Leider, MD, PhD, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York; Elisa Luna, MSW, Washington, 
DC; Robert Maupin, MD, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and LSU
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana; Jenny 
McFarlane, Texas Department of State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Lynne Mofenson,
MD, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Rockville, Maryland; Eve Mokotoff, MPH, Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists and Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Detroit, Michigan; Susan Moskosky, MS, Office of Population Affairs, Rockville, Maryland;
Doralba Muñoz, Union Positiva, Inc., Miami, Florida; 
George  Odongi,  Dorchester  Community  Health  Center,  Quincy,  Massachusetts;  Debra
Olesen, JSI Research and Training, Denver, Colorado; A. David 
Paltiel,  PhD,  Yale  School  of  Medicine,  New  Haven,  Connecticut;  Paul  Palumbo,  MD,
Newark, New Jersey; Jim Pickett, AIDS Foundation of Chicago, 
Chicago,  Illinois;  Pam  Pitts,  MPH,  Tennessee  Department  of  Health,  Nashville,
Tennessee; Borris Powell, Gay Men of African Descent, New York, New York; 
Liisa  Randall,  PhD,  Michigan  Department  of  Community  Health,  Okemos,  Michigan;
Mobeen Rathore, MD, University of Florida, Jacksonville, 
Florida;  Cornelis  A.  Rietmeijer,  MD,  PhD,  Denver  Public  Health  Department,  Denver,
Colorado; Sam Rivera, Fortune Society, New York, New York; 

Ruth Roman, MPH, Health Resources and Services Administration, Rockville, Maryland;
Richard Rothman, MD, Johns Hopkins University and 
American  College  of  Emergency  Physicians,  Baltimore,  Maryland;  Gale  Sampson-Lee,
National Black Leadership Commission on AIDS, New York, New York; 
John  Schneider,  MD,  PhD,  American  Medical  Association,  Flossmoor,  Illinois;  Deya
Smith-Starks, AIDS Healthcare Foundation, Los Angeles, 
California; Nilda Soto, PROCEED, Inc., Elizabeth, New Jersey; Alice Stek, MD, University
of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California;  Monica  Sweeney,  MD,  Bedford  Stuyvesant  Family  Health  Center,  Inc.,  and
National Association of Community Health Centers, Brooklyn, New 
York;  Donna  Sweet,  MD,  Wichita,  Kansas;  Wanda  Tabora,  Iniciativa  Communitaria  de
Investigacion, San Juan, Puerto Rico; Mark Thrun, MD, Denver 
Public  Health,  Denver,  Colorado;  Robert  A.  Weinstein,  MD,  Rush  Medical  College,
Chicago, Illinois; Carmen Zorilla, MD, University of Puerto Rico School 
of  Medicine,  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico;  Noel  Zuniga,  Bienestar  Human  Services,  Inc.,  Los
Angeles, California.
Peer  Reviewers:  Connie  Celum,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;
Daniel Kuritzkes, MD, HIV Medicine Association and Brigham 
and  Women's  Hospital,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Thomas  C.  Quinn,  MD,  National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. 
CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,
and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.

Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF

version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 Peer  Reviewers:  Connie  Celum,  MD,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle,  Washington;
Daniel Kuritzkes, MD, HIV Medicine Association and Brigham 
and  Women's  Hospital,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts;  Thomas  C.  Quinn,  MD,  National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. 
CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,
and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret

A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)

512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 
CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,
and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 

provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,

and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  

Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 Coordinator:  Bernard  M.  Branson,  MD,  National  Center  for  HIV/AIDS,  Viral  Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.

Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006

 Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC.
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret
A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 

the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 CDC  Presenters:  Brian  Boyett,  MS,  Bernard  M.  Branson,  MD,  H.  Irene  Hall,  PhD,
Margaret A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for
HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed).
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.

Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 
Box 1Return to top.
Box 2Return to top.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 

Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 Use  of  trade  names  and  commercial  sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not
imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 

Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication.
Disclaimer
  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.  Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only
and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer

  
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML.  This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors
in the HTML version.  
Users  should  not  rely  on  this  HTML  document,  but  are  referred  to  the  electronic  PDF
version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables.  
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202)
512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006
 
    HOME  |  
    ABOUT MMWR  | 
    MMWR SEARCH  | 
    DOWNLOADS  | 
    RSS 
    |  
    CONTACT
POLICY  |  
    DISCLAIMER  |  
    ACCESSIBILITY 

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
                  30333, U.S.A 
Department of Healthand Human Services 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5514a1.htm
