Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Emergency response employees (EREs) are at risk of exposure
to  potentially  life-threatening  infectious  diseases  through  contact  with  victims  during
emergencies.  Part  G  of  the  Ryan  White  HIV/AIDS  Treatment  Extension  Act  of  2009
requires  that  medical  facilities  provide  EREs  with  notification  of  when  they  may  have
been  exposed  to  potentially  life-threatening  infectious  diseases  while  transporting  or
serving victims of an emergency. Knowing this information allows EREs the opportunity
to seek timely medical care and to make informed decisions about addressing potential
health  issues  arising  from  their  exposures.  NIOSH  has  developed  a  list  of  potentially
life-threatening diseases, including emerging infectious diseases, to which EREs may be
exposed  while  transporting  or  serving  emergency  victims  taken  to  a  medical  facility.
Along  with  the  list,  NIOSH  has  also  developed  guidelines  describing  circumstances  in
which  EREs  may  be  exposed  to  a  listed  disease  and  the  manner  in  which  a
determination of an exposure shall be made by a medical facility. Medical facilities that
receive  and  treat  the  victims  of  an  emergency  or  ascertain  the  cause  of  death  are
responsible  for  routinely  notifying  and  responding  to  requests  pertaining  to  any
determinations that a victim of an emergency has a listed potentially life-threatening
infectious  disease,  as  described  in  the  NIOSH  guidelines.  When  a  medical  facility
determines that a victim of an emergency has a potentially life-threatening airborne or
aerosolized  infectious  disease,  the  medical  facility  is  responsible  for  initiating
notification  to  the  ERE  who  transported  the  victim.  If  an  ERE  believes  he  or  she  has
been  exposed  to  any  potentially  life-threatening  disease  on  the  NIOSH  list,  and  has
transported, attended, treated, or assisted the victim pursuant to the emergency, the
ERE may initiate a request for notification from the medical facility to which the victim
of the emergency was transported. To learn more about the guidelines describing ways

employees may be exposed to these diseases and the guidelines describing the manner
in  which  medical  facilities  should  make  determinations  about  exposures,  visit  the
Guidelines page. To learn more about how EREs who believe they have been exposed
to a disease on the list can request notification or about how medical facilities should
initiate  notification  if  an  ERE  may  have  been  exposed  to  an  airborne  or  aerosolized
infectious disease on the list, visit the Notification Process page. Diseases often have
multiple transmission  pathways.  However,  for purposes  of  this  classification,  diseases
routinely  transmitted  via  the  aerosol  airborne  and  aerosol  droplet  routes  are  so
classified,  even  if  other  routes,  such  as  contact  transmission,  also  occur.  CDC  will
continue  to  monitor  the  scientific  literature  on  these  and  other  infectious  diseases.  If
CDC determines that a newly emerged infectious disease fits criteria for inclusion in the
List  of  Potentially  Life-Threatening  Infectious  Diseases  to  Which  Emergency  Response
Employees May Be Exposed required by the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Treatment Extension
Act of 2009, CDC will amend the list and add the disease. These diseases include those
caused by any transmissible agent included in the HHS Select Agents List. [5] Many are
not  routinely  transmitted  human  to  human  but  may  be  transmitted  via  exposure  to
contaminated environments. The HHS Select Agents List is updated regularly and can
be found on the National Select Agent Registry Web site: http://www.selectagents.gov/
These diseases include those caused by any transmissible agent included in the HHS
Select Agents List. [5] Many are not routinely transmitted human to human but may be
transmitted via exposure to contaminated environments. The HHS Select Agents List is
updated  regularly  and  can  be  found  on  the  National  Select  Agent  Registry  Web  site:
http://www.selectagents.gov/ [1] Section 2695(b) [42 U.S.C. § 300ff–131(b)].
[2] Section 2695(b) [42 U.S.C. § 300ff–131(b)].
[3]  For  most  viral  hemorrhagic  fevers  (VHFs),  routine  transmission  is  limited  to
transmission from a zoonotic reservoir or direct contact with an infected person (e.g.
Ebola virus, Marburg virus) or through arthropod-borne transmission (Rift Valley fever,

Crimean-Congo  hemorrhagic  fever).  For  a  small  number  of  VHF  viruses,  transmission
may  occur  through  droplet  transmission  (e.g.  Nipah  virus),  however  prolonged  close
contact  is  likely  necessary.  Aerosol  transmission  does  not  occur  in  natural
(non-laboratory) settings.
[4]  Council  of  State  and  Territorial  Epidemiologists,  Position  Statement  Number:
09–ID–43.
 Available
 at
https://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.cste.org/resource/resmgr/PS/09-ID-43.pdf.
 Accessed
January 15, 2019.
[5]  42  C.F.R.  §§  73.3,  73.4.  If  you  have  any  questions  about  the  list  of  potentially
life-threatening  infectious  diseases  to  which  emergency  response  employees  may  be
exposed and accompanying guidelines, contact CDC/NIOSH Ryan White Coordinator via
email or mail. Please provide your return contact information, if seeking a reply. Please
do  not  provide  information  of  a  sensitive  nature  in  this  email,  such  as  any  disease
status for yourself or another person. Email: NIOSHRyanWhiteAct@cdc.gov Mail: Ryan
White Act Coordinator
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
1600 Clifton Road, NE
MS E20
Atlanta, GA 30329 If you have questions on other sections of Part G, please contact the
call  center  of  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  headquarters  at
1-877-696-6775.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/ryanwhite/default.html
