Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Yet  again,  more  than  2.5  million  cases  of  chlamydia,
gonorrhea,  and  syphilis  were  reported  in  the  United  States  Sexually  Transmitted
Infections  Surveillance,  2022  provides  the  most  current  and  complete  data  for
nationally  notifiable  STIs  for  federally  funded  control  programs.  CDC’s  annual  report
underscores that STIs must be a public health priority. In 2022, more than 2.5 million
cases  of  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and  chlamydia  were  reported  in  the  United  States.  The
most alarming concerns center around the syphilis and congenital syphilis epidemics,
signaling an urgent need for swift innovation and collaboration from all STI prevention
partners.  In  addition  to  the  syphilis  epidemic  worsening,  reported  gonorrhea  cases
declined  for  the  first  time  in  at  least  a  decade  while  reported  chlamydia  cases  were
level. CDC will continue to examine this finding closely and look to 2023 data for better
understanding,  but  recognize  this  finding  may  be  a  cause  for  an  even  closer  look  at
public health efforts and redoubled prevention strategies. As STI services and related
resources continue to rebound from the U.S. COVID-19 pandemic and mpox outbreak,
we must act now to mobilize and execute a whole-of-nation approach if we hope to turn
the tide. STI surveillance data collected during the COVID-19 pandemic and presented
in this report should be interpreted cautiously. See Impact of COVID-19 on STIs for more
information.  Dear  Partners  in  Prevention,  Today,  CDC  released  Sexually  Transmitted
Infections  (STI)  Surveillance,  2022.  The  annual  report  –  which  highlights  that  the
syphilis epidemic continues to escalate – underscores that STIs must be a public health
priority.  Overall,  in  2022,  more  than  2.5  million  cases  of  syphilis,  gonorrhea,  and
chlamydia were reported in the United States. According to the report, syphilis cases
(all  stages  and  congenital  syphilis)  have  increased  80  percent  in  the  past  five  years.
More than 3,700 congenital syphilis cases were reported in 2022, reflecting an alarming

937  percent  increase  in  the  past  decade.  While  reported  syphilis  cases  continued  to
increase, reported chlamydia cases were level and reported gonorrhea cases declined
by nearly 9 percent in 2022. Given this is the first drop in reported gonorrhea cases in
at least a decade, we are examining this finding closely and will be looking to 2023 data
to better understand if this signals a true decline in infections, or if this is related to
changes in gonorrhea diagnoses and reporting in 2022. Although gonorrhea declined,
this  finding  may  be  a  cause  for  an  even  closer  look  at  public  health  efforts  and
redoubled prevention strategies, including those that improve access to STI testing and
treatment. “There are no shortcuts, and we have to meet people where they are. Some
people  face  tremendous  barriers  to  STI  prevention  and  health  services.  So,  the  most
important work is often outside the clinic, whether it be reaching out to communities
with  testing,  interviewing  patients  to  offer  services  to  their  partners,  or  delivering
treatment  directly  to  someone.”  –  Laura  Bachmann,  MD,  MPH,  Acting  Director,  CDC’s
Division of STD Prevention The U.S. syphilis epidemic worsened yet another year, and
swift action is urgently needed to slow the curve. Cases of primary and secondary (P&S)
syphilis—the most infectious stages of the disease—increased 10 percent in 2022 alone
and  68  percent  since  2018.  Steady  growth  in  P&S  syphilis  among  women  fuels  the
congenital syphilis epidemic, threatening the health of babies. Building on a decade of
increases,  reported  congenital  syphilis  cases  increased  31  percent  in  just  one  year,
from  2021-2022.  Nearly  every  state  reported  having  at  least  one  congenital  syphilis
case. Some states are feeling the impact more than others – Texas, California, Arizona,
Florida, and Louisiana represented 57 percent of all reported congenital syphilis cases.
Tragically, these infections resulted in 282 stillbirths and infant deaths in 2022. Racial
and ethnic minorities continue to be disproportionately affected. The highest number of
cases occurred among those who are Black or African American, Hispanic and Latino,
and  White.  American  Indian  or  Alaska  Native  people  experienced  the  highest  rate  of
congenital  syphilis—for  every  155  births  in  2022,  there  was  one  congenital  syphilis

case.  Black  or  African  American  people  experienced  about  30  percent  of  congenital
syphilis cases in 2022. As disparities persist among some groups, it is evident that our
nation must keep striving to address longstanding social inequalities that often lead to
health  inequalities  and,  ultimately,  health  disparities.  CDC’s  recent  Vital  Signs  report,
Missed Opportunities for Preventing Congenital Syphilis — United States, 2022, showed
that  timely  syphilis  testing  and  treatment  during  pregnancy  might  have  prevented
almost 9 in 10 (or 88%) congenital syphilis cases in 2022. The STI field has reached a
tipping point. We have long known that these infections are common, but we have not
faced  such  severe  effects  of  syphilis  in  decades.  Recent  public  health  emergencies
diverted
 program
 resources
 and
 threatened
 the
 health
 of
 those
 already
disproportionately  affected  by  STIs.  We  must  move  now  to  pick  up  the  pieces.  We
cannot  continue  to  use  decades-old  prevention  strategies  to  address  today’s  STI
epidemic. People need testing and treatment to meet them where they are. We know
treatment is not always received in traditional healthcare settings. We must continue
supporting opportunities and initiatives that enhance and expand STI service delivery,
care,  monitoring,  research,  and  training.  Innovative  solutions  like  partnerships  with
retail  health  or  pharmacies,  STI  express  clinics,  and  setting  up  injectable  syphilis
treatment delivery programs can jump-start care for people. CDC is working quickly to
offer  final  guidance  on  the  use  of  doxycycline  post-exposure  prophylaxis  to  prevent
bacterial  STIs.  This  is  the  first  major  bacterial  STI  prevention  innovation  in  decades.
Within the STI epidemic, syphilis is one infection that stands alone. It has emerged as a
unique public health challenge. We are calling on all partners, particularly healthcare
providers, to understand who should be tested for syphilis in their community, talk with
patients about sexual health, treat patients and their partners immediately, and work
with local and state health departments to improve syphilis management and access to
care. Every case is one too many when we have the tools to prevent it. We must find a
way  to  apply  the  tools  we  have  more  effectively  and  acknowledge  that  innovation  is

overdue and new primary prevention strategies are now necessary. We urgently need
better tools for immediate diagnosis and new treatment options. We are encouraged as
the  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  mobilizes  the  first-ever  National
Syphilis and Congenital Syphilis Syndemic Federal (NSCSS) Task Force. The NSCSS Task
Force  is  a  cohesive,  coordinated  response  among  federal  agencies  and  external
partners to help move syphilis prevention forward. Together, partners seek to address
the  syndemic  of  syphilis  and  congenital  syphilis,  reduce  their  rates,  promote  health
equity,  and  share  resources  with  affected  communities.  We  are  grateful  for  the
continued collaboration of our STI prevention partners and look forward to supporting
partners outside of our field as we collaboratively mobilize to turn the tide on the STI
epidemic. Best regards, Laura Bachmann, MD, MPH, FIDSA, FACP
Acting Director, Division of STD Prevention
National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention
US  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention   STD  Data  &  Statistics   Syphilis
Supplement  GISP Profiles  NCHHSTP Atlas

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/2022/default.htm
