Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. ‹  View Table of Contents  People with immunocompromising
conditions  and  people  who  take  immunosuppressive  medications  or  therapies  are  at
increased risk for severe outcomes with COVID-19, including hospitalization, intensive
care unit admission, mechanical ventilation, and death.30,31 Studies show that people
with  a  hematologic  or  solid  organ  cancer,  hematopoietic  stem  cell  or  solid  organ
transplant,  or  who  are  taking  immunosuppressive  medications  can  experience  lower
vaccine  effectiveness  than  those  who  are  immunocompetent.32-34  However,  studies
suggest that administration of a third vaccine dose as part of the primary series and
additional doses of updated vaccine increases immune response and protection against
severe  illness.35-37  Pre-exposure  prophylaxis  (prevention)  medication  is  available  for
some  people  who  are  moderately  or  severely  immunocompromised  for  additional
protection  against  COVID-19.  Pemivibart  (Pemgarda™)  is  a  monoclonal  antibody  for
COVID-19  pre-exposure  prophylaxis  in  people  who  are  moderately  or  severely
immunocompromised  and  unlikely  to  mount  an  adequate  immune  response  to
COVID-19 vaccination and who meet the FDA-authorized conditions for use. Pemivibart
may provide another layer of protection against COVID-19 in addition to the protection
provided  through  vaccination  and  can  be  given  at  least  2  weeks  after  receiving  a
COVID-19 vaccine. Pemivibart is administered as a single intravenous infusion, over 60
minutes  at  a  doctor’s  office  or  healthcare  facility.  If  continued  protection  is  needed,
additional  doses  should  be  administered  every  3  months.  Pemivibart  is  still  being
studied  and  there  is  limited  information  about  the  safety  and  effectiveness  of
pemivibart in preventing COVID-19.   Pre-exposure prophylaxis helps prevent COVID-19
but  does  not  take  the  place  of  vaccination  in  people  who  are  eligible  to  receive  an
updated COVID-19 vaccine. Everyone ages 6 months and older should stay up-to-date

with  COVID-19  vaccine.  For  more  information,  please  see  the  FDA  Fact  Sheet  for
Providers. Several therapeutics, including the oral antiviral medication ritonavir-boosted
nirmatrelvir  (Paxlovid),  the  intravenous  antiviral  remdesivir,  and  the  oral  antiviral
molnupiravir  (Lagevrio),  are  beneficial  in  this  population  for  early  treatment  of
COVID-19. Treatment is best if initiated as soon as possible after diagnosis and within 5
to  7  days  after  illness  onset.  The  FDA  has  issued  an  emergency  use  authorization  to
permit  the  emergency  use  of  COVID-19  convalescent  plasma  with  high  titers  of
anti-SARS-CoV-2  antibodies  for  the  treatment  of  COVID-19  in  patients  with
immunosuppressive  disease  or  receiving  immunosuppressive  treatment,  in  either  the
outpatient or inpatient setting. For more information, please see the FDA Fact Sheet for
Providers. The Infectious Diseases Society of America Guidelines on the Treatment and
Management of Patients with COVID-19 also provides recommendations on who should
be considered for this treatment. Clinical information on the treatment of patients with
immunocompromising  conditions  can  be  found  on  the  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of
America  Guidelines  on  the  Treatment  and  Management  of  Patients  with  COVID-19.
There  are  additional  guidelines  about  COVID-19  vaccines,  and  prioritization  for
therapies specific to this population. See related pages  Pregnant and recently pregnant
people  (for  at  least  42  days  following  the  end  of  pregnancy)  are  at  increased  risk  of
severe  illness  from  COVID-19,  including  hospital  admission,  intensive  care  unit
admission,  receipt  of  invasive  mechanical  ventilation,  extracorporeal  membrane
oxygenation,  and  death,  compared  to  people  who  are  not  pregnant.3,4  Race  and
ethnicity,4-6  older  maternal  age,  occupation  in  healthcare,  and  number  and  type  of
underlying  conditions  are  associated  with  severe  COVID-19  illness  among  pregnant
people.4,7,8  Data  from  meta-analyses9-12  and  observational  studies2,8,13  suggest
that pregnant people with COVID-19 (compared to pregnant people without COVID-19)
are  at  increased  risk  of  preterm  birth  and  stillbirth  and  might  be  at  increased  risk  of
pregnancy  complications,  including  pre-eclampsia.  Increased  risk  for  postpartum

complications,  including  hospital  readmission,  has  been  observed  among  recently
pregnant  people  with  COVID-19  compared  to  recently  pregnant  people  without
COVID-19.14,15  However,  methods  for  defining  the  period  of  recent  pregnancy  vary
from  study  to  study.  While  some  studies  include  people  with  COVID-19  immediately
after  delivery,  others  include  people  with  COVID-19  up  to  at  least  42  days  (6  weeks)
after  a  live  birth  or  pregnancy  loss.  The  COVID-19  Treatment  Guidelines  Panel
recommends  against  withholding  treatment  for  COVID-19  from  pregnant  or  lactating
individuals  because  of  theoretical  safety  concerns.  For  more  information  on  the
treatment  of  COVID-19  in  pregnant  people,  see  the  NIH  Treatment  Guidelines
on  Special  Considerations  in  Pregnancy.  In  general,  the  therapeutic  management  of
pregnant  people  with  COVID-19  is  the  same  as  management  of  people  who  are  not
pregnant.   Multisystem  inflammatory  syndrome  (MIS)  is  a  rare  but  serious  condition
usually  occurring  2-6  weeks  after  SARS-CoV-2  infection.  MIS  is  characterized  by
systemic  inflammation  that  may  affect  the  heart,  lungs,  kidneys,  brain,  skin,  eyes,
gastrointestinal,  or  other  organ  systems.  MIS  can  occur  in  children  (MIS-C)  or  adults
(MIS-A). The Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists and CDC have developed
surveillance case definitions for MIS-C, with an updated CDC case definition [PDF – 13
pages] for MIS-C effective January 1, 2023.47 CDC provides a case definition for MIS-A.
Patients with MIS-A are often young adults who present with fever, elevated laboratory
markers  of  inflammation,  hypotension  or  shock,  cardiac  dysfunction,  shortness  of
breath,  and  gastrointestinal  symptoms.40-42  Diagnosing  MIS-A  can  be  challenging  as
patients  may  have  experienced  an  unrecognized  asymptomatic  or  mild  initial
SARS-CoV-2  infection.  Additionally,  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  MIS-A  overlap
substantially  with  other  conditions  such  as  acute  COVID-19  in  adults.41,42  When
evaluating  for  MIS-A  it  is  important  to  consider  alternative  diagnoses.  Treatment
recommendations  have  not  yet  been  developed  for  MIS-A;  however,  studies  have
reported
 the
 use
 of
 steroids,
 intravenous
 immunoglobulins
 (IVIG),
 other

immunomodulatory medications, and supportive care for treatment.40-42 Vaccination
is also considered beneficial for patients who have had MIS-A. For more information on
vaccination  recommendations  for  patients  with  a  history  of  MIS-A,  see  CDC’s  Interim
Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines Currently Approved or Authorized
in the United States. Consider reporting cases of MIS-A to your local, state, or territorial
health department. For more information, see CDC’s MIS-A Information for Healthcare
Providers.   The  initial  clinical  presentation  of  COVID-19  in  children  can  include  fever,
cough, or other respiratory symptoms; many children also experience gastrointestinal
symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea.16,17 Viral tests are recommended
for diagnosing COVID-19 in children. Children who develop severe illness can develop
abnormal vital signs and markers of severe inflammation once hospitalized.18 A study
of over 10,000 hospitalized children found that lower blood pressure, higher heart and
respiratory  rates,  and  abnormal  markers  of  inflammation,  including  D-dimers  and
ferritin,  were  associated  with  severe  illness  in  children.18  Studies  suggest  that  many
children  experience  asymptomatic  or  mild  illness,  but  some  children  can  experience
severe COVID-19 illness requiring admission to the hospital or ICU, or use of invasive
mechanical  ventilation,  and  some  die.19,20  Like  adults,  children  with  underlying
medical  conditions,  including  obesity,  diabetes,  and  cardiac,  lung,  and  neurologic
disorders, have increased risk of severe COVID-19.18,19,21,22 Studies of hospitalized
children with COVID-19 found that having more than one comorbidity is associated with
an increased risk of severe illness.22,23 While increasing age is the strongest risk factor
for  severe  COVID-19  illness  among  adults,1  among  children,  infants  (<12  months  of
age)  may  be  at  increased  risk  for  severe  illness.24,25  In  addition  to  individual  risk
factors, the COVID-19 variant that is circulating at the time of infection could have an
impact  on  disease  severity.  Compared  to  prior  periods,  studies  of  COVID-19  in  the
pediatric  population  during  the  Delta  predominant  period  found  increased  rates  of
hospitalization.26,27
 Further
 increases
 in
 overall
 number
 of
 pediatric

hospitalizations were observed during the Omicron predominant period, particularly for
children  under  the  age  of  5  years.  Despite  this,  pediatric  patients  experienced  less
severe disease during the Omicron period than in previous waves.25,28,29 Some of the
medications authorized for the treatment of COVID-19 in adults have been authorized
for  use  in  children.  For  information  on  medications  that  are  authorized  for  use  in
children in ambulatory and hospital settings, see Infectious Diseases Society of America
Guidelines  on  the  Treatment  and  Management  of  Patients  with  COVID-19.  For
information on recommendations for clinical management, see the American Academy
of Pediatrics Management Strategies in Children and Adolescents with Mild to Moderate
COVID-19.  Pregnancy  Children  Immunocompromising  Conditions  MIS  To  receive  email
updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-care/clinical-considerations-special-groups.html
