Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. 
                    We are taking steps to continue to modernize and secure our data,
applications,  and  systems.  We  completed  the  first  phase  and  restored  many  of  the
functions  put  on  pause  in  May  2021.  Now  that  the  first  phase  is  complete,  work  will
resume at a slower pace but will speed up as new systems and applications are brought
online. For more information and updates, please visit our Cybersecurity Modernization
Initiative web page.
                 The SEC was established by the Act/EEOICPA. Claims compensated under the
SEC  do  not  have  to  go  through  the  dose  reconstruction  process.  To  qualify  for
compensation under the SEC, a covered employee must: have at least one of the 22
SEC cancers and have worked for a specific period of time at one of the SEC work sites.
The Act also allows for additional groups of employees (called classes of employees) to
be  added  to  the  SEC.  Classes  of  employees  and  work  sites  can  be  considered  for
addition  to  the  SEC  through  a  petition  process  run  by  NIOSH.  To  help  individuals
interested  in  the  petition  process,  NIOSH  has  an  SEC  Petition  Counselor  and  an
Ombudsman to NIOSH.  The SEC Rule, Procedures for Designating Classes of Employees
as  Members  of  the  SEC  (42  Code  of  Federal  Regulations,  Part  83),   PDF  [132  KB  (13
pages)]  describes  the  procedures  used  to  add  a  class  of  employees  to  the  SEC.  The
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) created the SEC procedures rule to
ensure  that:  Petitions  are  submitted  by  authorized  parties  Petitions  are  justified
Petitions are given uniform, fair, and scientific consideration Petitioners are given the
opportunity to be involved with the petition process Topics Covered under the SEC Rule:
How  HHS  will  determine:  if  it  is  feasible  to  estimate  the  radiation  dose  that  a  class
received,  and  if  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the  radiation  dose  may  have

endangered the health of members of the class The procedures that are necessary to
add a class of employees to the SEC Individuals and organizations that are qualified to
submit an SEC petition on behalf of a class Minimum requirements that must be met for
an SEC petition to qualify for consideration Procedures to involve and notify petitioners
in  the  petition  process  and  to  allow  petitioners  to  seek  administrative  reviews  of
proposed decisions  In addition to having worked for a specific period of time at one of
the SEC work sites, a covered employee must also have at least one of the following
types of cancer to qualify for compensation under the SEC: Bone cancer Renal cancers
Leukemia (other than chronic lymphocytic leukemia) provided the onset of the disease
was at least two years after first exposure Lung cancer (other than in-situ lung cancer
that is discovered during or after a post-mortem exam) The following diseases provided
onset was at least five years after first exposure: Multiple myeloma Lymphomas (other
than Hodgkin’s disease) Primary cancer of the: Bile ducts Brain Breast (female) Breast
(male) Colon Esophagus Gall bladder Liver (except if cirrhosis or hepatitis B is indicated)
Ovary  Pancreas  Pharynx  Salivary  gland  Small  intestine  Stomach  Thyroid  Urinary
bladder  A “class of employees” is defined in the SEC rule as a group of employees who
work or worked at the same DOE facility or AWE facility, and for whom the availability
of information and recorded data on radiation exposures is comparable with respect to
the  informational  needs  required  to  complete  a  radiation  dose  reconstruction  as
required under The Act. The sites listed below currently have classes of employees in
the  SEC.  Please  click  on  the  links  below  to  view  the  specific  details  of  the  class
definition and petition information. 
    NIOSH welcomes comments from interested stakeholders (claimants, organized labor
groups, worker advocacy groups, etc.) on the SEC documents. Please include the name
of  the  work  site,  the  title  of  the  document,  or  the  Site  Profile/Docket  Number  when
submitting comments. All comments should be sent to NIOSH:     Department of Health
and Human Services

    National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
    Robert A. Taft Laboratories, MS-C34
    1090 Tusculum Avenue
    Cincinnati,  OH  45226      Hours:  Monday  through  Friday,  8:30  a.m.  to  4:00  p.m.
Eastern Standard Time     Telephone: (513) 533-8611     Fax: (513) 533-8285     Email:
nioshdocket@cdc.gov
  More information on the SEC can be found on the FAQs: Special Exposure Cohort (SEC)
page of our website.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/ocas/ocassec.html
