A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  CDC  investigates  each  multistate
foodborne  outbreak  thoroughly  using  a  7-step  process.  The  steps  are  described  in
order, but investigations are dynamic and several steps may happen at the same time. 
Multistate outbreaks are usually identified by PulseNet, but other public health partners
also  identify  them  and  report  them  to  CDC.  PulseNet  is  CDC's  national  laboratory
network  for  detecting  bacterial  enteric  (intestinal)  disease  outbreaks.  Multistate
outbreaks  are  usually  detected  by  PulseNet.  PulseNet  scientists  look  for  groups  of
people sickened by bacteria with the same DNA fingerprint (strain). Scientists perform
DNA fingerprinting on bacteria using a method called whole genome sequencing (WGS).
When a group of people get sick from bacteria with the same DNA fingerprint around
the  same  time,  it's  called  a  cluster  (possible  outbreak).  When  an  investigation  shows
that people in a cluster have something in common, suggesting they got sick from the
same  source,  the  group  of  illnesses  is  called  an  outbreak.  Local  and  state  health
departments  and  federal  partners  like  FDA  and  USDA  may  also  receive  reports  from
sick  people,  healthcare  providers,  and  others  about  possible  outbreaks.  Information
from these reports is frequently shared with CDC to see if the illnesses might suggest
that a multistate outbreak is happening. Finding sick people is important to help public
health officials understand the size and severity of a possible multistate outbreak and
decide  if  there  is  ongoing  risk  to  the  public.  Outbreak  investigators  develop  a  case
definition  to  define  which  sick  people  will  be  included  in  the  outbreak.  They  also  use
this definition to search for additional sick people that are part of the outbreak. Case
definitions  define  who  will  be  included  as  part  of  the  multistate  outbreak.  Multistate
outbreak  case  definitions  usually  include  details  about:  Multistate  outbreak  case
definitions do not typically limit who is included in the outbreak based on what state the
sick  person  lives  in  or  demographic  characteristics  of  the  sick  person,  such  as  age,

gender, or race. The number of sick people that meet the case definition is called the
case count. Using the case definition, local, state, and federal investigators search for
more cases related to the outbreak. For multistate outbreaks, investigators review DNA
fingerprint  information  on  cases  reported  through  PulseNet.  State  and  local  officials
may also look at other information to find cases that may be part of the outbreak and
work  to  get  DNA  fingerprinting  information,  including:  In  a  multistate  outbreak
investigation, a hypothesis is a guess about the source of the illnesses based on what
information  is  known.  Hypothesis  generation  is  an  ongoing  process  during  an
investigation.  Early  in  multistate  outbreak  investigations,  it  may  not  even  be  clear
whether the outbreak is caused by a contaminated food or something else, like contact
with animals. Many sources of information help to quickly narrow down how people in
the  outbreak  got  sick.  Basic  information  about  who  is  getting  sick  in  a  multistate
outbreak  and  where  and  when  the  illnesses  are  happening  can  help  investigators
narrow the list of possible sources. Investigators use a graph called an epidemic curve
or epi curve to track the number of illnesses over time. The pattern of the epi curve
helps investigators decide if sick people were exposed to the same source over a short
period or if the exposure was over a longer time. Investigators also use maps to mark
where sick people live so they can easily see if or how the outbreak is spreading. The
timing and spread of illnesses can provide important clues about possible causes of the
outbreak, including whether a food causing an outbreak has a short or long shelf life
and  whether  a  food  is  distributed  regionally  or  nationally.  Before  DNA  fingerprinting
information  is  available,  state  and  local  health  departments  already  know  that  a
possible  foodborne  illness  has  been  reported  in  their  state.  State  and  local  health
departments  interview  these  sick  people  with  standard  questionnaires.  For  many
illnesses,  like  Salmonella,  Listeria,  and  E.  coli  infections,  states  collect  information  on
foods  and  other  exposures  that  caused  illnesses  or  outbreaks  in  the  past.  For  some
germs, the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists recommends that state and

local  health  departments  ask  sick  people  about  certain  foods  and  other  exposures.
When investigators suspect that a contaminated food is causing a multistate outbreak,
they consider many different foods as the possible source. State and local public health
officials  interview  people  to  find  out  what  and  where  they  ate  in  the  days  or  weeks
before getting sick. These interviews are called hypothesis-generating interviews, and
they usually are much more detailed than routine enteric illness interviews. The time
period investigators ask about depends on how long it takes for a germ to cause illness,
which varies. CDC works closely with local and state public health officials to ask sick
people  in  the  outbreak  a  common  set  of  questions.  Depending  on  what  is  already
known,  interviews  may  focus  on  specific  foods,  but  most  hypothesis-generating
interviews  ask  about  many  possible  food  exposures.  View  sample  questionnaires  and
surveillance  tools.  Hypothesis-generating  interviews  typically  include  questions  on:
Information  from  prior  experience  with  the  strain  causing  an  outbreak  can  also  help
investigators  narrow  the  list  of  possible  causes.  Sometimes  the  germ  has  caused
outbreaks  in  the  past  or  has  been  found  in  foods,  animals,  the  environment,  or  food
facilities.  These  findings  can  provide  clues  about  the  source  of  an  outbreak,  but  an
outbreak  source  is  only  confirmed  after  other  types  of  information  support  the  link
between a food and the illnesses. Interviews rely on memory, and it can take several
weeks  from  the  time  someone  gets  sick  to  confirm  they  are  a  part  of  an  outbreak.
Someone may not remember what they ate many weeks ago. Remembering is harder
when the contaminated food is an ingredient such as eggs, spices, or herbs, because
people  often  do  not  know  specific  ingredients  of  the  food  they  ate.  These  challenges
make  it  harder  for  investigators  to  quickly  generate  a  hypothesis,  and  investigators
may need to re-interview people when a new hypothesis is generated. Home visits can
be  helpful  to  look  at  the  foods  in  a  sick  person's  pantry  and  refrigerator.  With
permission, investigators may also get information from a sick person's shopper cards
and  other  records  of  food  purchases  like  receipts.  Once  investigators  have  narrowed

down  the  likely  source  of  the  outbreak  to  a  few  possible  foods,  they  test  the
hypotheses. Investigators can use many different methods to test their hypotheses, but
most  methods  entail  studies  that  compare  how  often  (frequency)  sick  people  in  the
outbreak ate certain foods to how often people not part of the outbreak ate those foods.
If  eating  a  particular  food  is  associated  with  getting  sick  in  the  outbreak,  it  provides
evidence that the food is the likely source. Investigators can describe the strength of
the association between food and illness by using statistical tests or measures, such as
odds ratios and confidence intervals. An illness cluster is when two or more people who
do  not  live  in  the  same  household  report  eating  at  the  same  restaurant  location,
attending a common event, or shopping at the same location of a grocery store before
getting sick. Investigating illness clusters can help test hypotheses about the source of
an outbreak because an illness cluster suggests that the contaminated food item was
served  or  sold  at  the  cluster  location.  Conducting  epidemiologic  studies  within  illness
cluster  locations  can  be  an  effective  way  to  identify  foods  that  are  associated  with
illness. Case-control and cohort studies can both be used in illness cluster investigations
and  are  especially  useful  when  they  assess  associations  between  illness  and  specific
food ingredients. In some multistate outbreaks, investigators identify numerous illness
clusters. In those situations, looking for common ingredients that people ate across all
the illness clusters can help investigators test hypotheses, even in the absence of an
epidemiologic  study.  Investigators  often  compare  the  frequency  of  foods  reported  by
sick  people  in  a  multistate  outbreak  to  data  that  already  exist  about  healthy  people.
The most common source for data about how often healthy people eat certain foods is
the FoodNet Population Survey, a periodic survey of randomly selected residents in the
FoodNet surveillance area. The most recent FoodNet Population Survey was conducted
during 2018–2019 and included interviews from 38,743 adults and children. In addition
to information on food exposures, the survey also includes questions on demographic
characteristics,  such  as  age,  gender,  race,  and  ethnicity.  Investigators  use  statistical

tests  to  determine  if  people  in  an  outbreak  report  eating  any  of  the  suspected  foods
significantly more often than people in the survey. Comparing the frequency of foods
reported  by  sick  people  to  existing  data  is  often  faster  than  conducting  a  formal
epidemiologic study. If one or more of the suspected foods under consideration are not
included  on  the  FoodNet  Population  Survey,  investigators  might  need  to  do  an
epidemiologic study to determine whether consuming the food is associated with being
ill. Several types of studies can be conducted during multistate foodborne outbreaks:
There are several reasons why hypothesis testing might not identify the likely source of
an outbreak. Even if investigators do not find a statistical association between a food
and illness, the outbreak could still be foodborne. If the outbreak has ended, the source
of  the  outbreak  is  considered  unknown.  If  people  are  still  getting  sick,  investigators
keep gathering information to find the food that is causing the illnesses. Health officials
use  three  types  of  data  to  confirm  the  source  of  a  multistate  foodborne  outbreak:
epidemiologic,  traceback,  and  food  and  environmental  testing.  Once  the  analysis  of
epidemiologic data indicates a suspected source for the outbreak, traceback and food
or environmental testing data are used to confirm whether the food is the source. In
addition to helping confirm which food is causing the outbreak, officials use traceback
and  testing  information  to  help  find  exactly  where  contamination  occurred.
Contamination  can  happen  anywhere  along  the  chain  of  food  production,  including
during  growing,  harvesting,  processing,  transportation,  handling,  or  preparation.
Knowing where contamination occurred can help public health officials take actions to
stop  the  outbreak.  During  multistate  foodborne  outbreaks,  traceback  is  usually
conducted  by  state  and  federal  food  regulatory  authorities  and  involves  determining
the  movement  of  food  through  the  food  production  and  distribution  chain.  Traceback
usually starts by following a suspected food consumed by a sick person back through
the  points  of  distribution,  processing,  and  production  to  determine  the  source  of  the
product  or  its  ingredients.  When  a  food  reported  by  several  sick  people  share  a

common point in the chain of food production, it can confirm the food is the source of
the  outbreak  and  suggests  that  contamination  happened  at  or  before  the  common
point. For example, if several people bought and ate different brands of salad that were
packed at a common facility, this suggests that the salads were contaminated at the
facility  or  that  the  facility  received  a  contaminated  salad  ingredient.  Finding  the
outbreak strain (germ with the same DNA fingerprint as those making people sick) in a
food or in a food-growing or production environment can also confirm the source of an
outbreak.  Public  health  officials  look  for  opportunities  to  test  suspected  foods  in
outbreaks,  such  as  leftovers  in  sick  people's  homes  and  suspected  foods  from
restaurants, grocery stores, or in the supply chain. Sometimes foods being tested for
other  reasons  will  identify  an  outbreak  strain  and  help  confirm  the  source  of  the
outbreak. Food testing is most useful when it is driven by results of the epidemiologic
investigation. Identifying the outbreak strain in a food cannot by itself confirm that the
food is the source of the outbreak. Information from interviews must also show that sick
people  consumed  the  contaminated  food.  Traceback  can  be  challenging  for  several
reasons. Sometimes records documenting the movement of foods through the supply
chain  are  missing,  incomplete,  or  not  linkable  across  companies.  Also,  if  sick  people
consumed the same food multiple times before getting sick, it can be difficult to know
which  exposure  to  trace  back.  Finally,  investigators  often  don't  have  enough  detail
about a food exposure to start a traceback. For example, a sick person might not have
information  on  the  specific  brand  or  production  date  of  a  food  they  ate.  Food  and
environmental  testing  can  also  be  challenging.  Investigators  need  to  collect  enough
epidemiologic  information  to  know  which  foods  or  environments  to  test.  Even  if  they
have enough information to test specific foods, it may be difficult to find foods to test if
the  product  has  a  short  shelf  life.  Sometimes  leftover  foods  in  open  containers  can
include  a  mix  of  ingredients,  which  also  makes  test  results  challenging  to  interpret.
Finally, only a small fraction of any given food can be tested during an outbreak, so a

negative test does not prove that a food was not contaminated. Investigators must act
quickly  in  multistate  outbreaks  to  prevent  more  illnesses.  If  contaminated  food  isn't
removed from store shelves, restaurant kitchens, or homes, more people may get sick.
When  investigators  confirm  the  source  of  an  outbreak,  it  usually  means  they  have
collected enough information to take actions to stop the outbreak. Sometimes actions
can  be  taken  even  if  a  food  is  only  suspected  as  the  cause.  Public  health  officials
choose  control  measures  based  on  the  information  available  to  them.  Public  health
officials  can  sometimes  take  actions  to  stop  the  outbreak  based  solely  on  strong
epidemiological  evidence  of  the  source.  They  don't  have  to  wait  on  a  laboratory  to
identify the outbreak strain in the food. As officials learn more during the investigation,
they  may  change,  focus,  or  expand  control  measures  and  advice  to  the  public  and
businesses. It can be difficult to take actions to prevent illness in a multistate outbreak.
Public  health  officials  try  their  best  to  inform  the  public  about  the  outbreak  and  the
contaminated or recalled food. However, the advice may not reach everyone, and some
people may unknowingly eat the contaminated food. Even when people are aware of
the outbreak, it can sometimes be difficult for them to identify the contaminated food.
For  example,  some  recalls  involve  hundreds  of  products,  while  some  recalls  include
products of a specific lot code and expiry date. In addition, some recalls of food items,
like  onions  or  chicken,  can  lead  to  many  downstream  recalls  of  products  made  with
those  ingredients,  such  as  pizza  or  deli  salads.  An  outbreak  is  considered  over  when
new illnesses stop being identified or the contaminated food is no longer on the market
or  in  people's  homes.  The  epidemic  curve  helps  investigators  see  when  illnesses  are
declining. Even when illnesses from the outbreak appear to have stopped, public health
officials continue to monitor for new illnesses for a few weeks. This allows investigators
to  be  sure  the  control  measures  were  effective  and  gives  time  for  any  additional
illnesses  to  be  reported.  If  the  number  of  illnesses  rises  again,  the  investigation
continues or restarts. It could mean that the source was not completely eliminated from

the market or people's homes, or a second contamination event has occurred. Public
health officials also work to decide whether contaminated food is still available for sale
or in people's homes. This involves assessing the shelf life of the product, how quickly it
is used, and whether it can be frozen. Investigators also try to determine whether the
source  of  contamination  has  the  potential  to  affect  many  food  products  or  foods
produced over a long period of time. It takes time for an illness to be confirmed as a
part  of  a  multistate  outbreak,  so  investigators  are  often  evaluating  information  that
reflects people who ate the contaminated food weeks ago. This reporting lag can make
it  difficult  to  know  when  illnesses  have  truly  stopped.  In  addition,  some  strains  of
bacteria continually cause illnesses at low levels, so illnesses might never completely
stop  being  reported.  Finally,  it  can  be  difficult  to  confirm  whether  a  contaminated
product  is  still  on  the  market.  Learn  how  CDC  works  with  partners  to  investigate,
respond  to,  and  prevent  foodborne  outbreaks.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/foodborne-outbreaks/investigation-steps/index.html
