A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information  only  on  official,  secure  websites.  Instrument  processing  requires  multiple
steps  using  specialized  equipment.  Each  dental  practice  should  have  policies  and
procedures  in  place  for  containing,  transporting,  and  handling  instruments  and
equipment  that  may  be  contaminated  with  blood  or  body  fluids.  Manufacturer’s
instructions  for  reprocessing  reusable  dental  instruments  and  equipment  should  be
readily available—ideally in or near the reprocessing area. Most single-use devices are
labeled  by  the  manufacturer  for  only  a  single  use  and  do  not  have  reprocessing
instructions. Use single-use devices for one patient only and dispose of appropriately.
Cleaning,  disinfection,  and  sterilization  of  dental  equipment  should  be  assigned  to
dental health care personnel (DHCP) with training in the required reprocessing steps to
ensure  reprocessing  results  in  a  device  that  can  be  safely  used  for  patient  care.
Training should also include the appropriate use of personal protective equipment (PPE)
necessary for safe handling of contaminated equipment. Patient-care items (e.g., dental
instruments,  devices,  and  equipment)  are  categorized  as  critical,  semicritical,  or
noncritical, depending on the potential risk for infection associated with their intended
use. Note: Dental handpieces and associated attachments, including low-speed motors
and  reusable  prophylaxis  angles,  should  always  be  heat  sterilized  between
patients—not high-level or surface disinfected. Although these devices are considered
semicritical, studies have shown that their internal surfaces can become contaminated
with patient materials during use. If these devices are not properly cleaned and heat
sterilized, the next patient may be exposed to potentially infectious materials. Digital
radiography  sensors  are  also  considered  semicritical  and  should  be  protected  with  a
Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)-cleared  barrier  to  reduce  contamination  during
use,  followed  by  cleaning  and  heat  sterilization  or  high-level  disinfection  between
patients. If the item cannot tolerate these procedures then, at a minimum, protect with

an  FDA-cleared  barrier.  In  addition,  clean  and  disinfect  with  an  Environmental
Protection  Agency  (EPA)-registered  hospital  disinfectant  with  intermediate-level  (i.e.,
tuberculocidal  claim)  activity  between  patients.  Because  these  items  vary  by
manufacturer and their ability to be sterilized or high-level disinfected also vary, refer
to manufacturer instructions for reprocessing. Cleaning to remove debris and organic
contamination from instruments should always occur before disinfection or sterilization.
If blood, saliva, and other contamination are not removed, these materials can shield
microorganisms  and  potentially  compromise  the  disinfection  or  sterilization  process.
Automated cleaning equipment (e.g., ultrasonic cleaner, washer-disinfector) should be
used to remove debris to improve cleaning effectiveness and decrease worker exposure
to blood. After cleaning, dried instruments should be inspected, wrapped, packaged, or
placed into container systems before heat sterilization. Packages should be labeled to
show  the  sterilizer  used,  the  cycle  or  load  number,  the  date  of  sterilization,  and,  if
applicable, the expiration date. This information can help in retrieving processed items
in the event of an instrument processing/sterilization failure. The ability of a sterilizer to
reach  conditions  necessary  to  achieve  sterilization  should  be  monitored  using  a
combination of biological, mechanical, and chemical indicators. Biological indicators, or
spore  tests,  are  the  most  accepted  method  for  monitoring  the  sterilization  process
because they assess the sterilization process directly by killing known highly resistant
microorganisms (e.g., Geobacillus or Bacillus species). A spore test should be used at
least  weekly  to  monitor  sterilizers.  However,  because  spore  tests  are  only  performed
periodically  (e.g.,  once  a  week,  once  a  day)  and  the  results  are  usually  not  obtained
immediately,  mechanical  and  chemical  monitoring  should  also  be  performed.
Mechanical and chemical indicators do not guarantee sterilization; however, they help
detect procedural errors and equipment malfunctions. Mechanical monitoring involves
checking  the  sterilizer  gauges,  computer  displays,  or  printouts;  and  documenting  the
sterilization  pressure,  temperature,  and  exposure  time  in  your  sterilization  records.

Since these parameters can be observed during the sterilization cycle, this might be the
first indication of a problem. Chemical monitoring uses sensitive chemicals that change
color  when  exposed  to  high  temperatures  or  combinations  of  time  and  temperature.
Examples  include  chemical  indicator  tapes,  strips,  or  tabs,  and  special  markings  on
packaging  materials.  Chemical  monitoring  results  are  obtained  immediately  following
the  sterilization  cycle  and  therefore  can  provide  more  timely  information  about  the
sterilization cycle than a spore test. A chemical indicator should be used inside every
package to  verify  that the sterilizing  agent (e.g.,  steam) has penetrated  the package
and reached the instruments inside. If the internal chemical indicator is not visible from
the  outside  of  the  package,  an  external  indicator  should  also  be  used.  External
indicators can be inspected immediately when removing packages from the sterilizer. If
the  appropriate  color  change  did  not  occur,  do  not  use  the  instruments.  Chemical
indicators  also  help  to  differentiate  between  processed  and  unprocessed  items,
eliminating the possibility of using instruments that have not been sterilized. Note: A
single-parameter  internal  chemical  indicator  provides  information  regarding  only  one
sterilization  parameter  (e.g.,  time  or  temperature).  Multiparameter  internal  chemical
indicators  are  designed  to  react  to  ≥ 2  parameters  (e.g.,  time  and  temperature;  or
time,  temperature,  and  the  presence  of  steam)  and  can  provide  a  more  reliable
indication  that  sterilization  conditions  have  been  met.  Sterilization  monitoring  (e.g.,
biological, mechanical, chemical monitoring) and equipment maintenance records are
an important component of a dental infection prevention program. Maintaining accurate
records  ensures  cycle  parameters  have  been  met  and  establishes  accountability.  In
addition,  if  there  is  a  problem  with  a  sterilizer  (e.g.,  unchanged  chemical  indicator,
positive  spore  test),  documentation  helps  to  determine  if  an  instrument  recall  is
necessary.  Ideally,  sterile  instruments  and  supplies  should  be  stored  in  covered  or
closed  cabinets.  Wrapped  packages  of  sterilized  instruments  should  be  inspected
before opening and use to ensure the packaging material has not been compromised

(e.g.,  wet,  torn,  punctured)  during  storage.  The  contents  of  any  compromised  packs
should be reprocessed (i.e., cleaned, packaged, and heat-sterilized again) before use on
a  patient.  Recommendations  for  the  cleaning,  disinfection,  and  sterilization  of  dental
equipment  can  be  found  in  the  Guidelines  for  Infection  Control  in  Dental  Health-Care
Settings—2003.  Recommendations  for  the  cleaning,  disinfection,  and  sterilization  of
medical  equipment  are  available  in  the  Guideline  for  Disinfection  and  Sterilization  in
Healthcare Facilities (2008). FDA regulations on reprocessing of single-use devices are
available by visiting FDA regulations on reprocessing of single-use devices. Policies and
procedures  for  routine  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  environmental  surfaces  should  be
included as part of the infection prevention plan. Cleaning removes large numbers of
microorganisms  from  surfaces  and  should  always  precede  disinfection.  Disinfection  is
generally  a  less  lethal  process  of  microbial  inactivation  (compared  with  sterilization)
that eliminates virtually all recognized pathogenic microorganisms but not necessarily
all  microbial  forms  (e.g.,  bacterial  spores).  Emphasis  for  cleaning  and  disinfection
should  be  placed  on  surfaces  that  are  most  likely  to  become  contaminated  with
pathogens, including clinical contact surfaces (e.g., frequently touched surfaces such as
light  handles,  bracket  trays,  switches  on  dental  units,  computer  equipment)  in  the
patient-care  area.  When  these  surfaces  are  touched,  microorganisms  can  be
transferred to other surfaces, instruments, or to the nose, mouth, or eyes of DHCP or
patients. Although hand hygiene is the key to minimizing the spread of microorganisms,
clinical contact surfaces should be barrier protected or cleaned and disinfected between
patients.  EPA-registered  hospital  disinfectants  or  detergents/disinfectants  with  label
claims  for  use  in  health  care  settings  should  be  used  for  disinfection.  Disinfectant
products  should  not  be  used  as  cleaners  unless  the  label  indicates  the  product  is
suitable  for  such  use.  DHCP  should  follow  manufacturer  recommendations  for  use  of
products  selected  for  cleaning  and  disinfection  (e.g.,  amount,  dilution,  contact  time,
safe use, and disposal). Facility policies and procedures should also address prompt and

appropriate  cleaning  and  decontamination  of  spills  of  blood  or  other  potentially
infectious materials. Housekeeping surfaces, (e.g., floors, walls, sinks) carry less risk of
disease transmission than clinical contact surfaces and can be cleaned with soap and
water or cleaned and disinfected if visibly contaminated with blood. Additional guidance
for  the  cleaning  and  disinfection  of  environmental  surfaces—including  for  cleaning
blood  or  body  substance  spills—is  available  in  the  Guidelines  for  Environmental
Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities (2003) and the Guideline for Disinfection and
Sterilization  in  Healthcare  Facilities  (2008).  CDC  protects  patients  and  providers  by
developing  recommendations  that  guide  infection  prevention  and  control  practices
wherever  dental  care  is  delivered.  Languages  Language  Assistance  Languages  
Language Assistance 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/dental-infection-control/hcp/summary/sterilization-disinfection.html
