A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. A
lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites. Tables summarizing the recommendations
from  the  Guideline  for  Isolation  Precautions:  Preventing  Transmission  of  Infectious
Agents in Healthcare Settings (2007). These recommendations are designed to prevent
transmission of infectious agents among patients and healthcare personnel inpatients
with suspected or proven SARS all settings where healthcare is delivered. As in other
CDC/HICPAC  guidelines,  each  recommendation  is  categorized  on  the  basis  of  existing
scientific data, theoretical rationale, applicability, and when possible, economic impact.
The  CDC/HICPAC  system  for  categorizing  recommendations  is  as  follows:  Healthcare
organization administrators should ensure the implementation of recommendations in
this  section.  Assume  that  every  person  is  potentially  infected  or  colonized  with  an
organism  that  could  be  transmitted  in  the  healthcare  setting  and  apply  the  following
infection control practices during the delivery of health care. (See Figure) The following
recommendations  apply  to  the  use  of  needles,  cannulas  that  replace  needles,  and,
where applicable, intravenous delivery systems.454 V.B.2. Patient placement V.B.3. Use
of personal protective equipment Wear gloves whenever touching the patient’s intact
skin or surfaces and articles in close proximity to the patient (e.g., medical equipment,
bed  rails).  Don  gloves  upon  entry  into  the  room  or  cubicle.  V.B.4.  Patient  transport
V.B.5.  Patient-care  equipment  and  instruments/devices  Ensure  that  rooms  of  patients
on  Contact  Precautions  are  prioritized  for  frequent  cleaning  and  disinfection  (e.g.,  at
least daily) with a focus on frequently-touched surfaces (e.g., bed rails, overbed table,
bedside commode, lavatory surfaces in patient bathrooms, doorknobs) and equipment
in the immediate vicinity of the patient. Restrict susceptible healthcare personnel from
entering the rooms of patients known or suspected to have measles (rubeola), varicella
(chickenpox),  disseminated  zoster,  or  smallpox  if  other  immune  healthcare  personnel
are available  Interim Measles Infection Control [July 2019]

For  current  recommendations  on  face  protection  for  measles,  see  Interim  Infection
Prevention  and  Control  Recommendations  for  Measles  in  Healthcare  Settings  No
recommendation  is  made  regarding  the  type  of  personal  protective  equipment  (i.e.,
surgical mask or respiratory protection with a N95 or higher respirator) to be worn by
susceptible healthcare personnel who must have contact with patients with known or
suspected  measles,  chickenpox  or  disseminated  herpes  zoster.  CDC  provides
information on infection control and clinical safety to help reduce the risk of infections
among  healthcare  workers,  patients,  and  visitors.  Languages  Language  Assistance
Languages  Language Assistance 

Source
 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/infection-control/hcp/isolation-precautions/summary-recommendations.html
