Investigating  outbreaks  caused  by  non-infectious,  toxic  agents  requires  some  unique
considerations  and  skills  that  are  different  from  those  used  to  investigate  infectious
disease outbreaks. To help public health agencies investigate these outbreaks, CDC’s
National  Center  for  Environmental  Health  (NCEH)  has  developed  a  Toxicological
Outbreak  Investigation  course.  The  goal  of  the  Toxicological  Outbreak  Investigation
Course  is  to  provide  information,  resources,  and  learning  activities  to  impart  the
knowledge  and  skills  needed  to  investigate  a  toxicological  outbreak  to  public  health
practitioners  who  investigate  outbreaks.  The  Toxicological  Outbreak  investigation
toolkit  is  a  collection  of  sample  customizable  documents  that  can  be  used  during  an
outbreak investigation. This toolkit is available for downloadzip icon. Module Title and
Description  Module  1  Title  and  Description  Course  Introduction  and  Overview  In  this
module, we will define what a toxic agent is and provide a brief overview of the course,
and  describe  the  contents  of  the  Toxicological  Outbreak  Investigation  Tool  Kit.  The
module slides are available for download: Module 1 pdf icon[PDF – 1 MB] Module 2 Title
and  Description  Toxicological  Principles  In  this  module,  we  will  consider  what  a  toxic
agent outbreak looks like and the characteristics to look for when determining whether
one  is  taking  place.  We  will  define  toxidromes  and  discuss  the  various  factors  that
affect  toxicity.  We  will  also  examine  two  key  concepts  used  by  toxicologists.  The
module slides are available for download: Module 2 pdf icon[PDF – 1 MB] Module 3 Title
and Description Toxicological Laboratory Principles In this module, we will explain the
importance of early sample collection and the information needed in sample collection
protocols. We will also discuss what needs to be considered when a need for laboratory
testing  is  identified  and  the  collection  of  comparison  samples.  The  module  slides  are
available for download: Module 3 pdf icon[PDF – 720 KB]. Module 4 Title and Description
Analyzing and Interpreting Laboratory Results I n this module, we will discuss how to
analyze and interpret laboratory results. We will define what the limit of detection (LOD)
is, and identify the constant values that can be substituted for values lower than the

LOD. We will look at examples of how adjustments may be made to laboratory results.
We will also discuss log-normal distribution data and describe the information needed
to interpret laboratory results. The module slides are available for download: Module 4
pdf icon[PDF – 1 MB]. Module 5 Title and Description Steps of a Toxicological Outbreak
Investigation – Part 1 | Part 2 | Part 3 In this module, we will discuss the steps in an
outbreak  investigation.  The  module  slides  are  available  for  download:  Module  5  pdf
icon[PDF – 3 MB] Module 6 Title and Description Domestic Case Study In this module,
you  will  have  the  opportunity  to  practice  what  you  have  learned  in  Modules  1-5  by
completing  a  domestic  case  study.  The  module  slides  are  available,  for  download:
Module  6  pdf  icon[PDF  –  859  KB]  Module  7  Title  and  Description  International  Case
Study In this module, you will have the opportunity to practice what you have learned in
Modules 1-5 by completing an international case study. The module slides are available,
for  download:  Module  7  pdf  icon[PDF  –  2  MB]  PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION:   The
Toxicological  Outbreak  Investigation  course  is  an  online  course  that  includes  seven
modules. The goal of the Toxicological Outbreak Investigation Course is to provide the
skills  and  strategies  needed  to  investigate  a  toxicological  outbreak,  which  would
improve  the  competence  and  performance  of  the  workforce,  and  allow  timely  and
efficient  response  to  these  outbreaks,  which  will  ultimately  save  lives  and  prevent
future outbreaks. OBJECTIVES: At the conclusion of the session, the participant will be
able to: FACULTY/CREDENTIALS:                                            ORIGINATION DATE: January
01, 2020 RENEWAL DATE: January 01, 2022 EXPIRATION DATE: January 01, 2024 URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/elearning/toi/ HARDWARE/SOFTWARE: The course can be
accessed at the following link: https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/elearning/toi/. The learner
will need internet access.  There are no audio requirements for the course. MATERIALS:
 Participant’s  guide  on  website.  TARGET  AUDIENCE:  Epidemiologists,  general  public
health  professionals  PREREQUISITES:   The  target  audience  includes  public  health
practitioners who investigate outbreaks. The prerequisite skills include prior experience

in  investigating  outbreaks  or  potential  to  investigate  outbreaks  as  part  of  job.  The
prerequisite  knowledge  includes  basic  knowledge  of  epidemiological  principles.
FORMAT:   Web-based  CONTACT  INFORMATION:  Johnni  Daniel,  (770)  488-3415
ACCREDITATION  STATEMENTS:   In  support  of  improving  patient  care,  The  Centers  for
Disease  Control  and  Prevention  is  jointly  accredited  by  the  Accreditation  Council  for
Continuing  Medical  Education  (ACCME),  the  Accreditation  Council  for  Pharmacy
Education  (ACPE),  and  the  American  Nurses  Credentialing  Center  (ANCC),  to  provide
continuing education for the healthcare team. CEU: The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention is authorized by IACET to offer 0.3 CEU’s for this program. DISCLOSURE: In
compliance  with  continuing  education  requirements,  all  presenters  must  disclose  any
financial  or  other  associations  with  the  manufacturers  of  commercial  products,
suppliers  of  commercial  services,  or  commercial  supporters  as  well  as  any  use  of
unlabeled  product(s)  or  product(s)  under  investigational  use.  CDC,  our  planners,
content  experts,  and  their  spouses/partners  wish  to  disclose  they  have  no  financial
interests  or  other  relationships  with  the  manufacturers  of  commercial  products,
suppliers  of  commercial  services,  or  commercial  supporters.  Planners  have  reviewed
content  to  ensure  there  is  no  bias.  Content  will  not  include  any  discussion  of  the
unlabeled use of a product or a product under investigational use. CDC did not accept
commercial  support  for  this  continuing  education  activity.  Instructions  for  Obtaining
Continuing  Education  (CE)  In  order  to  receive  continuing  education  (CE)  for  WB4195-
Toxicological Outbreak Investigation Course please visit TCEO and follow these 9 Simple
Steps  before  January  01,  2024.  Complete  the  activity  Complete  the  Evaluation  at  
www.cdc.gov/GetCE Pass the posttest at 80% at www.cdc.gov/GetCE FEES: No fees are
charged for CDC’s CE activities. References:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/elearning/toi/default.htm
