Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Weekly  /  May  17,  2019  /  68(19);439–443  Lynn  E.  Sosa,
MD1,2; Gibril J. Njie, MPH3; Mark N. Lobato, MD2; Sapna Bamrah; Morris, MD3; William
Buchta,  MD4,5;  Megan  L.  Casey,  MPH6;  Neela  D.  Goswami,  MD3;  MaryAnn  Gruden,
MSN7;  Bobbi  Jo  Hurst7;  Amera  R.  Khan,  MPH3;  David  T.  Kuhar,  MD8;  David  M.
Lewinsohn, MD, PhD9; Trini A. Mathew, MD10; Gerald H. Mazurek, MD3; Randall Reves,
MD2,11;  Lisa  Paulos,  MPH2,12;  Wendy  Thanassi,  MD2,13;  Lorna  Will,  MA2;  Robert
Belknap,  MD2,11  (View  author  affiliations)  What  is  already  known  about  this  topic?
Since  1991,  U.S.  tuberculosis  (TB)  rates  have  declined,  including  among  health  care
personnel  (HCP).  Serial  TB  testing  has  limitations  in  populations  at  low  risk.  What  is
added  by  this  report?  A  systematic  review  found  a  low  percentage  of  HCP  have  a
positive  TB  test  at  baseline  and  upon  serial  testing.  Updated  recommendations  for
screening  and  testing  HCP  include  an  individual  baseline  (preplacement)  risk
assessment, symptom evaluation and testing of persons without prior TB or latent TB
infection  (LTBI),  no  routine  serial  testing  in  the  absence  of  exposure  or  ongoing
transmission,  treatment  for  HCP  diagnosed  with  LTBI,  annual  symptom  screening  for
persons  with  untreated  LTBI,  and  annual  TB  education  of  all  HCP.  What  are  the
implications  for  public  health  practice?  Increasing  LTBI  treatment  among  HCP  might
further decrease TB transmission in health care settings. Views equals page views plus
PDF  downloads  The  2005  CDC  guidelines  for  preventing  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis
transmission in health care settings include recommendations for baseline tuberculosis
(TB)  screening  of  all  U.S.  health  care  personnel  and  annual  testing  for  health  care
personnel  working  in  medium-risk  settings  or  settings  with  potential  for  ongoing
transmission  (1).  Using  evidence  from  a  systematic  review  conducted  by  a  National
Tuberculosis  Controllers  Association  (NTCA)-CDC  work  group,  and  following  methods

adapted  from  the  Guide  to  Community  Preventive  Services  (2,3),  the  2005  CDC
recommendations for testing U.S. health care personnel have been updated and now
include 1) TB screening with an individual risk assessment and symptom evaluation at
baseline (preplacement); 2) TB testing with an interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA)
or  a  tuberculin  skin  test  (TST)  for  persons  without  documented  prior  TB  disease  or
latent TB infection (LTBI); 3) no routine serial TB testing at any interval after baseline in
the  absence  of  a  known  exposure  or  ongoing  transmission;  4)  encouragement  of
treatment  for  all  health  care  personnel  with  untreated  LTBI,  unless  treatment  is
contraindicated; 5) annual symptom screening for health care personnel with untreated
LTBI;  and  6)  annual  TB  education  of  all  health  care  personnel.  Top  Historically,  U.S.
health care personnel were at increased risk for LTBI and TB disease from occupational
exposures;  however,  recent  data  suggest  that  this  might  no  longer  be  the  case.  TB
rates  in  the  United  States  have  declined  substantially;  the  annual  national  TB  rate  in
2017  (2.8  per  100,000  population)  represents  a  73%  decrease  from  the  rate  in  1991
(10.4) and a 42% decrease from the rate in 2005 (4.8) (4,5). Surveillance data reported
to  CDC  during  1995–2007  revealed  that  TB  incidence  rates  among  health  care
personnel were similar to those in the general population (6), raising questions about
the  cost-effectiveness  of  routine  serial  occupational  testing  (7).  In  addition,  a  recent
retrospective cohort study of approximately 40,000 health care personnel at a tertiary
U.S.  medical  center  in  a  low  TB-incidence  state  found  an  extremely  low  rate  of  TST
conversion  (0.3%)  during  1998–2014,  with  a  limited  proportion  attributable  to
occupational exposure (8). Moreover, IGRAs and TSTs have well-documented limitations
for serial testing of health care personnel at low risk for LTBI and TB disease (9,10). Top
In  2015,  an  NTCA-CDC  work  group  comprising  experts  in  TB,  infection  control,  and
occupational  health  was  formed  to  discuss  potential  updates  to  recommendations  for
health  care  personnel  TB  screening  and  testing.  The  work  group  included
representation  from  CDC,  state  and  local  public  health  departments,  academia,  and

occupational health associations. During 2015–2016, the work group met periodically to
discuss  where  updates  were  needed  to  the  2005  CDC  recommendations  and  to
establish  a  plan  for  the  review  of  evidence.  In  January  2017,  the  work  group
commenced a systematic literature review of the screening and testing of health care
personnel  for  TB  and  discussed  the  findings  during  a  web  conference  in  September
2017.  Updated  recommendations  were  developed  by  the  work  group  during  a  web
conference in December 2017. Systematic review methods and findings. A systematic
review of evidence published after release of the 2005 guidelines was conducted using
methodology  developed  for  the  Guide  to  Community  Preventive  Services  (2,3).  The
search included articles indexed in MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Scopus. The medical subject
headings  used  for  the  search  were  “latent  tuberculosis”  and  “tuberculosis”;  search
terms  included  “healthcare  worker,”  “healthcare  personnel,”  “health  worker,”
“occupational exposure,” and “occupational diseases.” English language articles were
included that 1) were published during January 2006–November 2017; 2) described TB
screening  and  testing  in  low-incidence  (11),  high-income  countries  (12);  3)  employed
study designs that were randomized controlled trials, prospective cohort, retrospective
cohort, or cross-sectional studies; and 4) reported LTBI prevalence, test conversion or
reversion,  or  TB  transmission  rates.  Each  study  was  independently  abstracted  and
assessed for suitability of study design by two reviewers using a data abstraction form
adapted  from  the  Guide  to  Community  Preventive  Services  (3).  This  search  identified
1,147 citations, of which 39 studies focused on TB screening and testing among health
care personnel; three studies (one that was an economic evaluation, one that focused
only on test performance, and one of limited execution quality) were excluded, leaving
36 studies in the analysis (Supplementary Box, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/77668).
Sixteen  (44%)  of  these  had  been  conducted  in  the  United  States,  with  the  remaining
studies  from  Australia  (one),  Europe  (17),  Israel  (one),  and  New  Zealand  (one).
Thirty-four (94%) studies had been conducted in a hospital setting; most used either a

retrospective
 cohort
 or
 cross-sectional
 design
 (14).
 Substantial
 unexplained
heterogeneity existed for all outcomes examined, even when stratified by location or
study design. An examination of the patterns of results did not indicate publication bias.
Five  U.S.  studies  reported  prior  bacillus  Calmette-Guérin  vaccination  by  health  care
personnel (median percentage = 7%; range = 2.3%–93%). Eight of the 16 U.S. studies
reported two-step TST testing at baseline. The remaining studies reported IGRA (six) or
a  combination  of  IGRA  and  TST  (two)  at  baseline.  Findings  from  the  metaanalyses
indicated that 5% and 3% of U.S. health care personnel tested positive at baseline by
IGRA  and  TST,  respectively,  and  that  4%  and  0.7%  converted  from  a  negative  to  a
positive  during  serial  testing  by  IGRA  and  TST,  respectively.  Among  U.S.  health  care
personnel  who  had  a  baseline  positive  test  and  were  retested  by  the  same  method
during serial testing, the second test was negative in 48% of cases by IGRA and 62% by
TST.  No  U.S.  studies  were  found  that  evaluated  the  clinical  implications  of  these
discordant  results.  Among  63,975  U.S.  health  care  personnel  from  eight  studies
reporting  disease  occurrence,  none  experienced  TB  disease.  Based  on  expert  opinion
from the NTCA-CDC work group and findings from the systematic review indicating that
a  limited  proportion  of  health  care  personnel  test  positive  at  baseline  and  convert
during  serial  testing,  recommendations  were  drafted  for  presentation  to  the  Advisory
Council on the Elimination of Tuberculosis (ACET) and the Healthcare Infection Control
Practices  Advisory  Committee  (HICPAC).  Expert  consultation  results.  The  draft
NTCA-CDC recommendations were presented publicly at the April 2018 ACET meeting
(13) and the May 2018 HICPAC meeting (14). Members of ACET and HICPAC were asked
to  provide  feedback  to  CDC  regarding  the  recommendations  and  their  accuracy,
practicability, clarity, and usefulness. Commenters during the ACET meeting noted that
the recommendation encouraging treatment of health care personnel with LTBI could
potentially generate cost savings and play an important role in the elimination of active
TB  disease  in  the  United  States.  Commenters  during  the  HICPAC  meeting  were

supportive of the need to reduce TB testing for health care personnel; questions were
raised  about  the  evidence  for,  and  feasibility  of,  implementing  some  of  the  proposed
changes. Commenters during both meetings also encouraged the work group’s plan for
a  supplemental  document  to  aid  health  care  facilities  in  implementing  the  updated
recommendations.  In  addition,  the  recommendations  were  presented  by  NTCA  at  the
National  Tuberculosis  Conference  in  May  2018  (15)  for  comment  and  feedback.
Conference  attendees  supported  the  need  for  updated  guidelines  and  the  content  of
the  recommendations  that  were  presented.  In  July  2018,  the  NTCA-CDC  work  group
held another web conference to address feedback received from the ACET, HICPAC, and
National
 Tuberculosis
 Conference
 meetings
 and
 finalized
 the
 updated
recommendations. The work group requested that NTCA convene a new work group to
develop the supplemental implementation guidance document supported by ACET and
HICPAC.  The  supplemental  document  is  expected  to  be  completed  by  NTCA  in  2019.
Top  Recommendations  from  the  2005  CDC  guidelines  that  are  outside  the  scope  of
health care personnel screening, testing, treatment, and education remain unchanged
(Table);  this  includes  continuing  facility  risk  assessments  for  guiding  infection  control
policies and procedures. Here, TB screening is defined as a process that includes a TB 
risk assessment, symptom evaluation, TB testing for M. tuberculosis infection (by either
IGRA or TST) for health care personnel without documented evidence of prior LTBI or TB
disease, and additional workup for TB disease for health care personnel with positive
test  results  or  symptoms  compatible  with  TB  disease.  This  update  does  not  include
recommendations for using an IGRA versus a TST for diagnosing LTBI, which have been
published  elsewhere  (16).  Baseline  (preplacement)  screening  and  testing.  All  U.S.
health  care  personnel  should  have  baseline  TB  screening,  including  an  individual  risk
assessment  (Box),  which  is  necessary  for  interpreting  any  test  result.  The  2005
guidelines state that baseline test results provide a basis for comparison in the event of
a potential or known exposure to M. tuberculosis, facilitate detection and treatment of

LTBI or TB disease in health care personnel before placement, and reduce the risk to
patients  and  other  health  care  personnel  (1).  The  risk  assessment  and  symptom
evaluation help guide decisions when interpreting test results. For example, health care
personnel  with  a  positive  test  who  are  asymptomatic,  unlikely  to  be  infected  with  M.
tuberculosis, and at low risk for progression on the basis of their risk assessment should
have  a  second  test  (either  an  IGRA  or  a  TST)  as  recommended  in  the  2017  TB
diagnostic guidelines of the American Thoracic Society, Infectious Diseases Society of
America,  and  CDC  (16).  In  this  example,  the  health  care  personnel  should  be
considered  infected  with  M.  tuberculosis  only  if  both  the  first  and  second  tests  are
positive.  Postexposure  screening  and  testing.  After  known  exposure  to  a  person  with
potentially  infectious  TB  disease  without  use  of  adequate  personal  protection,  health
care  personnel  should  have  a  timely  symptom  evaluation  and  additional  testing,  if
indicated. Those without documented evidence of prior LTBI or TB disease should have
an IGRA or a TST performed. Health care personnel with documented prior LTBI or TB
disease  do  not  need  another  test  for  infection  after  exposure.  These  persons  should
have further evaluation if a concern for TB disease exists. Those with an initial negative
test  should  be  retested  8–10  weeks  after  the  last  exposure,  preferably  by  using  the
same test type as was used for the prior negative test. Serial screening and testing for
health care personnel without LTBI. In the absence of known exposure or evidence of
ongoing  TB  transmission,  U.S.  health  care  personnel  (as  identified  in  the  2005
guidelines)  without  LTBI  should  not  undergo  routine  serial  TB  screening  or  testing  at
any interval after baseline (e.g., annually). Health care facilities might consider using
serial TB screening of certain groups who might be at increased occupational risk for TB
exposure  (e.g.,  pulmonologists  or  respiratory  therapists)  or  in  certain  settings  if
transmission  has  occurred  in  the  past  (e.g.,  emergency  departments).  Such
determinations should be individualized on the basis of factors that might include the
number  of  patients  with  infectious  pulmonary  TB  who  are  examined  in  these  areas,

whether delays in initiating airborne isolation occurred, or whether prior annual testing
has  revealed  ongoing  transmission.  Consultation  with  the  local  or  state  health
department is encouraged to assist in making these decisions. Health care personnel
might have risks for TB exposure that are not related to their work in the United States,
or  they  might  have  risks  for  TB  progression  after  baseline  testing  that  necessitate
special  consideration.  If  these  risks  are  unrecognized,  these  health  care  personnel
might experience TB disease and transmit TB to patients, coworkers, or other contacts.
Therefore, health care facilities should educate all health care personnel annually about
TB, including risk factors, signs, and symptoms; facilities also should encourage health
care personnel to discuss any potential occupational or nonoccupational TB exposure
with  their  primary  care  provider  and  occupational  health  clinician.  The  decision  to
perform TB testing after baseline should be based on the person’s risk for TB exposure
at work or elsewhere since that person’s last test. Evaluation and treatment of health
care personnel with positive test results. Health care personnel with a newly positive
test  result  (with  confirmation  for  those  persons  at  low  risk  as  described  previously)
should undergo a symptom evaluation and chest radiograph to assess for TB disease.
Additional  workup  might  be  indicated  on  the  basis  of  those  results.  Health  care
personnel with a prior positive TB test and documented normal chest radiograph do not
require  a  repeat  radiograph  unless  they  are  symptomatic  or  starting  LTBI  treatment
(16). The local public health department should be notified immediately if TB disease is
suspected. Health care personnel with LTBI and no prior treatment should be offered,
and  strongly  encouraged  to  complete,  treatment  with  a  recommended  regimen,
including short-course treatments, unless a contraindication exists (17,18). Health care
personnel  who  do  not  complete  LTBI  treatment  should  be  monitored  with  annual
symptom evaluation to detect early evidence of TB disease and to reevaluate the risks
and benefits of LTBI treatment. These health care personnel also should be educated
about  the  signs  and  symptoms  of  TB  disease  that  should  prompt  an  immediate

evaluation between screenings. Health care facilities should aim to identify LTBI among
health care personnel and encourage LTBI treatment. Health care facilities are urged to
collaborate  with  public  health  agencies  to  assist  in  achieving  this  goal.  Public  health
agencies can serve as a source for technical assistance, medical consultation regarding
diagnosis  and  treatment  of  LTBI,  and  clarification  of  state  or  local  regulations,
surveillance  requirements,  and  guidelines.  Sharing  information  and  experiences  with
public  health  agencies  is  necessary  for  understanding  the  impact  of  these
recommendations on the overall incidence of TB and LTBI in the United States and the
need to revise future recommendations for health care personnel. Top Corresponding
author:  Gibril  J.  Njie,  gnjie@cdc.gov,  404-639-3219.  Top  1Connecticut  Department  of
Public  Health;  2National  Tuberculosis  Controllers  Association,  Smyrna,  Georgia;
3Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD,
and  TB  Prevention,  CDC;  4Logistics  Health  Incorporated,  La  Crosse,  Wisconsin;
5American  College  of  Occupational  and  Environmental  Medicine,  Elk  Grove  Village,
Illinois;  6Respiratory  Health  Division,  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and
Health,  CDC;  7Association  of  Occupational  Health  Professionals  in  Healthcare,
Warrendale,  Pennsylvania;  8Division  of  Healthcare Quality  Promotion,  National  Center
for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC;  9Oregon  Health  &  Science
University, Portland; 10Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, Michigan; 11Denver Health and
Hospital Authority, Denver Public Health, Denver, Colorado; 12Maryland Department of
Health;  13Veterans  Administration  Palo  Alto  Healthcare  System,  Palo  Alto,  California.
Top All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE form for disclosure of potential
conflicts  of  interest.  Wendy  Thanassi  reports  a  grant  from  Qiagen  Inc.  outside  the
submitted  work.  Lorna  Will  reports  personal  fees  from  the  National  Tuberculosis
Controllers  Association  during  the  conduct  of  the  study.  MaryAnn  Gruden  reports
personal  fees  from  the  Allegheny  Health  Network,  Association  of  Occupational  Health
Professionals in Healthcare, and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health

Board of Scientific Counselors outside the submitted work. No other potential conflicts
of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  Top  Abbreviations:  IGRA  =  interferon-gamma  release
assay; LTBI = latent tuberculosis infection; TST = tuberculin skin test.
*  Jensen  PA,  Lambert  LA,  Iademarco  MF,  Ridzon  R.  Guidelines  for  preventing  the
transmission  of  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  in  health-care  settings,  2005.  MMWR
Recomm
 Rep
 2005;54(No.
 RR-17).
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5417a1.htm.
† All other aspects of the Guidelines for Preventing the Transmission of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis  in  Health-Care  Settings,  2005  remain  in  effect,  including  facility  risk
assessments  to  help  guide  infection  control  policies  and  procedures.  Top  Health  care
personnel should be considered to be at increased risk for TB if they answer “yes” to
any of the following statements. 1. Temporary or permanent residence (for ≥1 month)
in a country with a high TB rate (i.e., any country other than Australia, Canada, New
Zealand, the United States, and those in western or northern Europe) Or 2. Current or
planned  immunosuppression,  including  human  immunodeficiency  virus  infection,
receipt of an organ transplant, treatment with a TNF-alpha antagonist (e.g., infliximab,
etanercept,  or  other),  chronic  steroids  (equivalent  of  prednisone  ≥15  mg/day  for  ≥1
month), or other immunosuppressive medication Or 3. Close contact with someone who
has had infectious TB disease since the last TB test Abbreviation: TNF = tumor necrosis
factor.  *  Individual  risk  assessment  information  can  be  useful  in  interpreting  TB  test
results.  (Lewinsohn  DM,  Leonard  MK,  LoBue  PA,  et  al.  Official  American  Thoracic
Society/Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America/Centers  for  Disease  Control  and
Prevention clinical practice guidelines: diagnosis of tuberculosis in adults and children.
Clin Infec Dis 2017;64:111–5). https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/64/2/111/2811357 †
Adapted  from  a  tuberculosis  risk  assessment  form  developed  by  the  California
Department
 of
 Public
 Health.
https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CID/DCDC/CDPH%20Document%20Library/TBCB-CA-

TB-Risk-Assessment-and-Fact-Sheet.pdf. Top Suggested citation for this article: Sosa LE,
Njie GJ, Lobato MN, et al.  Tuberculosis Screening, Testing, and Treatment of U.S. Health
Care  Personnel:  Recommendations  from  the  National  Tuberculosis  Controllers
Association  and  CDC,  2019.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep  2019;68:439–443.  DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6819a3. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6819a3.htm
