Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official,  secure  websites.  Authors:  Jessica  Leung,  MPH;  Sara  Oliver,  MD,  MSPH;  Mona
Marin, MD Varicella (chickenpox) is a febrile rash illness resulting from primary infection
with the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). Humans are the only source of infection for this
virus. Varicella is characterized by a pruritic, maculopapular and vesicular rash usually
with  250–500  skin  lesions  that  evolves  into  noninfectious  crusts  over  a  4-  to  7-day
period. While the initial lesions are crusting, new crops form; the simultaneous presence
of skin lesions in various stages of evolution is characteristic of varicella.[1,2] Varicella
can  occur  in  vaccinated  persons  (termed  breakthrough  varicella).  Compared  with
varicella in unvaccinated persons, breakthrough varicella is generally milder, often with
fewer than 50 skin lesions, fewer vesicles (sometimes only maculopapular lesions and
no  vesicles),  low  or  no  fever,  and  fewer  days  of  illness.[2]  Given  its  modified  clinical
presentation,  breakthrough  varicella  can  be  challenging  for  healthcare  providers  and
parents  to  recognize  clinically.  Varicella  is  generally  a  mild  disease,  but  severe
complications  can  occur  in  any  age  group.[3–6]  Severity  is  increased  among
immunocompromised  persons,  pregnant  women,  children  younger  than  one  year  of
age, and adults.[7] Severe complications include secondary bacterial infections (most
notably  those  caused  by  group  A  beta-hemolytic  Streptococcus,  e.g.,  cellulitis,
necrotizing  fasciitis,  septicemia,  and  toxic  shock  syndrome  but  also  S.  aureus),
pneumonia, encephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, bleeding disorders, and Reye syndrome.[7]
Rarely,  these  complications  may  result  in  death.[4]  The  potential  for  severe  varicella
exists  among  both  vaccinated  and  unvaccinated  persons.  Congenital  varicella
syndrome,  characterized  by  cutaneous  scarring  in  a  dermatomal  distribution,
hypoplasia of an extremity, microcephaly, ocular and neurologic abnormalities, and low
birth  weight,  may  occur  among  0.4%–2.0%  of  infants  born  to  women  who  develop

varicella during the first or second trimester of pregnancy.[8-10] Infants born to women
who develop varicella within the period of five days before delivery to two days after
delivery  are  at  high  risk  of  severe  neonatal  varicella.  Immunity  following  varicella  is
considered to be long-lasting and a second case of varicella in otherwise healthy person
is  uncommon.[11,12]  However,  second  cases  may  occur  more  commonly  among
immunocompromised  persons.[13]  After  primary  infection,  VZV  remains  latent  in  the
sensory-nerve  ganglia  and  reactivates  in  approximately  1  in  3  of  infected  persons
during their lifetime, resulting in herpes zoster (shingles).[14–16] Herpes zoster usually
presents as a vesicular rash (appearing as clusters of vesicles) with pain and itching in
a dermatomal distribution. Herpes zoster incidence increases with age, especially after
age  50,  and  is  more  common  among  immunocompromised  persons.  A  decline  in  the
cell-mediated immunity is considered to be an important factor in the development of
herpes  zoster.  Varicella  is  highly  infectious,  with  secondary  infection  occurring  in
61%–100% of susceptible household contacts.[17–21] Transmission of VZV occurs from
person to person by direct contact with the vesicular fluid of skin lesions of persons with
either  varicella  or  herpes  zoster  or  inhalation  of  aerosols  from  vesicular  fluid  of  skin
lesions of persons with varicella or herpes zoster; spread from oropharyngeal secretions
of persons with varicella, that also may be aerosolized, may occur but to a much lesser
extent. The incubation period for varicella is 10–21 days, most commonly 14–16 days.
Persons with varicella are considered infectious from 1–2 days before the onset of rash
until all lesions are crusted, typically 4–7 days after onset of rash. Vaccinated persons
who get varicella may develop lesions that do not crust. These persons are considered
contagious until no new lesions have appeared for 24 hours. Persons with herpes zoster
are contagious while they have active, vesicular lesions (usually 7–10 days). Before the
availability  of  varicella  vaccine  in  the  United  States,  almost  everyone  had  varicella.
Thus, the number of cases approximated the birth cohort, and in the early 1990s (the
prevaccine  era)  this  resulted  in  an  average  of  about  4  million  cases  of  varicella,

10,500–13,500  hospitalizations  (range:  8,000–18,000),  and  100–150  deaths  each
year.[3–5]  Varicella  primarily  affected  children;  approximately  90%  of  cases  occurred
before 15 years of age, with the highest incidence reported among children 1–4 years
of  age.[3,22,23]  Varicella  vaccine  was  licensed  and  has  been  recommended  in  the
United  States  since  1995.  A  two-dose  series  is  recommended,  with  routine
administration  of  the  first  dose  at  12–15  months  of  age  and  the  second  dose  at  4–6
years of age.[24] Vaccination of older children, adolescents and adults without evidence
of immunity to varicella and persons who had received only one dose of vaccine is also
recommended.  The  minimum  interval  between  the  doses  is  3  months  for  persons
younger than 13 years of age and 4 weeks for persons 13 years of age and older. One
dose varicella vaccination coverage among children 19–35 months of age reached 90%
in  2007,  stabilizing  around  at  least  90%  thereafter;  ≥2-dose  varicella  vaccination
coverage among adolescents 13–17 years of age without history of varicella was 92% in
2020.[25,26]  Attaining  and  maintaining  high  vaccine  coverage  led  to  substantial
declines in varicella morbidity and mortality in the United States. Overall, in 2018–2019,
varicella  incidence  declined  >97%  based  on  data  from  four  states  that  have
continuously reported varicella to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System
(NNDSS)  since  before  the  varicella  vaccination  program.[27]  The  second  dose  of
varicella  vaccine  for  children  was  added  to  the  national  program  in  2007.[24]  During
the  2-dose  era,  data  from  39  states  and  DC  have  shown  an  89%  decline  in  varicella
incidence.[27]  Incidence  declined  in  all  age  groups  with  the  greatest  declines  among
children 5–14 years of age (92%–95%). As vaccination coverage has increased, about
half  of  varicella  cases  now  occur  among  vaccinated  persons.  Similarly,  the  severe
outcomes of varicella declined substantially. Compared with the prevaccine years, by
2018–2019,  varicella  hospitalizations  declined  90%  and  deaths  with  varicella  as  the
underlying cause of death declined 89% for all ages.[28] After 25 years of the varicella
vaccination program, fewer than 1,400 hospitalizations and 18–30 deaths are occurring

annually in the United States. The greatest decline for both hospitalizations and deaths
(97% and >99%, respectively) was among persons <20 years of age, born during the
varicella  vaccination  program,  in  whom  these  severe  outcomes  have  been  nearly
eliminated.[28]  The  varicella  vaccination  program  has  also  substantially  reduced  the
number of outbreaks in the U.S. Additionally, outbreak size and duration declined from
a  median  of  15  cases  per  outbreak  and  45  days  duration  early  in  the  vaccination
program to 7 cases and 30 days duration during the mature phase of the vaccination
program.[29]  Elementary  schools  continue  to  be  the  most  common  sites  for  varicella
outbreaks  and  are  the  main  reporting  sources  for  outbreak  surveillance  although  the
proportion  of  school  outbreaks  has  decreased  over  time.  Despite  low  susceptibility
among adults (generally less than 5%), outbreaks have been reported from a variety of
adult  settings,  including  correctional  facilities,  hospitals,  military  training  facilities,
refugee  centers,  immigration  detention  facilities,  homeless  shelters,  other  residential
institutions,  and  cruise  ships.  Top  of  Page  For  specific  information  about  varicella
vaccination, refer to the Pink Book varicella chapter which provides information on the
varicella  vaccines,  vaccination  schedule  and  use,  contraindications  and  precautions,
adverse events and reactions, and vaccine storage and handling. Evidence of immunity
to  varicella  includes  any  of  the  following:[24]  1.)  Documentation  of  age-appropriate
vaccination   2.) Laboratory evidence of immunity or laboratory confirmation of disease
  3.)  Born  in  the  United  States  before  1980    4.)  A  healthcare  provider  diagnosis  of
varicella  or  verification  of  history  of  varicella  disease    5.)  A  healthcare  provider
diagnosis of herpes zoster or verification of history of herpes zoster As varicella disease
has  declined  with  the  introduction  of  a  vaccine,  the  need  for  laboratory  confirmation
has  concomitantly  grown  because  fewer  physicians  have  seen  varicella  and
breakthrough  disease  is  often  milder  with  fewer  lesions  and  may  lack  characteristic
vesicles.  Laboratory  confirmation  of  suspected  varicella  is  becoming  increasingly
necessary  to  inform  clinical  and  public  health  management  and  understand  the  true

burden of disease and is now routinely recommended. The preferred diagnostic test to
confirm varicella is detection of viral DNA by real-time PCR. For additional information
on  laboratory  disease  surveillance,  including  specific  instructions  for  specimen
collection  and  shipping,  see  Chapter  22,  Laboratory  Support  for  Surveillance  of
Vaccine-Preventable  Diseases.  For  any  other  questions  regarding  laboratory  testing,
varicella contacts are listed in Table 1. Reporting varicella cases in childcare centers,
schools,  other  institutions,  military  barracks,  and  other  group  settings  will  facilitate
public  health  action  and  outbreak  control.  A  single  case  should  trigger  intervention
measures because it could lead to transmission and outbreaks. In addition, in certain
high-risk settings (e.g., hospitals and other healthcare settings, schools that may have
students  who  are  immunocompromised),  rapid  case  identification  and  public  health
action are important to prevent infection of susceptible persons at high risk for serious
complications of varicella, such as immunocompromised persons and pregnant women,
for  whom  varicella  vaccine  is  contraindicated.[24]  Varicella  surveillance  helps  to
facilitate public health actions at the state and local level and to monitor the impact of
the varicella vaccination program. Specifically, surveillance data are needed to: Top of
Page  The  following  case  definitions  were  approved  by  the  Council  of  State  and
Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE) for varicella cases in June 2023[30] and for varicella
deaths  in  1998.[31]  Clinical  Criteria  In  the  absence  of  a  more  likely  alternative
diagnosis: OR  Laboratory Criteria*a  Confirmatory Laboratory Evidence:  OR OR  OR 
Supportive  Laboratory  Evidence:   *  Note:  The  categorical  labels  used  here  to  stratify
laboratory evidence are intended to support the standardization of case classifications
for public health surveillance. The categorical labels should not be used to interpret the
utility or validity of any laboratory test methodology.
 aA negative laboratory result in a person with a generalized rash with vesicles does not
rule out varicella as a diagnosis.
b PCR of scabs or vesicular fluid is the preferred method for laboratory confirmation of

varicella. In the absence of vesicles or scabs, scrapings of maculopapular lesions can be
collected for testing.
cNot explained by varicella vaccination during the previous 6–45 days.
dSeroconversion is defined as a negative serum VZV IgG followed by a positive serum
VZV IgG.
eIn vaccinated persons, a 4-fold rise may not occur.
fIgM  serology  has  limited  value  as  a  diagnostic  method  for  VZV  infection  and  is  not
recommended for laboratory confirmation of varicella. However, an IgM positive result
in the presence of varicella-like symptoms can indicate a likely acute VZV infection. A
positive  IgM  result  in  the  absence  of  clinical  disease  is  not  considered  indicative  of
active varicella. Epidemiologic Linkage Criteria
Confirmatory  Epidemiologic  Linkage  Evidence:   OR  OR  Presumptive  Epidemiologic
Linkage  Evidence:   Healthcare  Record  Criteria  Confirmed:  OR   Probable:  OR   OR  
Confirmed:  A  death  resulting  from  a  confirmed  case  of  varicella  which  contributes
directly  or  indirectly  to  acute  medical  complications  that  result  in  death.  Probable:  A
death resulting from a probable case of varicella which contributes directly or indirectly
to  acute  medical  complications  that  result  in  death.  Varicella-like  rash  in  vaccine
recipients: A varicella-like rash in a recently vaccinated person may be caused by either
wild-  or  vaccine-type  virus  or  have  other  etiologies.  Approximately  4%–6%  of  1-dose
and  1%  of  2-dose  vaccine  recipients,  respectively,  develop  a  generalized  rash  with  a
median of 5 lesions 5–26 days postvaccination, and 1%–3% develop a localized rash at
the injection site with a median of 2 lesions 8–19 days postvaccination.[32] The rash
may be atypical in appearance (maculopapular with no vesicles). Attribution of disease
to vaccine strain VZV can be done by distinguishing wild-type VZV from vaccine-strain
VZV  using  strain  differential  PCR.  Breakthrough  disease  is  a  case  of  infection  with
wild-type  VZV  occurring  more  than  42  days  after  vaccination.  Disease  is  usually  mild
with a shorter duration of illness, fewer constitutional symptoms, and generally fewer

than 50 skin lesions. Breakthrough cases with fewer than 50 lesions have been found to
be  one-third  as  contagious  as  varicella  in  unvaccinated  persons,  but  breakthrough
cases with 50 or more lesions are as contagious as cases in unvaccinated persons.[33]
Though  generally  mild,  about  25%–30%  of  breakthrough  cases  among  1-dose
vaccinated  children  have  clinical  features  more  similar  to  those  in  unvaccinated
children  and  rare,  severe  presentations  with  visceral  dissemination  have  been
reported.[34]  Persons  who  received  two  doses  of  vaccine  are  less  likely  to  have
breakthrough  disease  than  those  who  received  one  dose.[35,36]  Additionally,
breakthrough  varicella  may  be  further  attenuated  among  2-dose  vaccine  recipients
though  the  difference  was  not  always  statistically  significant.[29,37]  No  cases  of
breakthrough  varicella  with  visceral  dissemination  have  been  reported  among  2-dose
vaccinees.[34] Top of Page Each state and territory has regulations or laws governing
the  reporting  of  diseases  and  conditions  of  public  health  importance.[38]  These
regulations  and  laws  list  the  diseases  to  be  reported  and  describe  the  persons  or
institutions  responsible  for  reporting,  including  healthcare  providers,  hospitals,
laboratories,  schools,  childcare  facilities,  and  other  institutions.  Persons  reporting
case(s)  should  contact  their  state  health  department  for  state-specific  reporting
requirements.  States  not  conducting  case-based  surveillance  are  encouraged  to
progressively implement individual case reporting integrating varicella surveillance into
an  existing  system  where  feasible.  This  can  be  done  by  establishing  statewide  or
sentinel  surveillance.  Statewide  surveillance  involves  adding  varicella  to  the  list  of
notifiable  diseases  that  are  reported  to  the  state  health  department.  Sentinel  site
surveillance  involves  identifying  sites  such  as  schools,  childcare  centers,  physicians’
practices, hospitals, colleges, and other institutions to perform surveillance for varicella.
Sentinel sites can be limited to a geographic area, such as a county or city, or selected
to be representative of the entire state population. States may also consider requesting
reports  from  sites  that  already  participate  in  other  surveillance  networks.  States  can

expand  the  number  of  sites  as  they  develop  their  system  with  the  intention  of
eventually having statewide surveillance. Notifications for confirmed or probable cases
of varicella should be sent to CDC using event code 10030 through National Notifiable
Diseases  Surveillance  System  (NNDSS).  Case  notifications  should  not  be  delayed
because  of  incomplete  information  or  lack  of  confirmation.  Data  can  be  updated
electronically  as  more  information  becomes  available.  The  state  in  which  the  patient
resides  at  the  time  of  diagnosis  should  submit  the  case  notification  to  CDC.  If
jurisdictions  have  questions  about  varicella  reporting  and  case  notification,  please
contact  the  Division  of  Viral  Diseases,  Viral  Vaccine  Preventable  Diseases  Branch  at
CDC.
 The
 following
 are
 core
 and
 disease-specific
 data
 elements
 that
 are
epidemiologically important and needed for varicella case classification and should be
collected  during  case  investigations.  Please  also  refer  to  the  Varicella  Surveillance
Worksheet  for  a  complete  list  of  the  variables  that  should  be  collected  during  case
investigations (Appendix 20 [4 pages]). Additional information may be collected at the
direction  of  the  state  health  department.  In  bold,  are  the  critical  variables  used  to
monitor the impact of the varicella vaccination program. In 1998, CSTE recommended
that varicella-related deaths be placed under national surveillance, and varicella-related
deaths  became  nationally  notifiable  on  January  1,  1999.[31]  Varicella  deaths  can  be
identified through death certificates, which may be available through state vital records
systems and may be more readily available soon after death in states using electronic
death certificates. State public health departments may also request that local health
departments, healthcare practitioners, and hospitals report varicella deaths that occur
in their community. Because varicella is a vaccine-preventable disease, all deaths due
to varicella should be investigated. Investigation may provide insight into risk factors
for varicella mortality and may help identify missed opportunities for, and barriers to,
vaccination.  A  worksheet  is  provided  to  guide  varicella  death  investigations  (see
Appendix  19)  [4  pages].  Deaths  should  be  reported  to  the  CDC  National  Center  for

Immunization  and  Respiratory  Diseases,  Division  of  Viral  Diseases,  Viral  Vaccine
Preventable  Diseases  Branch  and  to  NNDSS.  Top  of  Page  All  patients  with  suspected
varicella  should  be  investigated.  A  single  case  should  trigger  intervention  measures
because it could lead to transmission and outbreaks. Clinical diagnosis of varicella can
be unreliable. Cases of suspected varicella should be laboratory confirmed. Laboratory
confirmation  of  varicella  is  important  as  varicella  may  present  with  mild  or  atypical
presentation  making  clinical  diagnosis  especially  challenging.  Patients  with  varicella
should self-isolate at home until no longer infectious, unless medical care is needed (all
lesions have crusted or, if no vesicles were present, when no new lesions appear within
a 24-hour period). For residential institutions and healthcare settings, patients should
be  immediately  isolated  in  a  closed-door  room  (negative  pressure  room  if  available)
until  they  are  no  longer  infectious;  staff  with  varicella  should  be  excluded  from  the
setting and self-isolate until no longer infectious. As part of the case investigation, the
potential  for  further  transmission  should  be  evaluated,  and  contacts  of  the  patient
during  the  infectious  period  should  be  identified.  Guidance  can  be  found  in  the
Outbreak  Investigation  section.  These  recommendations  include  prior  guidance
published  in  the  document  Strategies  for  the  Control  and  Investigation  of  Varicella
Outbreaks Manual, 2008, which has been retired. An outbreak of varicella is defined as
the occurrence of ≥3 varicella cases that are related in place and are epidemiologically
linked.  Confirmation  of  the  Outbreak  Notification  of  the  Outbreak  Case  Identification
and Management Management of Contacts Establish Surveillance for Additional Cases
Communication  with  Providers  and  the  Public  about  Varicella   Definitions  Schools  
Daycares/Preschools
 Residential
 institutions
 and
 healthcare
 settings
 
Correctional/detention facilities Ships/Flights To receive email updates about this page,
enter your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/surv-manual/chpt17-varicella.html
