Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / April 6, 2018 / 67(13);396-401 On April 3, 2018, this
report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Kate  Russell  Woodworth,  MD1;
Maroya Spalding Walters, PhD1; Lindsey M. Weiner, MPH1; Jonathan Edwards, MStat1;
Allison C. Brown, PhD1; Jennifer Y. Huang, MPH1; Sarah Malik, PhD1; Rachel B. Slayton,
PhD1;  Prabasaj  Paul,  PhD1;  Catherine  Capers,  MA1;  Marion  A.  Kainer,  MD2;  Nancy
Wilde3; Alicia Shugart, MA1; Garrett Mahon, MPH1; Alexander J. Kallen, MD1; Jean Patel,
PhD1; L. Clifford McDonald, MD1; Arjun Srinivasan, MD1; Michael Craig, MPP1; Denise M.
Cardo,  MD1  (View  author  affiliations)  •  The  emergence  and  spread  of  antibiotic
resistance threatens to outpace the development of new antibiotics. Slowing the spread
of  emerging  resistance  is  a  CDC  priority  to  protect  persons  and  help  slow  the
development  of  antibiotic  resistance  overall.   •  Infection  data  from  the  National
Healthcare Safety Network from 2006-2015 were analyzed to calculate changes in the
annual
 proportion
 of
 selected
 pathogens
 that
 were
 nonsusceptible
 to
extended-spectrum  cephalosporins  (ESBL  phenotype)  or  resistant  to  carbapenems
(carbapenem-resistant  Enterobacteriaceae  [CRE]).   •  The  percentage  of  ESBL
phenotype  Enterobacteriaceae  decreased  by  2%  per  year;  by  comparison,  the  CRE
percentage  decreased  by  15%  per  year.   •  The  proportion  of  Enterobacteriaceae
infections  that  were  CRE  remained  lower  and  decreased  more  over  time  than  the
proportion that were ESBL phenotype. This difference might be explained by the more
directed control efforts implemented to slow transmission of CRE than those applied for
ESBL-producing  strains.  •  These  data  suggest  that  an  early  aggressive  response,  as
outlined  in  CRE-specific  infection  prevention  recommendations  released  beginning  in
2009,  can  slow  emergence  and  even  decrease  the  occurrence  of  infections  from
resistant  pathogens.  •  In  2017,  CDC  outlined  a  new  effort  to  react  rapidly  to  novel

multidrug-resistant organisms; this approach includes encouraging health care facilities
and  public  health  authorities  to  respond  to  even  single  isolates  of  an  emerging
antibiotic-resistant  pathogen.   •  From  January  to  September  2017,  carbapenemase
testing  was  performed  by  the  Antibiotic  Resistance  Lab  Network  for  4,442  CRE  and
1,334 carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (CRPA) isolates; 32% and 1.9%,
respectively  were  carbapenemase-producers.  Among  the  carbapenemase-producing
isolates,  221  (15.5%)  expressed  carbapenemases  other  than  Klebsiella  pneumoniae
carbapenemase.   Carbapenemases  can  make  germs  resistant  to  some  of  our  most
powerful
 drugs,
 carbapenems.
 
 •
 Additional
 information
 is
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/.   Views equals page views plus PDF downloads Figure 1
Figure 2 Table 1 Table 2   Background: Approaches to controlling emerging antibiotic
resistance  in  health  care  settings  have  evolved  over  time.  When  resistance  to
broad-spectrum  antimicrobials  mediated  by  extended-spectrum  β-lactamases  (ESBLs)
arose in the 1980s, targeted interventions to slow spread were not widely promoted.
However,  when  Enterobacteriaceae  with  carbapenemases  that  confer  resistance  to
carbapenem  antibiotics  emerged,  directed  control  efforts  were  recommended.  These
distinct  approaches  could  have  resulted  in  differences  in  spread  of  these  two
pathogens.  CDC  evaluated  these  possible  changes  along  with  initial  findings  of  an
enhanced  antibiotic  resistance  detection  and  control  strategy  that  builds  on
interventions  developed  to  control  carbapenem  resistance.  Methods:  Infection  data
from  the  National  Healthcare  Safety  Network  from  2006–2015  were  analyzed  to
calculate  changes  in  the  annual  proportion  of  selected  pathogens  that  were
nonsusceptible to extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ESBL phenotype) or resistant to
carbapenems (carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae [CRE]). Testing results for CRE
and carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (CRPA) are also reported. Results:
The percentage of ESBL phenotype Enterobacteriaceae decreased by 2% per year (risk
ratio [RR] = 0.98, p<0.001); by comparison, the CRE percentage decreased by 15% per

year  (RR  =  0.85,  p<0.01).  From  January  to  September  2017,  carbapenemase  testing
was  performed  for  4,442  CRE  and  1,334  CRPA  isolates;  32%  and  1.9%,  respectively,
were carbapenemase producers. In response, 1,489 screening tests were performed to
identify asymptomatic carriers; 171 (11%) were positive. Conclusions: The proportion of
Enterobacteriaceae infections that were CRE remained lower and decreased more over
time than the proportion that were ESBL phenotype. This difference might be explained
by  the  more  directed  control  efforts  implemented  to  slow  transmission  of  CRE  than
those  applied  for  ESBL-producing  strains.  Increased  detection  and  aggressive  early
response  to  emerging  antibiotic  resistance  threats  have  the  potential  to  slow  further
spread.  Top  The  emergence  and  spread  of  antibiotic  resistance  threatens  to  outpace
the development of new antimicrobials, and slowing the spread of these organisms has
become a priority. Among Enterobacteriaceae, the family of pathogens most frequently
associated with health care–associated infections (1), resistance to the broad-spectrum
antimicrobials  extended-spectrum  cephalosporins  and  carbapenems  has  been  driven
largely
 by
 the
 spread
 of
 plasmid-mediated
 resistance
 genes
 encoding
extended-spectrum  β-lactamases  (ESBLs)  and  carbapenemases,  respectively.  In  the
United States, ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae were first reported in 1988 (2). The
emergence of these ESBL-producing isolates limited the options available for treatment,
but  these  organisms  remained  susceptible  to  some  first-line  therapies,  including
carbapenems.  In  general,  facilities  independently  selected  approaches  to  control
spread,  which  often  included  core  infection  control  practices,  such  as  hand  hygiene,
and  placing  patients  with  ESBL-producing  strains  in  single  rooms  under  Contact
Precautions.  Enterobacteriaceae  resistance  to  even  broader  spectrum  antimicrobials,
including carbapenems, was reported with increasing frequency beginning in 2001 (3).
Rapid spread of these carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) in parts of the
United States and other countries (4,5) highlighted a need to more aggressively control
CRE transmission. In 2009, CDC created CRE-specific guidance, which was endorsed by

the  Healthcare  Infection  Control  Practices  Advisory  Committee  (6).  This  guidance
included  recommendations  for  additional  interventions  when  CRE  was  identified  at  a
health  care  facility,  including  laboratory  surveillance  of  clinical  cultures  and  targeted
patient screening to identify health care contacts with asymptomatic colonization. This
CRE-specific
 guidance
 was
 updated
 in
 2013
 and
 2015
(https://www.cdc.gov/hai/organisms/cre/cre-toolkit/index.html)  and  was  highlighted  by
CDC in a 2013 report (7). In 2017, CDC outlined a new effort to react rapidly to novel
multidrug-resistant  organisms  (8);  this  approach  includes  encouraging  health  care
facilities  and  public  health  authorities  to  respond  to  single  isolates  of  an  emerging
antibiotic-resistant pathogen. The strategy rests on these five pillars: 1) rapid detection
of  targeted  pathogens  and  their  resistance  mechanisms,  2)  on-site  infection  control
assessments by trained experts to identify gaps in infection prevention, 3) screening of
exposed contacts to identify asymptomatic colonization, 4) coordination of the response
among facilities, and 5) continuing these interventions until transmission is controlled.
Detection and control efforts can extend from the index facility to other facilities that
share  patients.  To  support  this  approach,  CDC  established  the  Antibiotic  Resistance
Laboratory
 Network
 (ARLN)
(https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/solutions-initiative/ar-lab-networks.html)
 to
improve national capacity to rapidly detect and respond to antibiotic resistance. ARLN
provides carbapenemase testing for two emerging antibiotic resistant pathogens, CRE
and  carbapenem-resistant  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa  (CRPA),  at  56  state  and  local
public  health  laboratories  and  screening  for  asymptomatic  CRE  and  CRPA  carriage  at
seven  regional  laboratories  (9).  Carbapenemase-producing  strains  were  targeted  for
detection and response in part because of their previously demonstrated propensity for
spread. CDC also expanded funding to state and local health departments to increase
capacity  and  build  expertise  in  responding  to  these  and  other  emerging  antibiotic
resistance  threats.  For  this  report,  data  from  a  national  health  care–associated

infections  surveillance  system  were  reviewed  to  determine  if  the  more  directed
approach  applied  for  CRE  was  associated  with  differences  in  the  percentage  of
Enterobacteriacae  health  care–associated  infections  that  were  CRE  compared  with
those that had the ESBL phenotype. In addition, findings from the first 9 months of the
enhanced response to emerging resistant organisms are described. Top Percentage of
Enterobacteriaceae  with  CRE  or  ESBL  phenotypes  in  the  National  Healthcare  Safety
Network, 2006–2015. Included in the analysis were central line–associated bloodstream
infections  (CLABSIs)  and  catheter-associated  urinary  tract  infections  (CAUTIs)
associated  with  Escherichia  coli  or  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  and  reported  to  CDC’s
National  Healthcare  Safety  Network  (NHSN)  during  2006–2015  from  adult  medical,
surgical, or medical/surgical intensive care units at short-stay acute care hospitals. The
Centers  for  Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services’  (CMS)  Hospital  Inpatient  Quality  Reporting
Program mandated reporting of CLABSI and CAUTI data to NHSN starting in 2011 and
2012, respectively; data from previous years represent voluntary reporting or reporting
to  comply  with  state  or  local  mandates.  National  pooled  mean  percentages  for
Enterobacteriaceae  with  CRE  phenotype  (isolates  resistant  to  imipenem,  meropenem,
doripenem,  or  ertapenem),  and  ESBL  phenotype  (isolates  that  tested  intermediate  or
susceptible  to  carbapenems  and  intermediate  or  resistant  to  ceftazidime,  cefepime,
ceftriaxone, or cefotaxime) were calculated. Log binomial regression models were used
to estimate the average annual change in the proportion of E. coli and K. pneumoniae
that  had  a  CRE  or  ESBL  phenotype.  P-values  <0.05  were  considered  statistically
significant. Sensitivity analyses were performed to account for the change in hospitals
reporting  to  NHSN  each  year.  The  results  of  the  log  binomial  regression  model  were
confirmed by a robust variance Poisson model. Enhanced detection and response. CRE
and  CRPA  (P.  aeruginosa  resistant  to  imipenem,  meropenem,  or  doripenem)  isolates
were  submitted  to  ARLN  laboratories  for  testing  for  carbapenemases.  Among
Enterobacteriaceae,  E.  coli,  K.  oxytoca,  K.  pneumoniae,  and  Enterobacter  spp.  were

targeted  for  submission.  Testing  at  ARLN  laboratories  included  carbapenemase
production  testing  and  molecular  detection  of  genes  encoding  for  the  five
carbapenemases
 of
 primary
 public
 health
 concern:
 Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
carbapenemase  (KPC),  New  Delhi  metallo-beta-lactamase  (NDM),  Verona  integron
encoded  metallo-beta-lactamase  (VIM),  imipenemase  (IMP),  and  oxacillinase-48-like
carbapenemase (OXA-48). ARLN laboratories were asked to report positive findings to
local public health authorities and CDC within 1 day and to submit testing summaries to
CDC  monthly.  For  each  carbapenemase-producing  isolate  detected,  CDC  guidance
recommends  that  state  health  department  staff  members  contact  the  health  care
facility to review infection control measures and consider performing on-site infection
control assessments. If indicated, contacts of the index patient are screened to detect
transmission;  testing  capacity  for  this  screening  is  provided  through  ARLN.  Response
activities continue until transmission is controlled. Screening results were stratified by
whether  the  screening  took  place  in  a  short-stay  acute  care  hospital  or  a  post–acute
care  facility  (i.e.,  long-term  acute  care  hospital  or  nursing  home).  Top  Percentage  of
Enterobacteriaceae  with  CRE  or  ESBL  phenotypes  in  the  National  Healthcare  Safety
Network,  2006–2015.  Among  short-stay  acute  care  hospitals,  the  percentage  of
Klebsiella  and  E.  coli  isolates  with  the  ESBL  phenotype  remained  relatively  stable,
ranging from 17.6% (116 of 659 isolates) in 2006 to 16.5% (694 of 4,211) in 2015, with
a peak of 18.9% in 2009 (Figure 1). The percentage of CRE declined from 8.8% (35 of
397 isolates) in 2006 and 10.6% (64 of 604) in 2007 to 3.1% (115 of 3,718) in 2015
(Figure  2).  During  2006–2015,  the  annual  percentage  of  isolates  with  the  ESBL
phenotype declined an average of 2% (RR = 0.98, p = 0.009); during the same period,
the proportion that were CRE decreased 15% per year (RR = 0.85, p<0.001). Results
were unchanged when the analysis was limited to facilities that reported in all years.
Enhanced  detection  of  and  response  to  carbapenemase-producing  organisms.  During
the first 9 months of 2017, among 4,442 CRE and 1,334 CRPA isolates that were tested

for  carbapenemases  from  32  states,  1,401  (32%)  CRE  and  25  (1.9%)  CRPA  were
carbapenemase  producers  (Table  1).  Among  the  carbapenemase-producing  isolates,
221  (15.5%)  expressed  carbapenemases  other  than  KPC.  Of  isolates  tested,  1,422
(25%) were collected in the first quarter of 2017, 2,141 (37%) in the second quarter,
and  2,213  (38%)  in  the  third  quarter.  During  this  period,  the  median  time  from
specimen collection to CDC notification decreased from 37 to 13 days. The percentage
of  carbapenemase-producing  isolates  varied  by  organism  and  was  highest  among
Klebsiella  species  (65%).  Among  carbapenemase-producing  CRE,  the  most  commonly
identified  carbapenemase  was  KPC  (1,232  of  1,401  isolates,  88%);  VIM  was  the  most
common  carbapenemase  identified  in  CRPA  (18  of  25,  72%)  (Table  1).  To  identify
asymptomatically  colonized  health  care  contacts  of  index  patients,  1,489  screening
tests for carbapenemases were performed during 70 surveys (defined as all screening
tests performed at a single facility within a 14-day period) in 50 facilities. A median of
10.5 contacts (interquartile range = 2–25) were screened per survey. Overall, 11% of
screening  tests  were  positive  for  at  least  one  of  the  five  carbapenemases  of  primary
public health concern (Table 2). A higher percentage of post–acute care facility contacts
screened positive for carbapenemases (14% [147 of 1,074 contacts]) than did contacts
from  short-stay  acute  care  hospitals  (5.8%  [21  of  365])  (p<0.01).  Screening  tests
performed  increased  from  363  in  the  first  quarter  of  2017,  to  732  in  the  third.
Illustrative examples. Public health responses using this new approach have identified
single cases without transmission, transmission within facilities, and spread to multiple
facilities. Examples from two states are presented to illustrate these efforts. In October
2017,  the  Tennessee  Department  of  Health  contacted  CDC  regarding  identification  of
an NDM and OXA-48–producing Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate through ARLN. Infection
control  assessment  and  screening  of  hospital  contacts  was  completed  and  results
returned within 48 hours of identification of carbapenemase presence. No transmission
was identified. Because the index patient had a recent health care exposure in another

country,
 ARLN
 regional
 laboratories
 expanded
 their
 services
 to
 perform
CDC-recommended admission screening for patients with a history of overnight health
care stays outside the United States during the preceding 6 months (10). In April 2017,
the  Iowa  Department  of  Public  Health  contacted  CDC  regarding  IMP  identified  in  a
Proteus  species  isolated  from  a  nursing  home  resident.  The  state  health  department
assessed  infection  control  practices  and  performed  a  point  prevalence  survey  that
identified five additional colonized residents among 30 surveyed at the nursing home.
The  health  department  conducted  additional  infection  control  assessments  to  ensure
adherence to recommended practices and two follow-up surveys of the nursing home
wing,  which  did  not  identify  any  additional  cases.  Top  Although  the  proportion  of
Klebsiella  spp.  and  E.  coli  that  had  either  an  ESBL  or  CRE  phenotype  both  declined
during  2006–2015,  larger  decreases  and  a  lower  overall  percent  resistant  were
observed for the CRE phenotype. This difference might be attributable, at least in part,
to  the  more  directed  response  employed  to  slow  the  spread  of  CRE  once  it  was
identified. Although CDC’s containment approach had not yet been fully initiated when
the  decline  in  CRE  began,  these  data  suggest  that  an  early  aggressive  response,  as
outlined  in  CRE-specific  infection  prevention  recommendations  released  beginning  in
2009  (6),  can  slow  emergence  and  even  decrease  the  occurrence  of  infections  from
resistant pathogens. As laboratory capacity improved, ARLN testing volume and public
health  responses  increased  over  the  first  three  quarters  of  2017,  demonstrating  that
recent  investments  in  detection  and  response  capacity  are  facilitating  prompt
identification  of  and  response  to  emerging  resistant  organisms.  Notably,  221  isolates
with non-KPC carbapenemases were identified; these rare forms of resistance have the
potential  to  add  to  the  U.S.  CRE  burden  and  represent  an  important  opportunity  to
prevent  the  spread  of  novel  resistance  at  its  earliest  stage.  Findings  from  these
enhanced prevention efforts are being used to further refine detection and prevention
strategies.  Contact  screening  identified  previously  undetected  transmission  and

appeared  to  have  the  highest  yield  in  post–acute  care  facilities  with  higher  acuity
patients.  Challenges  in  these  settings  that  might  facilitate  transmission  of  resistant
organisms
 include
 long
 duration
 of
 facility
 stay,
 less
 aggressive
 use
 of
transmission-based precautions because of concerns about resident quality of life, high
staff turnover rates, and less expertise and training in infection control. Previous work
has  also  identified  these  settings  as  potential  amplifiers  of  CRE  transmission  (11),
underscoring  the  importance  of  providing  ongoing  support  to  these  facilities  when
targeted  resistant  organisms  are  identified.  This  support  includes  infection  control
assessments  to  improve  adherence  to  recommended  interventions  and  screening  of
contacts  to  identify  asymptomatic  carriers.  Although  this  analysis  focused  on
carbapenemase-producing organisms, the containment strategy can prevent the spread
of  other  emerging  antimicrobial  resistant  pathogens,  including  Candida  auris  and
pan-resistant  bacteria.  Using  existing  surveillance  systems,  including  ARLN,  further
work is under way to better identify and understand new threats, including those that
are emerging outside the United States. CDC continues to work to develop tests for new
resistance mechanisms that can be made available via ARLN. Resistance is constantly
evolving,  and  the  containment  strategy  and  ARLN  are  designed  to  be  flexible  and
nimble to rapidly detect and respond to new threats. Despite improvements in capacity
to detect carbapenemases in clinical isolates and asymptomatic carriers through ARLN,
challenges remain. Transmission in one facility in a region has the potential to affect all
of the facilities and patients in a region through patient sharing; therefore, recognition
by  health  care  facilities  of  the  importance  of  an  aggressive,  early,  and  coordinated
response  is  needed  to  ensure  responses  are  timely  and  comprehensive.  Mathematic
modeling  of  the  containment  strategy  based  on  a  single  U.S.  state’s  patient  transfer
network  suggests  that  an  intervention  resulting  in  a  20%  reduction  in  transmission
would result in approximately 1,600 fewer clinical cases, a relative reduction of about
76%,  3  years  after  introduction  (CDC,  unpublished  data,  2018).  In  addition,

commitment from health care personnel and health care facilities to improve adherence
to infection control interventions that can prevent transmission, especially in post–acute
care  settings,  is  necessary  to  prevent  amplification  of  emerging  resistance.  For
situations  in  which  a  targeted  form  of  antimicrobial  resistance  has  emerged  more
widely  in  a  region,  containment  strategies  might  be  less  effective;  additional  work  is
required for these situations to identify the optimal strategies to reduce the prevalence
of  endemic  resistant  organisms.  Finally,  current  interventions  are  challenging  to
implement  and  sustain;  new  interventions  to  reduce  transmission  are  needed  to
supplement  currently  available  prevention  measures.  Public  health  departments,
because of their expertise and ability to work across health care facilities, are uniquely
positioned  to  facilitate  these  responses  to  emerging  antimicrobial  resistance.  Since
2009,  CDC  has  provided  resources  to  develop  state  and  local  health  care–associated
infection  programs;  currently,  CDC  supports  approximately  500  persons  in  state  and
local health departments to work on health care-associated infections and antimicrobial
resistance. Details on funding provided to each state to combat antimicrobial resistance
are
 provided
 in
 CDC’s
 antimicrobial
 resistance
 map
(https://wwwn.cdc.gov/arinvestments). The findings in this report are subject to at least
four  limitations.  First,  resistance  data  in  NHSN  are  collected  using  the  final
interpretations  of  resistant,  intermediate,  or  sensitive,  and  this  analysis  does  not
account for differences among laboratories in the breakpoints used for interpretation or
for changes in breakpoints over time. Enterobacteriaceae breakpoints for carbapenems
and  some  cephalosporins  were  lowered  during  the  analysis  period.  This  might  have
resulted in an increase in isolates reported as resistant in later years of this analysis
and  could  have  resulted  in  an  underestimation  of  any  reductions  in  CRE  or  ESBLs
described. Second, NHSN data analyzed for this report represent only isolates from two
infection  types  (CAUTI  and  CLABSI);  changes  in  colonization  or  other  infection  types
would not be identified. Third, although greater reductions were seen in the percentage

of organisms that were CRE compared to those with the ESBL phenotype, this analysis
is unable to identify the exact cause for this difference. Finally, some states and health
care  facilities  with  colonization  testing  capacity  chose  to  perform  screening  in-house
rather than through the ARLN regional laboratory; these tests are not reported to ARLN
and therefore are not included in this report, resulting in an underestimation of the true
volume  of  screening  conducted.  Limiting  the  spread  of  emerging  forms  of  antibiotic
resistance is a public health priority, and a timely and coordinated effort among health
care  facilities,  local  and  state  health  departments,  and  CDC  is  needed  to  accomplish
this  goal.  Research  is  already  under  way  to  expand  control  strategies  through
innovative  approaches  such  as  patient  decolonization  and  microbiome  manipulation,
along  with  a  focus  on  identifying  strategies  to  decrease  the  time  from  specimen
collection  to  public  health  response.  Fortunately,  with  the  parallel  development  of  an
enhanced
 prevention
 strategy
 for
 emerging
 antimicrobial
 resistance
 and
implementation of advanced laboratory testing in ARLN, the critical tools for controlling
the spread of antimicrobial resistance are now available nationwide. In the first year of
ARLN  implementation,  CDC  and  state  and  local  public  health  departments  and  public
health  laboratory  partners  have  effectively  increased  the  capacity  to  identify  and
respond  to  high  concern  organisms  to  prevent  transmission  of  resistant  pathogens.
Although  some  challenges  remain,  this  national  public  health  strategy  represents  a
critical  step  in  the  effort  to  decrease  the  impact  of  resistant  pathogens.  Top
Participating state and local health departments and public health laboratories. Top 
 No conflicts of interest were reported. Top Corresponding author: Alexander J. Kallen,
MD, akallen@cdc.gov. Top 1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center
for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Diseases,  CDC;  2Tennessee  Department  of  Health;  3Iowa
Department of Public Health. Top Top * Central line–associated bloodstream infections
and  catheter-associated  urinary  tract  infections.  †  Nonsusceptible  to  at  least  one
extended-spectrum  cephalosporin.   Top  *  Central  line–associated  bloodstream

infections  and  catheter-associated  urinary  tract  infections.   Top  Abbreviations:
IMP = imipenemase; KPC = Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase; NDM = New Delhi
metallo-beta-lactamase;  OXA-48  =  oxacillinase-48-like  carbapenemase;  VIM  =  Verona
integron encoded metallo-beta-lactamase.* Number of isolates tested.† Positive for at
least  one  of  the  five  carbapenemases  tested  (IMP,  KPC,  NDM,  OXA-48,  or  VIM).§  53
isolates were positive for more than one mechanism tested (28 KPC and NDM; 24 NDM
and
 OXA-48;
 one
 KPC
 and
 VIM).
 Top
 Abbreviations:
 IMP
 =
 imipenemase;
KPC
 =
 Klebsiella
 pneumoniae
 carbapenemase;
 NDM
 =
 New
 Delhi
metallo-beta-lactamase;  OXA-48  =  oxacillinase-48-like  carbapenemase;  VIM  =  Verona
integron  encoded  metallo-beta-lactamase.*  Includes  50  screening  tests  without  a
reported facility type, three of which were positive for KPC.† Includes long-term acute
care  facilities,  skilled  nursing  facilities,  and  inpatient  rehabilitation  facilities.§  Number
screened refers to individual screening tests. Not all screening swabs were tested for all
five mechanisms.¶ Seven tests were positive for more than one mechanism tested (four
KPC  and  NDM,  and  three  KPC  and  VIM).  Top  Suggested  citation  for  this  article:
Woodworth  KR,  Walters  MS,  Weiner  LM,  et  al.   Vital  Signs:  Containment  of  Novel
Multidrug-Resistant
 Organisms
 and
 Resistance
 Mechanisms
 —
 United
 States,
2006–2017.
 MMWR
 Morb
 Mortal
 Wkly
 Rep
 2018;67:396-401.
 DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6713e1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 

of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and
tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6713e1.htm
