Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Weekly / March 8, 2019 / 68(9);214–219 On March 5, 2019,
this  report  was  posted  online  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release.  Athena  P.  Kourtis1;  Kelly
Hatfield1;  James  Baggs1;  Yi  Mu1;  Isaac  See1;  Erin  Epson2;  Joelle  Nadle3;  Marion  A.
Kainer4; Ghinwa Dumyati5; Susan Petit6; Susan M. Ray7; Emerging Infections Program
MRSA author group; David Ham1; Catherine Capers1; Heather Ewing1; Nicole Coffin1; L.
Clifford  McDonald1;  John  Jernigan1;  Denise  Cardo1  (View  author  affiliations)  What  is
already  known  about  this  topic?  Invasive  methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus
(MRSA)  infections  have  been  declining  in  health  care  settings;  however,  the  rate  of
decline  has  recently  slowed.  What  is  added  by  this  report?  Nearly  120,000
Staphylococcus aureus bloodstream infections and 20,000 associated deaths occurred
in  the  United  States  in  2017.  After  years  of  progress,  the  rate  of  decline  of  MRSA
bloodstream  infections  has  slowed,  whereas  bloodstream  infections  caused  by
methicillin-susceptible  S.  aureus  are  increasing  slightly  in  the  community  (3.9%
annually, 2012–2017). What are the implications for public health practice? Adherence
to  CDC  recommendations  for  preventing  device-  and  procedure-associated  infections
and  interrupting  transmission,  along  with  innovative,  tailored  interventions  (including
decolonization) are needed to further prevent S. aureus infections. Views equals page
views  plus  PDF  downloads  Figure  1  Figure  2    Introduction:  Staphylococcus  aureus  is
one of the most common pathogens in health care facilities and in the community, and
can  cause  invasive  infections,  sepsis,  and  death.  Despite  progress  in  preventing
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) infections in health care settings, assessment of
the  problem  in  both  health  care  and  community  settings  is  needed.  Further,  the
epidemiology of methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) infections is not well described
at the national level. Methods: Data from the Emerging Infections Program (EIP) MRSA

population surveillance (2005–2016) and from the Premier and Cerner Electronic Health
Record  databases  (2012–2017)  were  analyzed  to  describe  trends  in  incidence  of
hospital-onset  and  community-onset  MRSA  and  MSSA  bloodstream  infections  and  to
estimate the overall incidence of S. aureus bloodstream infections in the United States
and associated in-hospital mortality. Results: In 2017, an estimated 119,247 S. aureus
bloodstream  infections  with  19,832  associated  deaths  occurred.  During  2005–2012
rates of hospital-onset MRSA bloodstream infection decreased by 17.1% annually, but
the decline slowed during 2013–2016. Community-onset MRSA declined less markedly
(6.9% annually during 2005–2016), mostly related to declines in health care–associated
infections.  Hospital-onset  MSSA  has  not  significantly  changed  (p  =  0.11),  and
community-onset  MSSA  infections  have  slightly  increased  (3.9%  per  year,  p<0.0001)
from  2012  to  2017.  Conclusions  and  Implications  for  Public  Health  Practice:  Despite
reductions in incidence of MRSA bloodstream infections since 2005, S. aureus infections
account  for  significant  morbidity  and  mortality  in  the  United  States.  To  reduce  the
incidence  of  these  infections  further,  health  care  facilities  should  take  steps  to  fully
implement CDC recommendations for prevention of device- and procedure-associated
infections and for interruption of transmission. New and novel prevention strategies are
also needed. Top On March 5, 2019, this report was posted as an MMWR Early Release
on  the  MMWR  website  (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).  Top  Staphylococcus  aureus  is  a
major  cause  of  community-  and  health  care–associated  infections  (1),  ranging  from
superficial skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI) to invasive infections, sepsis, and death.
Methicillin-resistant  S.  aureus  (MRSA)  has  long  been  recognized  as  a  pathogen
associated  with  health  care  settings;  however,  in  the  1990s,  community-associated
MRSA  infections,  causing  mostly  SSTI,  emerged  in  the  United  States  (2).  Substantial
progress has been achieved in preventing MRSA bloodstream infections in U.S. health
care facilities (3–5) after widespread introduction of enhanced infection control efforts
in  acute-care  hospitals.  Although  the  rates  of  hospital-onset  MRSA  bloodstream

infections have substantially decreased, evidence from the National Healthcare Safety
Network  (NHSN)  and  from  the  Emerging  Infections  Program  (EIP)  surveillance  system
suggests  that  the  decline  might  have  slowed  in  more  recent  years  (4,6);  the  United
States  is  not  on  track  to  meet  the  2020  goal  of  the  Healthcare-Associated  Infection
National Action Plan of a 50% reduction in hospital-onset MRSA bloodstream infections
from the 2015 baseline (7). Moreover, to protect patients, expanded efforts are needed
to prevent methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA), which causes approximately half of
all  health  care–associated  S.  aureus  infections  (8).  There  is  little  information  on  the
current epidemiology of MSSA infections in the United States, and available data might
not  be  nationally  representative  (9–11).  A  critical  assessment  of  recent  trends  and
incidence  of  both  MRSA  and  MSSA  invasive  disease  in  the  United  States  is  crucial  to
informing  public  health  policy  and  formulating  a  framework  of  approaches  to  further
prevent  S.  aureus  infections.  In  this  report,  recent  data  from  the  EIP  population
surveillance and two large electronic health record (EHR) data sets from over 400 U.S.
acute  care  hospitals  were  used  to  update  estimates  of  MRSA  and  MSSA  bloodstream
infections,  and  to  estimate  associated  in-hospital  mortality.  Top  EIP  population  MRSA
surveillance.  MRSA  bloodstream  infection  data  were  obtained  from  CDC’s  EIP  active
laboratory-  and  population-based  surveillance  for  invasive  MRSA  in  selected  counties
from six sites* reporting data continually from 2005 to 2016 (population in 2016 = 13
million). A case of MRSA bloodstream infection was defined as isolation of MRSA from a
blood culture in a resident of the catchment area, who had not had a positive invasive
culture  from  a  normally  sterile  site  in  the  preceding  30  days.  Annual  incidence  was
calculated  per  100,000  census  population  and  stratified  according  to  patient
epidemiologic exposure, determined through medical record review as 1) hospital-onset
if the culture was obtained on or after the fourth day of an inpatient hospitalization; 2)
health  care–associated  community-onset,  if  the  culture  was  obtained  from  an
outpatient or during the first 3 days of hospitalization in a patient with one of several

significant  prior  health  care  exposures;  and  3)  community-associated,  otherwise.
Community-onset  infections  comprise  health  care–associated  community-onset  and
community-associated infections. Further details about the surveillance program can be
found elsewhere (3). Adjusted annual decreases were modeled using Poisson regression
and  accounting  for  changes  in  the  overall  population  and  dialysis  population
demographics.  Postcensus  bridged-race  census  files  were  used  for  EIP  analyses.  EHR
databases.  The  Premier  Healthcare  Database  (12)  and  Cerner  Health  Facts  EMR  (13)
data were used to identify S. aureus bloodstream infections among patients discharged
from participating acute care hospitals reporting results of microbiologic cultures with
antimicrobial susceptibility testing during January 1, 2012–December 31, 2017. A case
was  defined  as  the  identification  of  S.  aureus  in  a  blood  culture  with  reported
antimicrobial sensitivity, without a positive S. aureus blood culture in the preceding 14
days. Community-onset and hospital-onset cases were defined as for EIP surveillance.
Incidences  of  MSSA  and  MRSA  were  calculated  as  the  number  of  community-onset
cases per 1,000 hospital discharges and the number of hospital-onset cases per 10,000
patient-days.  Trends  in  monthly  incidence  during  2012–2017  were  assessed  using
generalized  estimating  equations  to  fit  negative  binomial  regression  models  adjusted
for  seasonality  and  certain  hospital  characteristics  and  accounting  for  clustering  and
repeated  measures.  The  outcome  variable  was  the  number  of  S.  aureus  bloodstream
infections, and the predictor variable was a continuous time covariate. Adjusted rates
are presented as relative annual trends. Deaths associated with S. aureus bloodstream
infections were defined as deaths or discharges to hospice for patient hospitalizations
with  documented  S.  aureus  bloodstream  infections.  Differences  in  annual  mortality
were assessed using generalized estimating equations binomial models adjusting for all
the  same  characteristics  as  for  incidence.  Hospital  characteristics  were  used  in  a
raking-procedure  to  determine  weights  to  extrapolate  the  number  of  discharges
included in the sample to match the distribution of discharges for all hospitals from the

American Hospital Association survey (14). Using these weights, national estimates of
cases  of  S.  aureus  bloodstream  infections  and  deaths  associated  with  S.  aureus
bloodstream infections were extrapolated. All statistical analyses were performed using
SAS  (version  9.4;  SAS  Institute).  Top  Rates  of  hospital-onset  and  community-onset
MRSA, EIP surveillance, 2005–2016. From 2005 to 2016, the incidence of hospital-onset
and community-onset MRSA bloodstream infection declined 74% and 40%, respectively
(Figure 1). The decline in hospital-onset MRSA bloodstream infection rates has slowed in
more  recent  years:  adjusted  rates  decreased  by  17.1%  per  year  (p<0.001)  during
2005–2012  but  did  not  significantly  change  during  2013–2016  (p  =  0.25).  Adjusted
community-onset MRSA bloodstream infection rates declined by 6.9% per year during
2005–2016  (p<0.001).  Declines  in  rates  of  health  care–associated  community-onset
infections  accounted  for  most  of  the  decline  in  community-onset  MRSA  bloodstream
infections
 during
 2005–2016
 (Figure
 1).
 Adjusted
 health
 care–associated
community-onset bloodstream infection rates declined by 7.8% per year (p = 0.001),
but community-associated bloodstream infections declined by only 2.5% per year (p =
0.001). Rates of hospital-onset and community-onset MRSA and MSSA and associated
mortality,  EHR  data,  2012–2017.  From  2012  to  2017,  447  hospitals  contributed  data
(average per year = 325). During this time, adjusted hospital-onset MRSA bloodstream
infection rates declined 7.3% per year (p<0.0001) (Figure 2), with no significant change
in community-onset MRSA rates (p = 0.35). Hospital-onset MSSA rates did not change
(p  =  0.11),  and  community-onset  MSSA  rates  significantly  increased  (3.9%  per  year,
p<0.001) (Figure 2). The overall unadjusted in-hospital mortality among patients with S.
aureus  bloodstream  infections  over  the  study  period  was  18%.  No  significant  change
was  observed  from  2012  to  2017,  although  significant  differences  were  observed  by
epidemiologic classification: unadjusted MRSA and MSSA mortality rates were higher for
hospital-onset  cases  (29%  and  24%,  respectively)  than  for  community-onset  cases
(18% and 14%, respectively) (p<0.001). Estimated morbidity of S. aureus bloodstream

infections  and  in-hospital  mortality,  EHR  data,  United  States,  2017.  Overall,  an
estimated  119,247  cases  of  S.  aureus  bloodstream  infections  and  19,832  associated
deaths occurred nationwide in 2017. Top This study identified substantial reductions in
hospital-onset  MRSA  bloodstream  infection  rates  between  2005  and  2012;  however,
since 2012, the rate of decline has slowed. These trends are consistent with recent data
from  NHSN  (4).  Less  marked  declines  were  noted  in  rates  of  community-onset  MRSA
bloodstream infections compared with those of hospital-onset infections. The detailed
epidemiologic
 information
 that
 EIP
 collects
 allowed
 subclassification
 of
community-onset  MRSA  infections  into  those  with  prior  health  care  exposure  (health
care–associated community-onset), which account for the majority of cases, and those
without health care exposure (community-associated). Most of the reduction in MRSA
bloodstream  infection  is  attributable  to  reductions  in  health  care–associated  MRSA.
Community-associated MRSA infection rates have changed little overall. Hospital-onset
MSSA  infection  rates  have  not  changed  since  2012,  whereas  community-onset-MSSA
infection  rates  might  be  increasing  slightly.  The  reasons  for  the  declines  in
hospital-onset  MRSA  bloodstream  infections  might  be  attributable  to  a  variety  of
infection
 control
 efforts,
 including
 improvements
 in
 preventing
 device-
 and
procedure-associated  infections  (15–17),  as  well  as  efforts  to  interrupt  MRSA
transmission  in  the  hospital  setting  (5,18).  As  has  been  reported  previously  (17),
significant  national  reductions  in  central-line–associated  bloodstream  infections
occurred during 2001–2009, particularly in those caused by S. aureus; these reductions
have continued through more recent years (4). Meanwhile, evidence from the National
Veterans Affairs system suggests that decreasing hospital transmission of MRSA likely
also contributed to the observed reductions (19,20). National MRSA reductions primarily
reflect  declines  in  the  incidence  of  infections  caused  by  USA100  strains,  which  are
predominantly  transmitted  in  health  care  settings,  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  USA300
strains, which are predominantly transmitted in the community (21). Historically, large

shifts  in  S.  aureus  strain  epidemiology  have  occurred  (22).  Whereas  the  reasons  for
some of these shifts might be related to strain virulence and fitness, health care–related
interventions  are  likely  to  have  played  a  role  in  the  decrease  in  USA100.  The  recent
slowing in the reduction in hospital-onset MRSA bloodstream infections and the limited
decline in community-associated MRSA and in MSSA infections point to the need for an
updated  S.  aureus  prevention  framework,  including  greater  use  of  evidence-based
practices that can reduce transmission and prevent device- and procedure-associated
infections, as well as new and novel approaches. These include strategies to suppress
S.  aureus  colonization  in  patients  during  periods  of  high  risk  for  invasive  S.  aureus
infection,  such  as  when  invasive  devices  are  in  place,  during  admission  to  high-risk
hospital  units,  or  perioperatively  for  certain  high-risk  surgical  procedures.  The
experience with MRSA suggests that the postdischarge period might also be important
for  targeting  innovative  prevention  efforts:  EIP  data  suggest  that  the  majority  of  all
MRSA  bloodstream  infections  are  health  care–associated  community-onset,  and  most
occur  in  the  3  months  after  hospital  discharge  (3).  A  recent  study  suggests  that
prescribing  serial  decolonization  protocols  at  the  time  of  hospital  discharge  could
significantly  reduce  postdischarge  S.  aureus  infections  (23).  Suppression  of  S.  aureus
colonization  might  play  an  important  role  in  decreasing  transmission,  but  data  to
recommend this approach as a replacement for currently recommended strategies to
prevent  transmission,  such  as  contact  precautions,  are  insufficient  (24).  All  hospitals
should  have  strategies  in  place  for  preventing  S.  aureus  infections;  however,  the
prevention  impact  might  be  greatest  in  those  with  a  particularly  high  S.  aureus
incidence.  A  recent  review  of  NHSN  data  indicated  that  a  relatively  small  number  of
hospitals (approximately 200) account for slightly over half of the hospital-onset MRSA
incidence in excess of the 2020 goals and could be prioritized for prevention to reduce
MRSA
 bloodstream
 infections
 nationally
 (NHSN,
 unpublished
 data).
 
 
Community-associated  MRSA  infections  provide  a  reservoir  that  contributes  to  health

care–associated  disease  incidence  and  fuels  transmission  both  outside  and  within
health  care  settings.  USA300  strains,  for  example,  emerged  in  the  community  and
spread to health care settings (25). Community-associated S. aureus infections are not
declining,  and  the  ongoing  opioid  epidemic  might  be  contributing  to  this  trend.
Emerging evidence suggests a 16-fold risk for invasive MRSA infection among persons
who inject drugs; 9.2% of invasive MRSA cases in 2016 occurred in persons who inject
drugs  (26).  Prevention  of  opioid  misuse,  increasing  access  and  linkage  to
medication-assisted  treatment  for  persons  with  opioid  use  disorder  (27),  ensuring
access  to  sterile  injecting  equipment,  improving  education  about  safer  injection
practices  and  how  to  recognize  early  signs  of  infection,  and  linking  those  with  an
infection  to  care  are  needed.  Additionally,  community-associated  S.  aureus  infections
are known to disproportionately affect persons in lower socioeconomic strata (28); this
has  implications  for  the  formulation  of  approaches  to  enhance  prevention.  The
observed increases in rates of community-onset MSSA infections highlight the need to
systematically study the epidemiology of MSSA and develop innovative, evidence-based
prevention  strategies  for  this  setting.  Research  for  a  vaccine  or  for  novel  ways  to
decrease S. aureus bioburden should continue. The incidence of S. aureus bloodstream
infections  and  associated  deaths  is  substantial  and  consistent  with  estimates  using
Nationwide Inpatient Sample data (29). Mortality was unchanged over the time studied
and  comparable  to  what  was  achieved  in  the  VA  hospital  system  through
implementation  of  improved  clinical  management  of  infection  (28).  Appropriate  and
timely  diagnosis  and  antimicrobial  susceptibility-guided  treatment  of  S.  aureus
infections remain key to reducing poor outcomes and preventing sepsis and death (29).
The  findings  in  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  two  limitations.  First,  the  lack  of
detailed epidemiologic information on previous health care exposures captured in EHR
precluded subclassification of community-onset infections into those with and without
previous health care exposures. Second, possible variability in clinical or data capture

practices  across  different  hospitals  might  affect  the  validity  of  EHR  data  and  trends.
Strengths  of  this  study  include  the  use  of  multiple  data  sources;  the  detailed
epidemiologic  information  provided  in  the  population-based  EIP  surveillance;  the
inclusion  of  two  widely  used  EHR  systems  representing  a  large  number  of  U.S.
acute-care hospitals; and the use of weights to derive national estimates. As has been
previously shown with another infection-related condition (sepsis), clinical criteria using
EHR data are immune to temporal variations in coding practices that can be significant
(30),  whereas  death-certificate  data  are  an  insensitive  measure  of  sepsis-related
mortality  (31).  S.  aureus  infections  account  for  substantial  morbidity  in  the  United
States.  Despite  significant  reductions  in  health  care–associated  MRSA  infections,
progress  is  slowing.  MSSA  infections  have  not  decreased  as  much  in  hospitals  and
might  be  increasing  in  the  community.  Adherence  to  CDC  recommendations  (32)  for
preventing device- and procedure-associated infections and interrupting transmission,
along  with  innovative  interventions  tailored  to  the  needs  of  health  care  facilities
(including  decolonization)  are  needed  to  further  prevent  S.  aureus  infections.  Top
Corresponding author: Athena P. Kourtis, apk3@dc.gov, 770-488-5216. Top 1Division of
Healthcare  Quality  Promotion,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious
Diseases,  CDC;  2California  Department  of  Health;  3California  Emerging  Infections
Program,  Oakland,  California;  4Tennessee  Emerging  Infections  Program,  Nashville,
Tennessee; 5New York–Rochester Emerging Infections Program, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York; 6Connecticut Emerging Infections Program, New
Haven,  Connecticut;  7Georgia  Emerging  Infections  Program,  Atlanta  Georgia.  Top  All
authors  have  completed  and  submitted  the  ICMJE  form  for  disclosure  of  potential
conflicts  of  interest.  No  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  disclosed.  Top  *  California
(three  counties),  Connecticut  (statewide),  Georgia  (eight  counties),  Minnesota  (one
county), New York (one county), and Tennessee (one county). Top Top * Adjusted for
year  and  distribution  of  age,  sex,  and  race  among  overall  and  dialysis  population.

Community-onset  infections  comprise  health  care–associated  community-onset  and
community-associated infections † California (three counties), Connecticut (statewide),
Georgia  (eight  counties),  Minnesota  (one  county),  New  York  (one  county),  and
Tennessee
 (one
 county).
 Top
 Abbreviations:
 MRSA
 =
 methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus  aureus;  MSSA  =  methicillin-susceptible  Staphylococcus  aureus.  *
Modeled relative to observed rates in 2012. Model adjusts for discharge month and year
and hospital region, teaching status, bed size, and distributions of patient age, sex and
race,  in  addition  to  accounting  for  repeated  measures  and  clustering  by  facility.  Top
Suggested  citation  for  this  article:  Kourtis  AP,  Hatfield  K,  Baggs  J,  et  al.   Vital  Signs:
Epidemiology  and  Recent  Trends  in  Methicillin-Resistant  and  in  Methicillin-Susceptible
Staphylococcus  aureus  Bloodstream  Infections  —  United  States.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal
Wkly Rep 2019;68:214–219. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6809e1. 
MMWR  and  Morbidity  and  Mortality  Weekly  Report  are  service  marks  of  the  U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the  date  of  publication.  All  HTML  versions  of  MMWR  articles  are  generated  from  final
proofs through an automated process. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and

tables. 
 Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov.

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6809e1.htm
