  Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this
file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov. Type 508 Accommodation
and  the  title  of  the  report  in  the  subject  line  of  e-mail.  Please  note:  An  erratum  has
been  published  for  this  article.  To  view  the  erratum,  please  click  here.  On  March  6,
2012,  this  report  was  posted  as  an  MMWR  Early  Release  on  the  MMWR  website
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).  Background:  Clostridium  difficile  infection  (CDI)  is  a
common and sometimes fatal health-care–associated infection; the incidence, deaths,
and  excess  health-care  costs  resulting  from  CDIs  in  hospitalized  patients  are  all  at
historic highs. Meanwhile, the contribution of nonhospital health-care exposures to the
overall burden of CDI, and the ability of programs to prevent CDIs by implementing CDC
recommendations across a range of hospitals, have not been demonstrated previously. 
Methods: Population-based data from the Emerging Infections Program were analyzed
by  location  and  antecedent  health-care  exposures.  Present-on-admission  and
hospital-onset,  laboratory-identified  CDIs  reported  to  the  National  Healthcare  Safety
Network (NHSN) were analyzed. Rates of hospital-onset CDIs were compared between
two 8-month periods near the beginning and end of three CDI prevention programs that
focused  primarily  on  measures  to  prevent  intrahospital  transmission  of  C.  difficile  in
three states (Illinois, Massachusetts, and New York).  Results: Among CDIs identified in
Emerging Infections Program data in 2010, 94% were associated with receiving health
care;  of  these,  75%  had  onset  among  persons  not  currently  hospitalized,  including
recently  discharged  patients,  outpatients,  and  nursing  home  residents.  Among  CDIs
reported to NHSN in 2010, 52% were already present on hospital admission, although
they  were  largely  health-care  related.  The  pooled  CDI  rate  declined  20%  among  71
hospitals participating in the CDI prevention programs.  Conclusions: Nearly all CDIs are
related  to  various  health-care  settings  where  predisposing  antibiotics  are  prescribed
and  C.  difficile  transmission  occurs.  Hospital-onset  CDIs  were  prevented  through  an
emphasis on infection control.  Implications for Public Health: More needs to be done to

prevent CDIs; major reductions will require antibiotic stewardship along with infection
control  applied  to  nursing  homes  and  ambulatory-care  settings  as  well  as  hospitals.
State  health  departments  and  partner  organizations  have  shown  leadership  in
preventing CDIs in hospitals and can prevent more CDIs by extending their programs to
cover  other  health-care  settings.  Introduction  Clostridium  difficile  is  an  anaerobic,
spore-forming bacillus that causes pseudomembranous colitis, manifesting as diarrhea
that often recurs and can progress to toxic megacolon, sepsis, and death. Infection is
spread  by  the  fecal-oral  route;  spores,  the  infective  form,  can  persist  on  fomites  and
environmental surfaces for months. Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) often occurs in
patients  in  health-care  settings,  where  antibiotics  are  prescribed  and  symptomatic
patients, an important source for transmission, are concentrated. From 2000 to 2009,
the  number  of  hospitalized  patients  with  any  CDI  discharge  diagnoses  more  than
doubled, from approximately 139,000 to 336,600, and the number with a primary CDI
diagnosis  more  than  tripled,  from  33,000  to  111,000  (1).  Although  the  incidence  of
other health-care–associated infections has declined (2), CDIs have increased and only
recently  plateaued  (1).  Evidence-based  guidelines  for  the  prevention  of  CDIs  in
hospitals have been published (3). However, because the evidence for many of these
recommendations  is  weak  (4)  the  degree  to  which  they  can  prevent  CDIs  effectively
across a range of hospitals is unknown, as is the relative burden of CDIs in nonhospital
and  hospital  health-care  settings.  Methods  In  this  investigation,  three  data  sources
were used to identify health-care exposures for CDIs, determine the proportion of CDIs
occurring  outside  hospital  settings,  and  assess  whether  prevention  programs  can
effectively  reduce  CDIs.  CDC's  Emerging  Infections  Program  conducted  active,
population-based surveillance for CDIs from eight diverse geographic areas in 2010 (5).
Program  surveillance  coordinators  received  laboratory  reports  of  positive  stool  C.
difficile tests from residents of catchment areas. Cases were defined by a positive C.
difficile  test  in  a  person  without  a  positive  test  during  the  previous  8  weeks  (repeat

positive tests during this period suggest recurrence) (6). Medical records were reviewed
to confirm the presence of symptoms consistent with CDI and to record all health-care
exposures during the 12 weeks preceding specimen collection (i.e., minimum duration
of antibiotic-induced susceptibility to CDI). CDIs were classified by the patient's location
at the time of stool specimen collection and divided into three groups: 1) hospital-onset
CDI, occurring in a hospitalized patient with a positive stool specimen collected more
than 3 days after admission; 2) nursing home–onset CDI, occurring in a nursing home
resident with a positive stool specimen collected at any time during their stay; and 3)
community-onset  CDI,  occurring  in  an  outpatient  or  an  inpatient  of  any  health-care
facility with a positive stool specimen collected within 3 days (the median incubation
period of C. difficile) after admission. Community-onset CDI cases were subcategorized
based  on  previous  health-care  exposures  during  the  12  weeks  preceding  specimen
collection;  previous  inpatient  exposures  took  precedence  over  outpatient  exposures
when  classifying  cases.   A  second  data  source  was  the  National  Healthcare  Safety
Network (NHSN) Multidrug-Resistant Organism and Clostridium difficile Infection module
for laboratory-identified (LabID)-CDI events, which became available in March 2009 (7).
Incident  LabID-CDI  events  in  NHSN  are  based  on  positive  C.  difficile  test  results  from
hospital patients who did not have a previous positive test result reported within that
facility  during  the  preceding  8  weeks.  LabID-CDI  events  present  on  admission  were
defined by a positive stool specimen collected within the first 3 days of admission; a
subset was delineated further if patients were discharged from the reporting hospital in
the  preceding  4  weeks,  during  which  time  previous  hospitalization  is  most  likely  to
influence the risk for CDI (6,7). Rates of hospital-onset CDI cases were calculated per
10,000  patient-days.  The  third  set  of  data  included  early  results  from  three  state-led
programs  (Illinois,  Massachusetts,  and  New  York)  similar  to  other  programs  in  which
hospitals collaborated with one another to prevent health-care–associated infections (8)
(in this case, hospital-onset CDIs). The three programs included a total of 71 hospitals

focused  on  preventing  CDIs  during  three  different  periods  ranging  from  19  to  22
months.*  Although  the  systems  for  data  collection  and  behavioral  change  strategies
varied  among  programs,  all  three  used  CDC  surveillance  definitions  (6)  and  focused
primarily  on  infection  control  interventions  to  prevent  transmission  of  C.  difficile;  the
Massachusetts program did include antibiotic stewardship as a minor component. Using
a  negative  binomial  model,  rates  of  hospital-onset  CDI  from  hospitals  participating  in
the  three  programs  were  compared  between  two  same-calendar-month,  8-month
periods (to control for seasonal variation in rates), one earlier and the other later in the
conduct of each program.  Results The Emerging Infections Program population under
surveillance included persons in the catchment areas of 111 acute-care hospitals and
310 nursing homes. A total of 10,342 CDIs were identified; 44% of patients were aged
<65  years.  CDIs  were  classified  by  inpatient  or  outpatient  status  at  time  of  stool
collection  and  type/location  of  exposures  (Figure  1).  Overall,  94%  of  all  CDIs  were
related to various precedent and concurrent health-care exposures; of these, 75% had
their onset outside of hospitals. In addition, some cases occurred in patients who were
exposed  to  multiple  settings.  For  example,  20%  of  hospital-onset  CDIs  occurred  in
recent (i.e., <12 weeks) residents of a nursing home, and 67% of nursing home–onset
CDI cases occurred in patients recently discharged from an acute-care hospital.  A total
of  711  acute  care  hospitals  in  28  states  conducted  facility-wide  inpatient  LabID-CDI
event reporting to NHSN in 2010 (Table 1). A total of 42,157 incident LabID-CDI events
were  reported  (Figure  2).  Overall,  52%  of  LabID-CDI  events  were  already  present  on
admission  to  hospitals.  The  pooled  rate  of  hospital-onset  CDI  was  7.4  per  10,000
patient-days, with a median hospital rate of 5.4 per 10,000 and an interquartile range
of  6.2.   The  pooled  hospital-onset  CDI  rate  across  the  three  prevention  programs
declined 20%, from 9.3 per 10,000 patient-days during the early comparison period to
7.5  during  the  later  comparison  period  (rate  ratio:  0.80)  (Table  2).   Conclusions  and
Comment   The  incidence,  mortality,  and  medical  care  costs  of  CDIs  have  reached

historic highs (1,3,9,10). The estimated number of deaths attributed to CDI, based on
multiple  cause-of-death  mortality  data,  increased  from  3,000  deaths  per  year  during
1999–2000 to 14,000 during 2006–2007, with more than 90% of deaths in persons aged
≥65 years (10). Recent excess health-care costs of hospital-onset CDI are estimated to
be  $5,042–$7,179  per  case  with  a  national  annual  estimate  (limited  to  the  subset  of
hospital-onset  CDIs  only)  of  $897  million  to  $1.3  billion  (11).  Much  of  the  recent
increase  in  the  incidence  and  mortality  of  CDIs  is  attributed  to  the  emergence  and
spread of a hypervirulent, resistant strain of C. difficile that produces greater quantities
of principal virulence toxins A and B and has additional factors enhancing its virulence
(9,12).  Nonetheless,  many  of  these  infections  can  be  prevented,  as  demonstrated  by
the  20%  reduction  in  incidence  of  hospital-onset  CDI  among  three  state  prevention
programs  conducted  over  approximately  21  months.  In  England,  where  a  national
campaign  to  publicly  report  and  prevent  CDIs  was  implemented  in  2007  through  an
emphasis  on  antibiotic  stewardship  as  well  as  infection  control  (13),  pooled
hospital-onset CDI rates declined 56% during a 3-year period (2008–2011) (14). In the
United  States,  the  National  Action  Plan  for  Prevention  of  HAIs  has  targeted  a  30%
reduction  of  CDIs  in  acute-care  hospitals  by  2015  (15).  Principal  recommendations  to
prevent  CDI  include  improving  antibiotic  use,  early  and  reliable  detection  of  CDI,
isolation of symptomatic patients, and reducing C. difficile contamination of health-care
environmental  surfaces  (3).  Good  antibiotic  stewardship  is  an  important  aspect  of
quality health care that prevents CDI. Antibiotic use increases the risk for developing
CDI by seven- to 10-fold while the patient is taking the antibiotic and for 1 month after
discontinuation,  and  by  approximately  three-fold  for  the  subsequent  2  months  (16).
CDC  provides  tools  for  facilities  to  develop  antibiotic  stewardship  programs.†   To
prevent transmission of C. difficile, early detection and isolation of patients with CDI is
essential.  Nucleic  acid  amplification  tests  can  be  as  much  as  twice  as  sensitive  as
enzyme immunoassays and can detect CDI more accurately when used in populations

with  an  appropriate  pretest  probability  (i.e.,  patients  with  more  than  three  unformed
stools  in  a  24-hour  period  without  an  identified  cause)  (3,17).  Because  of  their
increased sensitivity, nucleic acid amplification tests will yield higher hospital-onset CDI
rates. Currently, 35% of NHSN hospitals are using nucleic acid amplification tests (Table
1);  risk  adjustment  will  be  necessary  to  compare  rates  accurately  where  diagnostic
testing practices vary.  C. difficile frequently is transmitted between patients via hands
of  health-care  personnel  transiently  contaminated  after  contact  with  symptomatic
patients or their surrounding environment. Glove use, with strict adherence to changing
between  patient  contacts,  is  the  best  proven  method  for  preventing  hand
contamination
 with
 C.
 difficile
 from
 symptomatic
 patients
 (3,4).
 Health-care
environmental  services  have  a  key  role  in  reducing  contamination  that  can  directly
transmit  to  patients  or  contaminate  the  hands  of  health-care  personnel.§  Because  C.
difficile spores resist killing by usual hospital disinfectants, an Environmental Protection
Agency–registered disinfectant with a C. difficile sporicidal label claim¶ should be used
to augment thorough physical cleaning. These findings emphasize how the risk for CDI
from  antibiotic  exposure  and  transmission  moves  with  patients  across  multiple
health-care settings, leading to the interdependence of health-care settings in a region
to  lower  their  CDI  rates.  Because  antibiotics  disrupt  the  normally  protective  bacterial
populations of the lower intestine in a manner that increases risk for CDI for 3 or more
months, antibiotics received in one setting often predispose a patient to develop CDI in
another. In contrast, because the incubation period is a median of only 2–3 days (3),
acquisition  of  C.  difficile  is  overall  more  likely  to  have  occurred  in  the  setting  where
symptoms have their onset and CDI is diagnosed. Meanwhile, CDIs present on hospital
admission are most often related to the care delivered in other inpatient or outpatient
facilities;  because  they  are  an  important  source  for  intrahospital  transmission,  CDIs
present  on  admission  are  a  risk  factor  for  higher  hospital-onset  CDI  rates  (18).   The
findings  of  this  report  are  subject  to  at  least  six  limitations.  First,  data  on  antibiotic

exposure, which are important for targeting prevention efforts, were not available. An
NHSN  option  designed  to  address  this  problem  is  undergoing  piloting  with  electronic
health  record  vendors.**  Second,  data  on  potential  underlying  temporal  trends  in
prevention  program  hospitals  were  not  available.  Third,  the  various  methods  used  to
implement prevention strategies in the prevention hospitals were not described (e.g.,
staff  training,  assessment  and  feedback  of  compliance  with  isolation  precautions,  or
adequacy of environmental cleaning). Although the pooled rate toward the end of these
programs  (7.5  per  10,000  patient-days)  was  similar  to  the  rate  across  all  NHSN
hospitals  in  2010  (7.4),  the  three  programs  started  and  ended  at  different  rates,
suggesting  that locally tailored  approaches to prevention might be beneficial. Fourth,
the impact of ongoing CDI prevention initiatives under way during the early phase of
evaluation  also  was  not  assessed.  Fifth,  the  potential  impact  of  any  shifts  in  test
sensitivity  between  different  methods  used  (e.g.,  nucleic  acid  amplification  versus
enzyme  immunoassay)  was  not  assessed.  Finally,  in  both  the  Emerging  Infections
Program and NHSN, the setting of onset was based on where the patient was located at
the
 time
 of
 stool
 specimen
 collection;
 therefore,
 there
 might
 have
 been
misclassification of cases if a marked delay occurred between onset of symptoms and
stool  specimen  collection.  Because  nearly  75%  of  all  CDIs  related  to  U.S.  health  care
have their onset outside of hospitals, more needs to be done to prevent CDIs across all
health-care  settings.  For  its  part,  CDC  is  working  to  improve  NHSN  LabID-CDI  event
reporting  for  nursing  homes  as  well  as  hospitals.  Clinical  document  architecture
specifications  are  available  for  electronic  health  record  system  vendors  to  use  in
enabling their systems to serve as electronic data sources for LabID-CDI event reporting
to  NHSN.††  The  option  to  report  electronically  will  take  on  greater  importance  as
increasing  numbers  of  hospitals  are  required  to  report  LabID-CDI  events  to  NHSN.
Currently,  six  states  (California,  Illinois,  New  York,  Oregon,  Tennessee,  and  Utah)
mandate  public  reporting  of  facility-wide  LabID-CDI  events.  Beginning  in  2013,  all

hospitals  participating  in  the  Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services'  Inpatient
Prospective  Payment  System  Quality  Reporting  Program  will  be  required  to  report
facility-wide  LabID-CDI  events  using  NHSN  to  qualify  for  their  2015  annual  payment
update;  public  reporting  of  hospital  rates  will  begin  in  2014  at  the  Hospital  Compare
website  (19).   Clinicians  and  other  health-care  providers,  as  well  as  inpatient  and
outpatient  health-care  facilities,  state  and  federal  public  health  officials  (e.g.,  the
Partnership for Patients), and partner patient safety organizations, could benefit from
increased  collaboration  in  preventing  CDIs.  Such  collaborations  could  broaden  and
enhance the use of prevention strategies and do so across the entire spectrum of U.S.
health-care  delivery.  State  health  departments,  working  with  regional  quality
improvement organizations, hospital associations, and other nongovernmental patient
safety partners, are positioned uniquely to work across these multiple settings.§§ Given
the  emphasis  of  current  health-care  reform  efforts  to  improve  patient  safety  while
reducing costs, now is an opportune time to begin to eliminate health-care–associated
CDIs.   L.  Clifford  McDonald,  MD,  Fernanda  Lessa,  MD,  Dawn  Sievert,  PhD,  Matt  Wise,
PhD, Rosa Herrera, Carolyn Gould, MD, Paul Malpiedi, MPH, Maggie Dudeck, MPH, Arjun
Srinivasan,  MD,  Scott  Fridkin,  MD,  Denise  Cardo,  MD,  Div  of  Healthcare  Quality
Promotion,  National  Center  for  Emerging  and  Zoonotic  Infectious  Diseases,  CDC.
Corresponding contributor: L. Clifford McDonald, cmcdonald1@cdc.gov, 404-639-3833.
Iowa  Foundation  for  Medical  Care–Illinois,  Oakbrook;  Illinois  Dept  of  Public  Health.
Massachusetts Coalition for the Prevention of Medical Errors; the Massachusetts Dept of
Public Health. Greater New York Hospital Association; United Hospital Fund; New York
State Dept of Health. Hospitals and staff members reporting to the National Healthcare
Safety  Network.  Amit  Chitnis,  MD,  EIS  Officer;  principal  investigators  and  surveillance
staff members, Emerging Infections Program, CDC.  * The Illinois prevention program,
led  by  the  Department  of  Public  Health  and  the  Iowa  Foundation  for  Medical
Care–Illinois  (a  health-care  quality  improvement  organization  headquartered  in  West

Des  Moines,  Iowa),  included  11  hospitals  with  complete  data  from  the  beginning  of
March  2010  through  October  2011.  The  Massachusetts  program,  led  by  the
Massachusetts  Coalition  for  the  Prevention  of  Medical  Errors  and  the  Massachusetts
Department  of  Public  Health,  included  27  hospitals  with  complete  data  from  January
2010 through September 2011. The New York program, led by the Greater New York
Hospital  Association  and  the  United  Hospital  Fund  in  collaboration  with  the  New  York
State Department of Health, included 33 hospitals with complete data from March 2008
through
 December
 2009.
 †
 Additional
 information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/healthcare/improve-efforts/clinicians.html.   §  Additional
information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/hai/toolkits/evaluating-environmental-cleaning.html.   ¶  Additional
information
 available
 at
 http://www.epa.gov/oppad001/cdif-guidance.html.
 
 
 **
Additional  information  available  at  http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/psc_ma.html.    ††
Additional information available at http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/cda_esurveillance.html.  §§
Additional
 information
 available
 at
http://www.cdc.gov/hai/stateplans/haistateplans-map.html.  
Key  Points  FIGURE  1.  Percentage  of  Clostridium  difficile  infection  (CDI)  cases  (N  =
10,342), by inpatient or outpatient status at time of stool collection and type/location of
exposures* — United States, Emerging Infections Program, 2010 * CDIs were classified
by the patient's location at the time of stool specimen collection and divided into three
groups: 1) hospital-onset CDI, occurring in a hospitalized patient with a positive stool
specimen  collected  more  than  3  days  after  admission;  2)  nursing  home–onset  CDI,
occurring  in  a  nursing  home  resident  with  a  positive  stool  specimen  collected  at  any
time during their stay; and 3) community-onset CDI, occurring in an outpatient or an
inpatient  of  any  health-care  facility  with  a  positive  stool  specimen  collected  within  3
days  (the  median  incubation  period  of  C.  difficile)  after  admission.  Community-onset
CDI cases were subcategorized based on previous health-care exposures during the 12

weeks  preceding  specimen  collection;  previous  inpatient  exposures  took  precedence
over  outpatient  exposures  when  classifying  cases.  Alternate  Text:  The  figure  above
shows  the  percentage  of  Clostridium  difficile  infection  (CDI)  cases  (N  =  10,342),  by
inpatient or outpatient status at time of stool collection and type/location of exposures,
in the United States during 2010, based on data from the Emerging Infections Program.
The  population  under  surveillance  included  persons  in  the  catchment  areas  of  111
acute-care  hospitals  and  310  nursing  homes.  A  total  of  10,342  CDIs  were  identified.
CDIs  were  classified  by  inpatient  or  outpatient  status  at  time  of  stool  collection  and
type/location of exposures. Overall, 94% of all CDIs were related to various antecedent
and  concurrent  health-care  exposures;  of  these,  75%  had  their  onset  outside  of
hospitals. In addition, some cases occurred in patients who were exposed to multiple
settings. For example, 20% of hospital-onset CDIs occurred in recent (i.e., <12 weeks)
residents  of  a  nursing  home,  and  67%  of  nursing  home-onset  CDI  cases  occurred  in
patients recently discharged from an acute-care hospital.
                     TABLE  1.  Number  and  percentage  of  hospitals  reporting
laboratory-identified Clostridium difficile infections, by selected characteristics — United
States,  National  Healthcare  Safety  Network,  2010  Characteristic  No.   (%)  Total  711
(100)  Bed  size  ≤200  429  (61)  201–500  232  (33)  501–1000  46  (6)  >1000  1   (<0.5)
Medical  school  affiliation  226  (31)  Primary  diagnostic  assay  used   Enzyme
immunoassay  for  toxin  A  and/or  B  364  (51)  Nucleic  acid  amplification  test  238  (33)
Other   88  (12)  Missing  data   21  (3)  FIGURE  2.  Percentage  of  laboratory-identified
Clostridium  difficile  infections  (N  =  42,157),  by  hospitalization  status  at  time  of  stool
collection  and  type/location  of  exposure  —  United  States,  National  Healthcare  Safety
Network, 2010 * From reporting hospital during the preceding 4 weeks. Alternate Text:
The  figure  above  shows  the  percentage  of  laboratory-identified  Clostridium  difficile
infections (LabID-CDIs) (N = 42,157), by hospitalization status at time of stool collection
and type/location of exposure in the United States, during 2010, based on data from the

National  Healthcare  Safety  Network.  Surveillance  was  conducted  over  approximately
27.6 million patient days. A total of 42,157 incident LabID-CDIs were reported. Overall,
52% of LabID-CDIs events were already present on admission to hospitals. The pooled
rate of hospital onset CDI was 7.4 per 10,000 patient-days, with a median hospital rate
of 5.4 per 10,000 and an interquartile range of 6.2.
                     TABLE 2. Reductions in hospital-onset Clostridium difficile infection rates
— Illinois, Massachusetts, and New York, May 2008–October 2011* State Period Patient
days  Rate   (95%  CI*)  Rate  ratio  (95%  CI)  Illinois  Mar  2010–Oct  2010  637,135  11.6
(10.3–13.0) 0.84 (0.70–1.00) Mar 2011–Oct 2011 578,121 9.9 (8.4–11.4) Massachusetts
Feb 2010–Sep 2010 823,939 7.6 (6.7–8.5) 0.75 (0.63–0.90) Feb 2011–Sep 2011 830,023
5.7  (4.9–6.5)  New  York  May  2008–Dec  2008  2,607,464  9.2  (8.5–9.9)  0.81  (0.73–0.89)
May  2009–Dec  2009  2,575,514  7.5  (7.0–8.0)  Overall  Pooled  baseline  4,068,538  9.3
(8.7–9.8)  0.80  (0.73–0.86)  Pooled  post  3,983,658  7.5  (7.0–7.9)  Abbreviation:  CI  =
confidence interval. * Study periods vary by state. Use of trade names and commercial
sources  is  for  identification  only  and  does  not  imply  endorsement  by  the  U.S.
Department of 
Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions
from typeset documents. 
This  conversion  might  result  in  character  translation  or  format  errors  in  the  HTML
version. 
Users are referred to the electronic PDF version (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr) 
and/or the original MMWR paper copy for printable versions of official text, figures, and

tables. 
An  original  paper  copy  of  this  issue  can  be  obtained  from  the  Superintendent  of
Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; 
telephone: (202) 512-1800. Contact GPO for current prices.
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov. How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this
site? 

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6109a3.htm
