Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization
in  the  United  States.  Secure  .gov  websites  use  HTTPS  A  lock  (   )  or  https://  means
you've  safely  connected  to  the  .gov  website.  Share  sensitive  information  only  on
official, secure websites. Updated July 5, 2024 Seasonal influenza activity remains low
nationally. positive for influenza
this week Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, A(H3N2), and B viruses were all co-circulating this
week.  Genetic  and  antigenic  characterization  and  antiviral  susceptibility  are
summarized  in  this  report.  of  visits  to  a  health  care  provider  this  week  were  for
respiratory illness
(below baseline). This week no jurisdictions experienced moderate, high, or very high
activity. weekly hospitalization rate. Because of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, this
system  will  suspend  data  collection  for  the  2020-21  influenza  season.  of  deaths
attributed to influenza this week. influenza-associated deaths were reported this week
for a total of 184 deaths this season. All data are preliminary and may change as more
reports  are  received.  Directional  arrows  indicate  changes  between  the  current  week
and  the  previous  week.  Additional  information  on  the  arrows  can  be  found  at  the
bottom of this page. A description of the CDC influenza surveillance system, including
methodology  and  detailed  descriptions  of  each  data  component  is  available  on  the
surveillance  methods  page.  Additional  information  on  the  current  and  previous
influenza seasons for each surveillance component are available on FluView Interactive.
Key  Points   Nationally,  the  percentage  of  respiratory  specimens  testing  positive  for
influenza  in  clinical  laboratories  remained  stable  (change  of  ≤0.5  percentage  points)
compared  to  the  previous  week.  Nationally,  influenza  A(H1N1)pdm09,  A(H3N2),  and
B/Victoria viruses are all co-circulating. However, the distribution of circulating viruses
varies by region. For regional and state level data and age group distribution, please
visit  FluView  Interactive.  The  results  of  tests  performed  by  clinical  laboratories
nationwide  are  summarized  below.  Data  from  clinical  laboratories  (the  percentage  of

specimens  tested  that  are  positive  for  influenza  virus)  are  used  to  monitor  whether
influenza activity is increasing or decreasing.   The results of tests performed by public
health  laboratories  nationwide  are  summarized  below.   Data  from  public  health
laboratories  are  used  to  monitor  the  proportion  of  circulating  influenza  viruses  that
belong to each influenza subtype/lineage.  
View  Chart  Data  |  View  Full  Screen  Additional  virologic  surveillance  information  for
current and past seasons:
Surveillance Methods | FluView Interactive: National, Regional, and State Data or Age
Data  A  patient  aged  >  18  years  in  Colorado  developed  eye  redness  and  irritation  on
June 26, 2024, while working at a commercial dairy cattle farm where highly pathogenic
avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) virus had been detected in cows. The patient reported
their symptoms to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment during a
public health visit to the farm. Respiratory and conjunctival specimens were collected
on June 28, 2024. A respiratory specimen was inconclusive at the Colorado State Public
Health Lab using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) influenza A(H5)
assay.  Specimens  were  then  sent  to  CDC  for  further  testing.  The  specimens  were
received  and  tested  at  CDC  on  July  2,  2024.  A  respiratory  specimen  was  positive  for
influenza  A  and  A(H5)  virus  using  diagnostic  RT-PCR.  Additional  analysis  of  the
respiratory specimen, including genetic sequencing, is underway. The patient was not
hospitalized, was provided with oseltamivir for treatment and symptoms are resolving.
In response to this detection additional case investigation and surveillance activities are
currently ongoing by public health officials. This is the fifth person to test positive for
A(H5) virus in the United States overall. The first was reported in April 2022 in Colorado,
the second in April 2024 in Texas, and the third and fourth were reported in May 2024
in Michigan. This is the fourth case associated with an ongoing multistate outbreak of
HPAI A(H5N1) in dairy cows in 2024. Currently in the United States, HPAI A(H5N1) virus
has been detected in wild birds, and there have been outbreaks among other animals

including  commercial  poultry,  backyard  flocks,  and  dairy  cows.  Sporadic  infections  in
wild  mammals  have  also  been  reported  by  United  States  Department  of  Agriculture
(USDA)  Animal  Plant  Health  Inspection  Service  (APHIS).  CDC  recommends  that  state
and local public health departments monitor people who are exposed to birds or other
animals (including livestock) suspected to be infected with avian influenza A viruses for
onset  of  signs  and  symptoms  until  10  days  after  their  last  exposure  and  that  people
who develop signs or symptoms of respiratory illness and/or conjunctivitis be tested for
influenza. During February 9, 2022 — June 29, 2024, over 9,800 people were monitored
following  exposure  to  HPAI  infected  birds,  cows,  or  other  animals.  Interim
recommendations  for  Prevention,  Monitoring,  and  Public  Health  Investigations  are
available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/bird-flu/prevention/hpai-interim-recommendations.html.
Information
 about
 avian
 influenza
 is
 available
 at
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/index.htm.  The  latest  case  reports  on  avian  influenza
outbreaks in wild birds, commercial poultry; backyard or hobbyist flocks; and mammals
in
 the
 United
 States
 are
 available
 from
 the
 USDA
 at
https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/animal-disease-information/avi
an/avian-influenza/2022-hpai.  Additional  information  regarding  human  infections  with
novel  influenza  A  viruses:  Surveillance  Methods   |   FluView  Interactive  CDC  performs
genetic  and  antigenic  characterization  of  U.S.  viruses  submitted  from  state  and  local
public  health  laboratories  according  to  the  Right  Size  Roadmap  submission  guidance.
These data are used to compare how similar the currently circulating influenza viruses
are  to  the  reference  viruses  representing  viruses  contained  in  the  current  influenza
vaccines. The data are also used to monitor evolutionary changes that continually occur
in  influenza  viruses  circulating  in  humans.  CDC  also  tests  susceptibility  of  circulating
influenza  viruses  to  antiviral  medications  including  the  neuraminidase  inhibitors
(oseltamivir,  zanamivir,  and  peramivir)  and  the  PA  endonuclease  inhibitor  baloxavir.

CDC  has  genetically  characterized  4,922  influenza  viruses  collected  since  October  1,
2023. CDC antigenically characterizes influenza viruses by hemagglutination inhibition
(HI)  (H1N1pdm09,  H3N2,  B/Victoria,  and  B/Yamagata  viruses)  or  neutralization-based
HINT  (H3N2  viruses)  using  antisera  that  ferrets  make  after  being  infected  with
reference viruses representing the 2023-2024 Northern Hemisphere recommended cell
or  recombinant-based  vaccine  viruses.  Antigenic  differences  between  viruses  are
determined by comparing how well the antibodies made against the vaccine reference
viruses  recognize  the  circulating  viruses  that  have  been  grown  in  cell  culture.  Ferret
antisera  are  useful  because  antibodies  raised  against  a  particular  virus  can  often
recognize small changes in the surface proteins of other viruses. In HI assays, viruses
with similar antigenic properties have antibody titer differences of less than or equal to
4-fold  when  compared  to  the  reference  (vaccine)  virus.  In  HINT,  viruses  with  similar
antigenic properties have antibody neutralization titer differences of less than or equal
to 8-fold. Viruses selected for antigenic characterization are a subset representing the
genetic  changes  in  the  surface  proteins  seen  in  genetically  characterized  viruses.
Influenza  A  Viruses  Influenza  B  Viruses  Assessment  of  Virus  Susceptibility  to  Antiviral
Medications CDC assesses susceptibility of influenza viruses to the antiviral medications
including the neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir) and the
PA  endonuclease  inhibitor  baloxavir  using  next  generation  sequence  analysis
supplemented  by  laboratory  assays.  Information  about  antiviral  susceptibility  test
methods  can  be  found  at  U.S.  Influenza  Surveillance:  Purpose  and  Methods  |  CDC.
Viruses  collected  in  the  U.S.  since  October  1,  2023,  were  tested  for  antiviral
susceptibility  as  follows:  Three  A(H1N1)pdm09  viruses  had  NA-H275Y  amino  acid
substitution and one A(H1N1)pdm09 virus had NA-H275H/Y, conferring highly reduced
inhibition  by  oseltamivir  and  peramivir.  One  (H1N1)pdm09  virus  had  NA-I223V  and
NA-S247N amino acid substitutions and showed reduced inhibition by oseltamivir. Two
B  viruses  had  NA-A245G  amino  acid  substitution  and  showed  reduced  inhibition  by

peramivir.  One  B  virus  had  NA-D197N  amino  acid  substitution  and  showed  reduced
inhibition  by  zanamivir  and  peramivir.  One  A(H3N2)  virus  had  PA-I38T  amino  acid
substitution and showed reduced susceptibility to baloxavir. High levels of resistance to
the
 adamantanes
 (amantadine
 and
 rimantadine)
 persist
 among
 influenza
A(H1N1)pdm09  and  influenza  A(H3N2)  viruses  (the  adamantanes  are  not  effective
against  influenza  B  viruses).  Therefore,  use  of  these  antivirals  for  treatment  and
prevention  of  influenza  A  virus  infection  is  not  recommended  and  data  from
adamantane  resistance  testing  are  not  presented.  The  U.S.  Outpatient  Influenza-like
Illness  Surveillance  Network  (ILINet)  monitors  outpatient  visits  for  respiratory  illness
referred  to  as  influenza-like  illness  [ILI  (fever  plus  cough  or  sore  throat)],  not
laboratory-confirmed influenza and will therefore capture respiratory illness visits due
to infection with pathogens that can present with similar symptoms, including influenza
viruses, SARS-CoV-2, and RSV. It is important to evaluate syndromic surveillance data,
including that from ILINet, in the context of other sources of surveillance data to obtain
a more complete and accurate picture of influenza, SARS-CoV-2, and other respiratory
virus activity. CDC is providing integrated information about COVID-19, influenza, and
RSV activity on a website that is updated weekly. Information about other respiratory
virus activity can be found on CDC’s National Respiratory and Enteric Virus Surveillance
System  (NREVSS)  website.  Nationally,  the  percentage  of  visits  for  respiratory  illness
that were reported through ILINet remained stable (change of ≤ 0.1 percentage points)
compared to the previous week and is below the national baseline. All 10 regions are
below their region-specific baselines. Multiple respiratory viruses are co-circulating, and
the relative contribution of influenza virus infection to ILI varies by location.   * Effective
October 3, 2021 (week 40), the ILI definition (fever plus cough or sore throat) no longer
includes  “without  a  known  cause  other  than  influenza.”   About  70%  of  ILINet
participants  provide  both  the  number  of  patient  visits  for  respiratory  illness  and  the
total  number  of  patient  visits  for  the  week  broken  out  by  age  group.  Data  from  this

subset  of  providers  are  used  to  calculate  the  percentages  of  patient  visits  for
respiratory illness by age group. The percentage of visits for respiratory illness reported
in ILINet decreased in the 0-4 years age group and remained stable for all other age
groups in Week 26 compared to Week 25.   View Chart Data | View Full Screen Data
collected in ILINet are used to produce a measure of ILI activity* by state/jurisdiction
and  Core  Based  Statistical  Areas  (CBSA).     *Data  collected  in  ILINet  may
disproportionally  represent  certain  populations  within  a  jurisdiction  or  CBSA,  and
therefore, may not accurately depict the full picture of influenza activity for the entire
jurisdiction or CBSA. Differences in the data presented here by CDC and independently
by some health departments likely represent differing levels of data completeness with
data  presented  by  the  health  department  likely  being  the  more  complete.  Additional
information about medically attended visits for ILI for current and past seasons:
Surveillance  Methods  |  FluView  Interactive:  National,  Regional,  and  State  Data  or  ILI
Activity Map The Influenza Hospitalization Surveillance Network (FluSurv-NET) conducts
population-based
 surveillance
 for
 laboratory-confirmed
 influenza-related
hospitalizations in select counties in 14 states and represents approximately 9% of the
U.S. population. FluSurv-NET hospitalization data are preliminary. As data are received
each  week,  prior  case  counts  and  rates  are  updated  accordingly.  A  total  of  25,196
laboratory-confirmed
 influenza-associated
 hospitalizations
 were
 reported
 by
FluSurv-NET  sites  between  October  1,  2023,  and  June  29,  2024.  The  weekly
hospitalization  rate  observed  in  Week  26  was  0.1  per  100,000  population.  The  peak
weekly hospitalization rate observed this season was 9.0 per 100,000 population and
occurred  during  Week  52.  Among  25,196  hospitalizations,  21,301  (84.5%)  were
associated with influenza A virus, 3,707 (14.7%) with influenza B virus, 53 (0.2%) with
influenza A virus and influenza B virus co-infection, and 134(0.5%) with influenza virus
for  which  the  type  was  not  determined.  Among  those  with  influenza  A  subtype
information, 4,223 (68.0%) were A(H1N1) pdm09 and 1,991 (32.0%) were A(H3N2).  

View Full Screen  View Full Screen **In this figure, weekly rates for all seasons prior to
the 2023-2024 season reflect end-of-season rates. For the 2023-2024 season, rates for
recent hospital admissions are subject to reporting delays and are shown as a dashed
line for the current season. As hospitalization data are received each week, prior case
counts  and  rates  are  updated  accordingly.  Additional  FluSurv-NET  hospitalization
surveillance information for current and past seasons and additional age groups:
Surveillance  Methods  |FluView  Interactive:  Rates  by  Age,  Sex,  and  Race/Ethnicity  or
Data on Patient Characteristics | RESP-NET Interactive Effective May 1, 2024, hospitals
are  no  longer  required  to  report  hospital  admissions,  hospital  capacity,  or  hospital
occupancy  data  to  HHS  through  NHSN.  Voluntarily  reported  NHSN  hospital  data  can
found at Weekly United States Hospitalization Metrics by Jurisdiction. 
View  Chart  Data  |  View  Full  Screen  Additional  NHSN  Hospitalization  Surveillance
information:
Surveillance Methods | Additional Data | FluView Interactive Based on NCHS mortality
surveillance data available on July 3, 2024, the percentage of deaths that were due to
influenza slightly decreased (≥0.1 percentage point change) compared to the previous
week. The data presented are preliminary and may change as more data are received
and processed. View Chart Data | View Full Screen Additional pneumonia, influenza and
COVID-19 mortality surveillance information for current and past seasons:
Surveillance Methods | FluView Interactive Three influenza-associated pediatric deaths
occurring  during  the  2023-2024  season  were  reported  to  CDC  during  Week  26.  The
deaths occurred during weeks 3, 17 and 18 of 2024 (the weeks ending January 20, April
27, and May 4 of 2024). Two deaths were associated with influenza A viruses and one
death was associated with an influenza B virus with no lineage determined. One of the
influenza A viruses had subtyping performed and it was an A(H1N1)pdm09 virus. A total
of  184  influenza-associated  pediatric  deaths  occurring  during  the  2023-2024  season
have  been  reported  to  CDC.   View  Full  Screen   Additional  pediatric  mortality

surveillance information for current and past seasons:
Surveillance Methods | FluView Interactive Increasing: 
Decreasing: 
Stable:  Clinical Labs: Up or down arrows indicate a change of greater than or equal to
0.5 percentage points in the percent of specimens positive for influenza compared to
the previous week.
Outpatient Respiratory Illness (ILINet): Up or down arrows indicate a change of greater
than  0.1  percentage  points  in  the  percent  of  visits  due  to  respiratory  illness  (ILI)
compared to the previous week.
NHSN Hospitalizations: Up or down arrows indicate change of greater than or equal to
5% of the number of patients admitted with laboratory-confirmed influenza compared
to the previous week.
NCHS  Mortality:  Up  or  down  arrows  indicate  change  of  greater  than  0.1  percentage
points of the percent of deaths due to influenza compared to the previous week. 1U.S.
Influenza Surveillance:  Purpose and Methods (2023 Oct). Centers for Disease Control
and  Prevention.  https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/overview.htm#ILINet.  2Grohskopf  LA,
Blanton LH, Ferdinands JM, Chung JR, Broder KR, Talbot HK. Prevention and Control of
Seasonal  Influenza  with  Vaccines:  Recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on
Immunization  Practices  —  United  States,  2023–24  Influenza  Season.  MMWR  Recomm
Rep
 2023;72(No.
 RR-2):1–25.
 DOI:
 http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr7202a1
3Influenza  Antiviral  Medications:  Summary  for  Clinicians  (2023  Sept).  Centers  for
Disease
 Control
 and
 Prevention.
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-clinicians.htm.
 
 FluView
Interactive:  FluView  includes  enhanced  web-based  interactive  applications  that  can
provide  dynamic  visuals  of  the  influenza  data  collected  and  analyzed  by  CDC.  These
FluView
 Interactive
 applications
 allow
 people
 to
 create
 customized,
 visual
interpretations  of  influenza  data,  as  well  as  make  comparisons  across  flu  seasons,

regions,  age  groups  and  a  variety  of  other  demographics.  National  Institute  for
Occupational  Safety  and  Health:  Monthly  surveillance  data  on  the  prevalence  of
health-related workplace absenteeism among full-time workers in the United States are
available from NIOSH. U.S. State and local influenza surveillance: Select a jurisdiction
below to access the latest local influenza information. World Health Organization:
Additional influenza surveillance information from participating WHO member nations is
available through
FluNet and the Global Epidemiology Reports. WHO Collaborating Centers for Influenza:
Australia,  China,  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States  (CDC  in  Atlanta,
Georgia) Europe:
The most up-to-date influenza information from Europe is available from WHO/Europe
and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Public Health Agency of
Canada:
The most up-to-date influenza information from Canada is available in Canada’s weekly
FluWatch report. Public Health England:
The most up-to-date influenza information from the United Kingdom is available from
Public  Health  England.  Any  links  provided  to  non-Federal  organizations  are  provided
solely as a service to our users. These links do not constitute an endorsement of these
organizations or their programs by CDC or the Federal Government, and none should be
inferred. CDC is not responsible for the content of the individual organization web pages
found at these links. A description of the CDC influenza surveillance system, including
methodology  and  detailed  descriptions  of  each  data  component  is  available  on  the
surveillance methods page. To receive weekly email updates about Seasonal Flu, enter
your email address:

Source URL: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/index.htm
