                                              HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                      TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

                                     ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                     05/01/2013              05/25/2023             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                     REVISED DATE:
     CHLA                            04/08/2023
 POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  Page 1 of 4
PURPOSE:

To ensure safe attendance during group settings within patient care areas, to prevent the spread of
infectious organisms and to promote an overall safe therapeutic environment for patients, personnel, and
visitors at Children’s Hospital Los Angeles.

SCOPE:

This policy is applicable to all CHLA team members in the inpatient areas.

DEFINITION:

Patient Care Areas are identified as shared space for a group activity or event. Patient care areas include but are
not limited to, Playrooms, Teen Lounge, and Multi Use Rooms (MUR)

          Playrooms                                       A supervised space for patients and visitors of all ages
          Multi Use Rooms (MUR)                           MUR is used for (but not limited to) school, Literally
                                                          Healing reading activities, and supervised Child Life
                                                          activities for patients and visitors
          Teen Lounge                                     A supervised space for adolescent patients and visitors
                                                          (12 and up)
    •    This policy does not apply to outpatient areas

PROCEDURE:

Factors guiding playroom attendance
    1. Isolation Status
              a. Patients in Standard Precautions are permitted to attend playrooms.
              b. Patients on Transmission-Based Precautions are not permitted to attend playrooms (see
                  CHLA Policy IC – 301.0 Isolation Precautions for more information).
    2. Medical Stability
              a. Patients who are medically stable and do not require continuous observation by licensed
                  HCP
              b. Patients with PCA pumps are permitted to attend as long as there is a hospital staff or family
                  member over the age of 16 accompanying during transport and the bedside R.N. contact
                  number is available (See PC – 056.1 Transport Pyramid for more details)

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                              HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    05/01/2013              05/25/2023              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             04/08/2023
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                    Page 2 of 4
            c. Patients who are on portable telemetry are permitted to attend their unit based playroom
                 unless explicitly ordered by provider to be off telemetry when leaving the floor
            d. Patients on a ventricular assisted device (VAD) can attend CV Acute Playroom with
                 physician consent. (R.N. and one additional staff person must be present with patient)
            e. Patients receiving continuous chemo and/or blood product transfusions must stay on their
                 respective unit to ensure proper monitoring

   3. Transplant Populations
            a. Eligibility of transplant patients to attend playrooms or multi-use rooms will be managed
                 and communicated to the individuals staffing the rooms by the Child Life specialist assigned
                 to the service.
            b. Renal transplant patients may not attend playrooms unless approved by the Kidney
                 Transplant team.
            c. Liver and intestinal transplant patients may attend playrooms if they meet the following
                 criteria:
                      i. Patients > 3 months post-transplant with ANC >500 and on Standard Precautions
                     ii. Patients are not permitted to attend playroom if they meet the following criteria:
                               1. Intestinal transplant recipients < 3 months post- transplant (this includes new
                                    transplants and re-admissions).
                               2. New liver and Intestinal transplant recipients who have not been discharged
                                    from the hospital for the first time.
                               3. Liver and intestinal transplant recipients actively being treated for rejection
                                    with IV corticosteroids and/or a biologic agent for the length of their
                                    admission.
                               4. Liver and intestinal transplant recipients being treated for PTLD or other
                                    complication requiring biologic therapy for the length of their admission.
                               5. Liver and intestinal transplant recipients with ANC < 500.
                               6. Patients in acute liver failure being evaluated for liver transplantation.
                               7. Patients who are listed for liver transplant as 1A or 1B status.
            d. Pre-cardiac transplant patients are permitted to attend individual (1:1) session in CV Acute
                 Playroom.
            e. Post-cardiac transplant patients are not permitted to attend unless explicitly cleared by
                 cardiac transplant physician.
   4. Visitor Guidelines
            a. Visitors of patients permitted to attend playroom may attend playroom.
            b. If patients are not permitted to attend playroom due to medical instability, their visitors will
                 be allowed to visit playroom.

          *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
         considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                        Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                              HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                      TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

                                     ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                     05/01/2013             05/25/2023              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                     REVISED DATE:
     CHLA                            04/08/2023
 POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  Page 3 of 4
              c. If patients are not permitted to attend playroom due to isolation status or transplant status,
                  their visitors will also not be allowed to visit playroom.
              d. Visitors 3 years old and under must be accompanied by a parent or caregiver to the patient
                  care areas
              e. Siblings visiting patients who are in standard precautions in the PICU and NICCU may
                  attend the playroom on CV Acute
    5. Unit Guidelines
              a. Patients and visitors may only attend the playroom located on their own patient unit (except
                  MUR, Teen Lounge, PICU and NICCU)
              b. BMT patients are not permitted to attend playrooms or Multi Use Rooms.
              c. Patients on Duque 5 and Duque 6 inpatient units are permitted at attend MURs in Anderson
                  Pavilion if they are on Standard Precautions.
    6. Other Guidelines
              a. Patients three years or younger must be accompanied by a parent or caregiver when
                  attending playrooms or MURs.
              b. Patients with seizures must be accompanied by a parent or caregiver when attending
                  playrooms or MURs.
              c. Caregivers must be present on the unit if the sibling/visitor is participating in playroom
                  (except Teen Lounge and siblings visiting NICCU and PICU)
    7.    Guidelines for Infectious Disease Outbreaks and Pandemics
              a. During Phase I of outbreaks and pandemics, all playrooms and MURs should be closed.
              b. During Phase II of outbreaks and pandemics:
                       i. Playrooms and MURs msay be reopened with limited capacity. Safe capacity for reach
                            playroom and MUR to be determined and posted by Child Life team.
                       ii. Only COVID negative patients may attend playrooms and MURs.
                      iii. One caregiver will be allowed per patient. Siblings will not be allowed in playrooms.
                      iv. Capacity will be determined by the size of the playroom and the ability for patients to
                            maintain physical distancing (minimum 6 feet) from other patients.
                       v. Use of playroom toys may be limited to reduce risk of cross-contamination. No toys
                            or other equipment should be shared between patients unless disinfected by CHLA
                            staff or badged volunteers.
                      vi. All staff, visitors and patients (when developmentally appropriate) must wear a mask
                            at all times in the playroom or MUR.

Exceptions
    1. Please consult with Child Life or appropriate medical team for exceptions.

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                 HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                        TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

                                        ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                        05/01/2013              05/25/2023              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                        REVISED DATE:
     CHLA                               04/08/2023
  POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0             CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                      Page 4 of 4
REFERENCES:
     1. PC – 056.1 Transport Pyramid
     2. IC – 301.0 Isolation Precautions

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Accreditation, Infection Prevention and Control, and Emergency Management

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
            considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                           Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.