                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Prevention of Surgical Site Infection – Appendix A: Cardiac SSI Bundle Elements

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             02/06/2023
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 229.1           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 1 of 1
        Standardized Pre-Operative Education for Patients, Families and Staff

        1. Pre-Operative Bathing Protocol
             a.    Outpatient
                   •     Parents will be instructed to bathe/shower their child the night before surgery
                         using their regular soap with attention to proper scrubbing. Parents will be
                         instructed to wash their child’s hair the night before surgery using their child’s
                         usual shampoo.
                   •     A reminder call, the night before surgery, includes instructions to complete the
                         pre-operative bath as discussed above. Surgical admitting will wipe the
                         patient’s skin the morning of surgery with CHG (Sage) wipes based on
                         manufacturer’s recommendations before the patient is transferred to the
                         operating room If patient is allergic to CHG, a soap and water bath will be
                         performed based on amount of time before the surgical procedure. If there is no
                         time for a soap and water bath to be performed, Ready Bath wipes will be used.
             b.    Inpatient
                   •     Night before surgery: Patient will be given a soap and water bath
                   •     Day of surgery: Patient’s will have their skin wiped with CHG (Sage) wipes
                         within 6 hours of incision time b.
                   •     Patient’s allergic to CHG: A soap and water bath will be performed based on
                         the amount of time before the surgical procedure. If there is no time for a soap
                         and water bath to be performed, Ready Bath wipes or sterile gauze/sterile
                         water ) will be used.
        2. Pre/Post -Operative Antimicrobial Protocol: Please refer to CT surgery antibiotic plans

        3. Intra-Operative Skin Preparation Protocol
                  •   Chloraprep (CHG) will be used to scrub/paint the surgical site using the Cardiac
                      CHG skin prep procedure, unless a CHG allergy is identified.
                  •   Patients identified to have a CHG allergy will use Betadine to prep the surgical
                      site using the Cardiac OR Betadine skin prep procedure

        4. Discharge Education: Education will be provided on sternal incision care and sternal
             precautions, please refer to Heart Institute education.

                  *Once this document is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures
                   Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this
                   document in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.