                                                              HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Standard Precautions

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    09/01/1990              06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 220.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 1 of 5
PURPOSE:

The purpose of this policy is to establish individual responsibilities to minimize the risk for health care
workers of acquiring hospital-acquired infections due to occupational exposures at CHLA.

SCOPE:

This policy is applicable to all CHLA Team Members.

DEFINITIONS:

     1. Standard Precautions: The routine and consistent use of appropriate barrier protection to prevent
         skin and mucous membrane transmission of microorganisms resulting from contact with blood
         and body substances, and as part of the practice of general hygiene.

     2. Blood and body substances: These include all body fluids, tissues and substances that may
         potentially harbor contagious microorganisms. Blood and body substances include but are not
         limited to the following:

         amniotic fluid                    feces                             pleural fluid                    urine
         blood                             nasal secretions                  saliva                           vaginal secretions
         body tissues                      non-intact skin                   semen                            vomitus
         breast milk                       pericardial fluid                 sputum                           wound drainage
         cerebrospinal fluid               peritoneal fluid                  synovial fluid

         NOTE: Blood and body substances do not include tears or perspiration unless they contain visible
         evidence of blood.

     3. Exposure: Actual or potential skin, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or body
         substances.

     4. Hand Hygiene/Barrier Protection: The appropriate use of hand washing, gloves, gowns, masks,
         goggles, and face shields to minimize exposure to blood and body substances.

PROCEDURE:

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                             HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Standard Precautions

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   09/01/1990              06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                            04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 220.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 2 of 5
Elements of Standard Precautions:
    1. Hand hygiene should be performed consistent with the WHO 5 Moments (see IC 212.0)
    2. Gloves should be used in the following situations:
         •    For touching blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions and/or contaminated items
         •    For touching mucous membranes and or non intact skin
         •    As required for Transmission-Based Precautions (see IC 301)
    3. Masks, eye protection, face shield should be used in the following situations:
         •    To protect mucous membranes of the eyes, nose and mouth during procedures and patient care
              activities likely to generate sp0lashes or sprays of blood, body fluids, secretions and or
              excretions.
    4. Gowns
         Gowns are used to protect skin and prevent soiling of clothing during procedures and patient care
         activities likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood, body fluids, secretions and or excretions.
    5. Patient Care Equipment
         Soiled patient care equipment should be handled in a manner to prevent skin and mucous
         membrane exposures, contamination of clothing and transfer of microorganisms to other patients
         and environments. Reusable equipment must be cleaned and reprocessed before being used in the
         care of another patient. See IC 716.0 for more details.
    6. Environmental Cleaning
         This requires procedures, for routine care, cleaning and disinfection of patient furniture and the
         environment. See IC 716.0 for more details.
    7. Linens
         Soiled linens should be handled in a manner to prevent skin and mucous membrane exposures,
         contamination of clothing and transfer of microorganisms to other patients and environments.
    8. Sharps Devices
              •   Avoid recapping used needles
              •   Avoid removing used needles from disposable syringes by hand
              •   Avoid bending, breaking or manipulating used needles by hand
              •   Place sharp devices in puncture resistant containers
    9. Patient Resuscitation
         Use mouthpieces, resuscitation bags or other ventilation devices to avoid mouth to mouth
         resuscitation.
    10. Patient Placement
         Patients who contaminate the environment or cannot maintain appropriate hygiene should be
         placed in a private room.
    11. Respiratory Hygiene/ cough etiquette-
             •    Includes covering nose and mouth during coughing or sneezing with a tissue or offering a
                  surgical mask to the coughing patient,
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                              HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Standard Precautions

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    09/01/1990              06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 220.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 3 of 5
              •   Discard mask or tissue appropriately and perform hand hygiene after
     12. Special Lumbar Puncture Procedures- wear a face mask during spinal procedures.

     1. Management of Contaminated Items Contaminated surgical instruments shall be placed into
         impervious closed containers before being returned to Sterile Processing Department for
         reprocessing (see PER 113.0)
     2. All patient specimens being transported to clinical laboratories shall be placed inside “ziplock”
         plastic specimen bags. The bagged specimen and the lab requisition shall be placed inside a
         second ziplock bag. Items too large to fit inside a bag shall be wrapped securely. See UTILITY –
         007.0 for proper Pneumatic Tube specimen transport procedure.
     3. Soiled linen shall be placed in covered hampers. Full bags shall be closed, removed to the holding
         truck by EVS, and a new bag provided.
     4. Biohazardous medical wastes shall be placed in leakproof red biohazard bags. This includes
                          a. all material containing large amounts of drainage from purulent or infectious sites;
                          b. fluid blood and blood-soaked dressings;
                          c. hemodialysis waste and all specimens and items used to process specimens and
                              blood.
              NOTE: Small amounts of blood on a dressing are NOT considered medical waste under
              California Medical Waste Disposal law and can be discarded with ordinary trash.
     5. Handling of containers filled with body substances depends on the content of the containers.
              a. Containers of bloody body substances must be closed securely and placed inside a red
                   "biohazard" bag. Containers of fluid blood or bloody material should not be thrown in the
                   trash chute. Containers in which fluid has been solidified are still considered infectious and
                   must be placed in a red bag.

Sharps Safety
     1. All sharp devices used in contact with blood or body material are to be handled with care and
         attention.
All disposable sharps shall be disposed of in puncture-proof containers without manipulation, breaking
or recapping, and without forcing devices into the container.
Safety devices should be activated immediately after use.
Once the sharps container is filled to the designated line it should be sealed, the unit removed to the
soiled utility room and a new container provided.
     6. Whenever possible, safety sharp devices, needle-recessed connectors or needleless IV lines shall be
         used

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                              HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Standard Precautions

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    09/01/1990              06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 220.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 4 of 5
CLEANING AND DECONTAMINATING BLOOD SPILLAGE
        1. All spills of blood or blood-contaminated substances are promptly cleaned and decontaminated
             using hospital-approved disinfectants:
        2. Gloves must be worn while cleaning and disinfecting.;
        3. Remove visible material with disposable towels or other appropriate means to prevent direct
             contact with potentially infectious material, and spreading of fluids when disinfectant is
             applied.
        4. If the spill is large or splashing is anticipated, additional protective gear may be required, such
             as a fluid-impervious gown or apron and protective eyewear.
        5. The area should then be treated with the appropriate hospital approved disinfectant,.
         6. Hands should be washed following removal of gloves.
         7. Soiled cleaning equipment should be cleaned and decontaminated or placed in appropriate
              container and disposed of according to hospital policy.
     2. When massive blood contamination on floors has occurred, the use of impervious shoe covering
         should be considered.
         a. Protective gloves should be worn to remove contaminated shoe covering;
         b. The coverings and gloves should be disposed of in biohazardous bags.

Safe Injection Practices
Important infection prevention and control practices associated with the use of syringes, needles,
multiple-dose vials, single-use vials, and flush solutions.
              1. Never reuse a syringe for more than one patient after only changing the needle
              2. Changing the needle on a used syringe is not sufficient protection against disease
                       transmission even if aspiration of blood does not occur and there is no visible blood in
                       the syringe
              3. Never use single-dose/single-use vials for multiple patients
              4. Never use the same syringe to re-enter a multiple-dose vial more than once.
              5. While common preservatives used in multiple-dose vials may be bacteriostatic, they will
                       not destroy all bacteria, and they do not have antiviral or antifungal activity. When
                       possible, single-use medications and devices are strongly preferred.
              6. Never bring a multiple-dose vial to the bedside for use with the patient
              7. Never use a common bag or bottle of IV solution as a source of flushes and drug diluents
                       for multiple patients

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                              HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Standard Precautions

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    09/01/1990             06/28/2022              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 220.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 5 of 5
ATTACHMENTS:
     1. IC – 220.1 Example of Safe Donning and Removal of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)

REFERENCES:
     1. Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for isolation
         precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80, and Am J Infect Control
         1996;24:24-52.
     2. Isolation Precautions, Chapter 28, APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. 2014
     3. Ambulatory Surgery Centers, Chapter 64, APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. 2014
     4. CDC FAQs regarding Safe Practices for Medical Injections, updated June 20, 2019:
         https://www.cdc.gov/injectionsafety/providers/provider_faqs_multivials.html

     5. Pugliese, G, Gosnell,C et al. (2010).Injection Practices among clinicians in U.S. health care settings.
         Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology. 38: 789-98.
     6. CHLA Policy UTILITY – 007.0 Pneumatic Tube (P-tube) Procedure
     7. CHLA Policy PER – 113.0 Instrument Decontamination Process
     8. CHLA Policy IC – 212.0 Hand Hygiene
     9. CHLA Policy IC – 716.0 Cleaning Disinfection

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Infection Prevention and Control

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.