                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Pertussis, Management and Prevention of Transmission

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Medical Executive Committee and Board
                                    12/01/2004             04/26/2018              of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 309.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 1 of 4
PURPOSE:

The purpose of the following policy is to prevent the transmission of pertussis to susceptible persons,
define a pertussis exposure and establish guidelines for the management of personnel exposed to
pertussis.

PROCEDURES:

Background
     1. Pertussis is spread by droplets generated during coughing or sneezing or during performance of
     2. procedures.
     3. When caring for a patient with pertussis, perform hand hygiene and wear gloves, gown and mask
     4. prior to entering the patient’s room.
     5. Healthcare workers caring for patients during or when performing potentially aerosol generating
     6. procedures should wear an N 95 respirator.
     7. All employees should be vaccinated with the Tdap vaccination as an adult and with each
         pregnancy, as recommended by Employee Health Services.

Staff Education
Educate appropriate personnel in accordance with their level of responsibility in the health-care setting
about the epidemiology, modes of transmission, and means of preventing the spread of pertussis.

Case-Reporting, Disease Surveillance, and Case - Contact Notification
     1. Report to the local and/or state health department all confirmed and suspected cases of pertussis.
              a. Report patients <3months with a positive Pertussis PCR/culture to LACDPH
                   Communicable Disease Control

     2. Conduct active surveillance for cases of pertussis until 21 days after the onset of the last pertussis
         case.
              a. Notify persons who have had close contact with a case of pertussis in the health-care setting
                   so that they can be monitored for symptoms of pertussis and/or administered appropriate
                   chemoprophylaxis. Close contact includes face-to-face contact with a patient.

Prevention of Pertussis Transmission
     1. All employees should be vaccinated with Tdap vaccine.
     2. During an outbreak
              a. There is no minimum interval between receipt of a tetanus- or diphtheria-toxoid-containing
                   vaccine and Tdap when Tdap is otherwise indicated
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Pertussis, Management and Prevention of Transmission

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Medical Executive Committee and Board
                                    12/01/2004              04/26/2018             of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 309.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 2 of 4
              b. Accelerate scheduled vaccinations to infants and children aged <7 years who have not
                   completed their primary vaccinations.
              c. Administration of a single dose of Tdap to children 7 through 10 years of age with
                   incomplete or unknown pertussis vaccine history

Patient Placement and Management
Patients should be placed in Combined-Droplet precautions
A mask, gown, and gloves are required when entering the patient room

     1. For high hazard procedures an N95 mask is required
     2. Place a patient with diagnosed pertussis in a private room, or if known not to have any other
         respiratory infection or chronic conditions, in a room with other patient(s) with pertussis until
         after the first 5 days of a full course of antimicrobial treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if
         unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis.
     3. Place a patient with suspected pertussis in a private room. After pertussis and no other infection is
         confirmed, the patient can be placed in a room with other patient(s) (without any underlying
         chronic conditions) who have pertussis after the first 5 days of a full course of antimicrobial
         treatment or 21 days after the onset of cough if unable to take antimicrobial treatment for pertussis.
     4. Perform diagnostic laboratory tests (for confirmation or exclusion of pertussis) on patients who are
         admitted with or who develop signs and symptoms of pertussis.

Use of a Prophylactic Antibiotic Regimen for Contacts of Persons with Pertussis
     1. Administer a macrolide to any person who has had close contact with persons with pertussis and
         who does not have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides.
              a. Except in infants aged <2 weeks, use erythromycin. For patients who are intolerant to
                   erythromycin or for infants aged <2 weeks, use any of the following regimens:
                   azithromycin for 5–7 days; or clarithromycin for 10–14 days
     2. For chemoprophylaxis of persons who have hypersensitivity or intolerance to macrolides, use
         (except in the case of a pregnant woman at term, a nursing mother, or an infant aged <2 months)
         trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for 14 days

Management of Symptomatic Health-Care Personnel
     1. In conjunction with employee-health personnel, perform diagnostic laboratory tests for pertussis in
         health-care personnel with illness suggestive of pertussis (i.e., unexplained cough illness of >1
         week duration and paroxysmal cough)
     2. In conjunction with employee-health personnel, treat symptomatic health-care personnel who are
         proven to have pertussis or personnel who are highly suspected of having pertussis with the same
         antimicrobial regimen, as detailed for chemoprophylaxis of case-contacts.
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Pertussis, Management and Prevention of Transmission

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Medical Executive Committee and Board
                                    12/01/2004             04/26/2018              of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 309.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 3 of 4
     3. Restrict symptomatic pertussis-infected healthcare workers from work during the first five (5) days
         of their receipt of antimicrobial therapy.
     4. Health care workers with symptoms of pertussis who cannot or refuse to take antimicrobial
         therapy should be excluded from work for 21 days from onset of cough.

Work Exclusion of Asymptomatic Health-Care Workers Exposed to Pertussis
         1. Do not exclude from patient care a health-care worker who remains asymptomatic and is
              receiving chemoprophylaxis after an exposure to a case of pertussis (i.e., by direct contact of
              one's nasal or buccal mucosa with the respiratory secretions of an untreated person who is in
              the catarrhal or paroxysmal stage of pertussis).
         2. Where feasible, exclude an exposed, asymptomatic health-care worker who is unable to receive
              chemoprophylaxis from providing care to a child aged <4 years during the period starting 7
              days after the worker's first possible exposure until 14 days after his last possible exposure to a
              case of pertussis.

Other measures

Limiting patient movement or transport
Limit the movement and transport of a patient with diagnosed or suspected pertussis from his/her room
to those for essential purposes only. If the patient is transported out of the room, ensure that precautions
are maintained to minimize the risk for disease transmission to other patients and contamination of
environmental surfaces or equipment.

Limiting visitors
Do not allow persons who have symptoms of respiratory infection to visit the hospital.

REFERENCES:
     1. CDC and HICPAC. Guidelines for Preventing Health-Care-Associated Pneumonia. 2003
     2. CDC. 2005 Updates -Guidelines for the Control of Pertussis Outbreaks, 2005.
     3. APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. Chapter 71: Bordetella pertussis, 2014.
     4. Control of Communicable Diseases Manual. 20th Edition. Chin J. editor. APHA. 2014.
     5. CDC, HICPAC. Guidelines for Infection Control in Hospital Personnel. 1998.
     6. Red Book. Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. 2012.
     7. Occupational Health, Chapter100, APIC Textbook, 20014
     8. Aerosol Transmissible Disease Exposure Control Plan
     9. CHLA policies
         •    HR – 062.0 Influenza Vaccination

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                               HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                      TITLE: Pertussis, Management and Prevention of Transmission

                                     ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Medical Executive Committee and Board
                                     12/01/2004               04/26/2018              of Directors

                                     REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 309.0CHLA        CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                      PAGE 4 of 4
ATTACHMENTS:
     1. IC – 309.1 Pertussis Background Information

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Infection Prevention and Control

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                           Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.