   CHLA
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 229.3


                  HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
        TITLE: Prevention of Surgical Site Infection – Appendix C: Orthopedic Spinal Fusion/All Joints SSI Bundle
        Elements
        REVISED DATE:
        02/06/2023
        CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                             PAGE 1 of 2
Standardized Pre-Operative Education for Patients, Families and Staff
                          1. Pre-Operative Bathing Protocol
                               a.     Outpatient
                                      • Parents will be instructed to bath/shower their child the night before surgery using
                               regular soap.
                                      • Parents will be instructed to wash their child’s hair the night before surgery using their
                               child’s usual shampoo.
                                      • A reminder call, the night before surgery, includes instructions to complete the pre-
                               operative bath as discussed above. Surgical admitting will wipe the patient’s skin the morning of
                               surgery with CHG (Sage) wipes based on manufacture’s recommendations before the patient is
                               transferred to the operating room. If patient is allergic to CHG, a soap and water bath will be
                               performed based on amount of time before the surgical procedure. If there is no time for a soap
                               and water bath to be performed, Ready Bath wipes will be used.
                               b.     Inpatient
                                    o     Night before surgery: Patient will be given a soap and water bath.
                                    o     Day of surgery: Patient’s greater than/equal to 36 weeks: Will have their skin wiped with
                                          CHG (Sage) wipes based on manufacture’s recommendations before the patient is
                                          transferred to the operating room.
                                                         •     Patient’s less than 36 weeks and/or allergic to CHG: A soap and water
                                                               bath will be performed based on the amount of time before the surgical
                                                               procedure. If there is no time for a soap and water bath to be
                                                               performed, Ready Bath wipes or sterile gauze/sterile water (<34 weeks)
                                                               will be used.
                          2. Pre/Post-Operative Antimicrobial Protocol
                               a. Please refer to Ortho admission and postop plans
                          3. Intra-Operative Skin Preparation Protocol
                               a. Chloraprep (CHG) will be used to scrub/paint the surgical site unless a CHG allergy is
                                    identified.
                               b. Surgical wound is irrigated with Castile soap and NaCl irrigation.
                          4. Post-Operative Dressing Protocol
                               a. Dressings are assessed in the post-operative unit setting.
                               b. Idiopathic Spine Patients:
                                         i.     If dressings are soiled Ortho surgeon will be paged to quickly replace.
                                        ii.     Dressing is removed prior to discharge.
                               c.   Neuromuscular Spine patients:
                                         i.     If dressings are soiled Ortho surgeon will be paged to quickly replace the dressing.
                                *Once this document is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures
                                 Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this
                                 document in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                 HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                       TITLE: Prevention of Surgical Site Infection – Appendix C: Orthopedic Spinal Fusion/All Joints SSI Bundle
                                       Elements
                                       REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                                02/06/2023
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 229.3              CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                           PAGE 2 of 2
                            ii.     Dressing will be changed by the Ortho surgeon prior to discharge.
              5. Discharge Education
                   a. Idiopathic spinal fusion dressing is removed at discharge.
                   b. Neuromuscular spinal fusion patient’s will be given supplies for 2 dressing changes along
                        with detailed instructions for home dressing changes. Dressings are discontinued at the 1
                        week post–op follow up visit.

                    *Once this document is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures
                     Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this
                     document in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.