                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Management and Prevention

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Chief
                                    06/01/1990              11/19/2021             Clinical Officer, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
    CHLA                            09/21/2021
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 310.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 1 of 2
 PURPOSE:

 Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) is one of the leading causes of respiratory tract infections in infants and
 the elderly worldwide. RSV is an infectious agent that is transmitted by direct and indirect contact. The
 management of patients diagnosed with, or highly suspicious of having RSV must be defined and
 preventive measures instituted. The mode of transmission and high attack rate make RSV a significant
 nosocomial pathogen, necessitating rapid implementation of infection prevention and control measures.

 The purpose of the following policy is to prevent transmission of RSV to susceptible persons, define RSV
 exposure, and establish guidelines for patient placement and management.

 DEFINITIONS:

     1. Mode of Transmission: RSV can be transmitted by direct contact with infected persons via large
          particle droplets. Indirect transmission can occur from hands or fomites that are contaminated
          with RSV.

     2. Clinical Manifestation: The most common presentation of RSV is upper respiratory tract infection,
          including sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, cough, and often fever. Progression to lower tract
          disease may result in bronchiolitis, tracheobronchiolitis, and pneumonia.

 PROCEDURES:

     1. Patients admitted to CHLA with symptoms of an acute respiratory illness must be placed in
          Combined-Droplet precautions using mask, gloves, and gown for 7 days after positive test; or
          return to baseline (whichever is longer). For high hazard procedures, an N95 mask is required per
          CHLA’s ATD plan.

     2. Mask, gloves, and gowns must be worn before entering the patient room. Stringent hand hygiene
          must be practiced (5 Moments of Hand Hygiene).

     3. Because of the virus’ ability to survive on hands and environmental surfaces, health care workers
          should abstain from touching eyes, nose and mouth while caring for patients. Eyes, mouth and
          nose are inoculation sites.

     4. Place patients with diagnosed RSV in a private room, or if known not to have any other respiratory
          infections or chronic conditions, in a room with other patient(s) with RSV

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
            considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Management and Prevention

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Chief
                                    06/01/1990             11/19/2021              Clinical Officer, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             09/21/2021
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 310.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 2 of 2
     5. Patients (without any underlying chronic conditions) who are symptomatic for or highly
         suspicious of having RSV may be cohorted.

     6. Do not cohort asymptomatic RSV positive patients with symptomatic RSV positive patients.
         Patients can be re-infected.

     7. In a multi bed room where a patient becomes symptomatic, and the patient cannot be moved to
         another room, consider the entire room exposed. Mask, gown, and gloves must be used to prevent
         cross infection to the other patients.

     8. Repeat respiratory viral panel testing need not be done to discontinue isolation of asymptomatic
         patients. Positive RSV may persist for 3-4 weeks, but infectiousness has not been determined.

     9. The physician's clinical judgment will determine the management of patients with chronic
         respiratory illnesses

REFERENCES:
     1. CDC. HICPAC. Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents
         in Healthcare Settings, 2007.
     2. APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology, 4th edition. Chapter 90: Respiratory Syncytial
         Virus, 2014.

POLICY OWNER:
Executive Director, Infection Prevention, Accreditation and Licensing, Emergency Management

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.