                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Reprocessing of Single Use Devices

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Chief
                                    05/01/1993             11/19/2021              Clinical Officer, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             09/21/2021
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 219.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 1 of 3
PURPOSE:

To state the position of Children’s Hospital Los Angeles on the practice of reprocessing and reusing medical
devices that are intended to be used only once. To ensure patient safety and to meet FDA regulations

DEFINITION:

     1. Single-Use Device (SUD): A SUD is a device that is intended for one use or on a single patient
         during a single procedure.
     2. Reprocessed Single-Use Device (SUD): A reprocessed SUD is an original device that has
         previously been used on a patient and has been subjected to additional processing and
         manufacturing for the purpose of an additional single use on a patient.
     3. Supplemental Validation Submission (SVS): Medical Device User Free & Modernization Act
         (MDUFMA) required that certain devices that had already been cleared through the 510(k) process
         are required to submit validation data regarding cleaning, sterilization, and functional
         performance in order to remain on the market. This additional data is referred to as a
         supplemental validation submission (SVS).
     4. Validation: Validation means confirmation by examination and provision of objective evidence
         that the particular requirements for a specific intended use can be consistently fulfilled.
              a. Process Validation means establishing by objective evidence that a process consistently
                   produces a result or product meeting its predetermined specifications.
              b. Design Validation means establishing by objective evidence that device specifications
                   conform with user needs and intended use(s).
     5. Validation Data: Validation data includes cleaning and sterilization data, and functional
         performance data demonstrating that an single-use device will remain substantially equivalent to
         its predicate device after the maximum number of times the device is reprocessed as intended by
         the person submitting the premarket notification (510(k)).

Reprocessed SUD Requirements:

     1. Disposable products or products intended for single use shall not be reused, re-sterilized, or
         reprocessed at CHLA.
     2. Items which may be returned to stock are items with their original manufacturer applied wrappers
         intact. The wrappers must be unsoiled with secretions, food, liquids, and solutions and must not
         have been stored in a room with a patient on isolation precautions.
              a. Emergency set up supplies if stored at the bedside in a sealed plastic bag that is bagged in a

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Reprocessing of Single Use Devices

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Chief
                                   05/01/1993              11/19/2021             Clinical Officer, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                            09/21/2021
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 219.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 2 of 3
                  second plastic bag may be reused as long as the outer bag is changed when the patient
                  room is cleaned.
              b. Open unused and expired items may be donated or recycled.
    3. Any item which has been wet or soiled must be discarded. These items must not be stored in the
         patient's bedside unit.
    4. Items may be stored in a separate area or closed cart away from the patient's bedside. It is
         recommended that only the number of items required be taken into the patient room at the time of
         use and not stock piled for future use.
    5. One time use, disposable medical products shall not be reprocessed at the hospital, but may be
         reprocessed for reuse by an FDA approved third party device reprocessing company.
    6. The decision to contract with a reprocessing company will be based on a thorough review of the
         third party reprocessing company.
              a. This review will be done by a multidisciplinary team including representatives from
                  Distribution Services, Peri-operative Services, and Infection Prevention.
              b. The review will include an onsite inspection of the reprocessing facility.
    7. The third party reprocessor must show evidence of the following in the review:
              a. Registration and Listing with the FDA including their most recent FDA inspection report.
              b.   A system or process in place for reporting adverse events
              c. A system or process in place for tracking Medical Devices
              d. A system or process in place for Medical Device Corrections and Removals
              e. Quality Systems Regulation including process validation requirements and validation data.
                  Product labeling that includes name of manufacturer and adequate directions for use
              f. 510K clearances and Supplemental Validation Submission (SVS) if required
              g. Premarket Notification and Approval Requirements based on the FDA classification of the
                  device.
              h. Insurance/warranty policy in good standing with coverage of no less than (insert coverage
                  requirement)
              i.  Process for handling and notification of device recall and product complaints

PROCEDURE:

CHLA will work with the third party reprocessor to determine which SUD’s will be reprocessed.
    1. SUD’s that may be reprocessed must fit the following criteria:
              a. Third party reprocessor must have 510K clearance for the SUD
              b. SUD is on the Reprocessing Service list provided by the third party reprocessor
              c. SUD is either open and unused or used.

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Reprocessing of Single Use Devices

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Chief
                                    05/01/1993             11/19/2021              Clinical Officer, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             09/21/2021
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 219.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 3 of 3
     2. SUD’s for reprocessing will be collected in special containers or bins provided by the third party
         reprocessing company
              a. Standard precautions must be followed when handling all SUD’s collected for shipment to
                   the third party reprocessor.
              b. No decontamination or cleaning is required prior to collection.
              c. Collection bins are collected and shipped by the staff of the third party device reprocessing
                   company at CHLA.
     3. The remanufacture or reprocess of the SUD done by the third party reprocessing company will
         incorporate all of the following elements:
              a. Decontaminate and cleaning
              b. Inspection and functional testing
              c. Repair or resharpening if needed
              d. Packaging
              e. Sterilization
     4. Infection Prevention and Control and Distribution Services must be notified immediately of any
         product complaints or device recalls.

REFERENCES:
         1.        APIC text of Infection Control and Epidemiology, 2014. Chapter 32, Reprocessing Single-
                   use Devices.
         2.        FDA: Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff Medical Device User Fee and Modernization
                   Act of 2002, Validation Data in Premarket Notification Submissions (510(k)s) for
                   Reprocessed Single-Use Medical Devices, 2006
         3.        CDC HICPAC Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2017

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Infection Prevention and Control

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.