                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Clostridioides Difficile, Preventing Transmission

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    11/01/1998              06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 317.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 1 of 3
PURPOSE:

Clostridioides difficile is a spore-forming bacillus that produces toxins which cause diarrhea and colitis in
susceptible patients. Because C. difficile can survive routine cleaning procedures and remain on
contaminated surfaces (i.e.: door knobs, TV control/nurse call, toilets, floor, and walls) for weeks, care
must be taken to prevent colonization of surfaces. C. difficile may be transmitted by direct contact with a
patient (hand or skin-to-skin contact that occurs when performing patient-care activities that require
touching the patient’s dry skin) and by indirect contact (touching) with environmental surfaces or patient-
care items in the patient’s environment.

PROCEDURES:

     1. The definition of Clostridioides difficile infection-(CDI) is:
              a. New onset of diarrhea (i.e.:   3 loose/watery bowel movement in a 24 hour-period) that is
                   unusual or different for the patient AND
              b. Patient has a positive diagnostic test result for toxin producing C. diff or its toxins (toxin A
                   and B) AND
              c. There is no other recognized etiology for diarrhea, such as laxative use, inflammatory
                   bowel disease or other etiology
     2. C. difficile cytotoxic assay testing in infants under one year old are not recommended, as it is
         normal flora in this age group. Consult with Infectious Diseases for these patients.
     3. Diagnostic studies for C. difficile should only be performed on patients who are symptomatic.

Patient Placement and Management:

          1. Use Contact + Precautions: for known or suspected CDI patients:
                    a. A gown and gloves are required when entering the patient room
                    b. Prior to patient/environment contact: Upon entry to the patient room, hand hygiene
                         shall be performed with either hand sanitizer or soap and water.
                    c. After patient/environment contact: All other hand hygiene opportunities following
                         this must be performed using only soap and water.
                    d. Place patients with diagnosed or suspected CDI in a private room
                    e. Dedicate equipment whenever possible.
                    f. Continue Contact + precautions until 48 hours after diarrhea has resolved.
          2. The Infection Prevention and Control team should review all cases of CDI at the time of
               diagnosis and regularly thereafter to ensure that Contact + precautions are used correctly.
          3. Re-testing stool for C. difficile after treatment (within 7 days) is not necessary nor
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Clostridioides Difficile, Preventing Transmission

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    11/01/1998              06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 317.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 2 of 3
               recommended.
          4. Maintain isolation for the length of the current admission in all oncology and BMT/HSCT
               patients who test positive for C. difficile. Repeat testing is not indicated if the patient is
               asymptomatic (passing formed stools).
          5. Oncology and BMT/HSCT patients who are receiving treatment for C. difficile must be
               isolated upon readmission if readmitted before therapy is complete.
          6. BMT/HSCT patients with a history of C. difficile in the past six months who are readmitted for a
               transplant will need to be isolated for the duration of the admission, due to the risk of reactivation
               of CDI symptoms.

Patient Transport and Activities
     1. C. difficile-positive patients are not allowed to go to public areas (including the playroom).
     2. Toys brought inside a C. difficile-positive patient’s room are either washable or disposable. If
         washable or disposal toys not available, the item should be gifted to the patient.
     3.   Upon transfer/transport outside of the unit, the receiving clinics/ department must be notified of
         the patient’s isolation status.
     4. Patients should be encouraged to wash hands and bathe/shower prior to transport if feasible to
         decrease spore burden on the skin

Cleaning
     1. Surfaces should be kept clean, and body substance spills should be managed promptly as outlined
         in CDC’s “Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in Health-Care Facilities.”
     2. Ensure adequate cleaning and disinfection of horizontal environmental surfaces and reusable
         devices.
              a. Particular attention should be paid to items likely to be contaminated with feces and
                   surfaces that are touched frequently (i.e.: bedside rails, telephone, call light/TV controls,
                   door handles, faucets, commodes and toilets, etc)
              b. Cleaning should preferably be conducted once a shift, using hospital approved sporicidal
                   disinfectant such as Dispatch bleach-based disinfectant wipes(Refer to Policy IC – 716 and
                   attachments).
              c. All rooms need to be terminally cleaned with bleach/sporicidal agent when a C. difficile
                   positive patient is discharged, or moved

Patient Care Equipment
     1. Whenever possible, dedicate the use of non-critical patient-care equipment to a single patient. If
         use of common equipment or items (i.e.: blood glucose testing kit, stethoscope,
         sphygmomanometer) is unavoidable, use them first with uninfected patients and adequately clean
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Clostridioides Difficile, Preventing Transmission

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   11/01/1998              06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                            04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 317.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 3 of 3
         and disinfect them after use on patients.
    2. Discard all items soiled with infected material (i.e.: feces) in plain/clear plastic bags. Do not use
         red bags unless material is saturated with fluid blood or bloody fluid.
    3. ALWAYS carry linen, food trays, trash away from body , to avoid contamination.
    4. Empty bedpans, urinals, urine/stool collection receptacles VERY carefully to prevent splashes or
         spills.
    5. Never throw soiled linen or diapers on the floor.

Refer to Appendix A for “Guidelines” and Appendix C for full reference article.

REFERENCES
    1. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults and Children: 2017 Update
         by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of
         America (SHEA), Vol. 66, No. 7 (March 2018), pp. e1-e48
    2. Healthcare-Associated Infections: Clostridium difficile Infections. Center for Disease Control and
         Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/organisms/cdiff/Cdiff_infect.html
    3. APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. Chapter 72: Clostridium difficile Infection and
         Pseudomembranous Colitis, 2014.
    4. Journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics: Clostridium difficile Infection in Infants and
         Children,       Pediatrics     2013;131;196;       originally      published       online     December        31,    2012;DOI:
         10.1542/peds.2012-2992.
    5. William A. Rutala, David J. Weber, M.D. and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
         Committee (HICPAC). Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008.
         Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/guidelines/Disinfection_Nov_2008.pdf.
    6. IC - 716.0 Cleaning Disinfection

ATTACHMENTS:
         1. IC – 317.1 Clostridium Difficile Fact Sheet (English)
         2. IC – 317.2 Clostridium Difficile Fact Sheet (Spanish)
         3. IC – 317.4 Appendix Clostridioides Difficile Guidelines

ASSOCIATED DOCUMENTS:
    1.    CHLA Antimicrobial Stewardship Guidelines

POLICY OWNER:
 Executive Director, Infection Prevention and Control, Accreditation and Licensing, and Emergency Management

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.