  IC - 301.4 Appendix F: Contact Isolation and Infection Prevention Protocol in ASC

Eligible Patient(s):

Only patients with orders for Contact Isolation are eligible for this protocol.

Patients requiring Contact +, Combined-Droplet, Combined-Droplet +, and Combined-
Airborne Isolation are not eligible for this protocol.

Patient bed assignment:

A patient requiring Contact Isolation may be treated in an ASC Operating Room and
recovered in the ASC PACU.

Patient(s) who required Contact Isolation must be assigned to one of two designated bed
spaces in ASC PACU.

The designated privacy screen must be used to separate the patient bed space from the
adjoining bed space.

A privacy curtain may be drawn at the foot of the patient bed space if needed.

A maximum of 2 isolated patients may be cared for in the ASC PACU at any time.

ASC Charge Nurse will prioritize scheduling of isolated patients either at the beginning or
the end of the day.

Personal Protective Equipment:

All staff must follow PPE required for Contact Isolation during each patient encounter
including transport of patient to ASC PACU bed space

             •    Gown
             •    Gloves

Hand Hygiene:

Hand Hygiene in compliance with the World Health Organization (WHO) 5 Moments is
required per policy IC 212: Hand Hygiene

Parents or visitors at the bedside of the patient must be instructed in proper hand hygiene
with specific focus on performing hand hygiene after touching the patient or surroundings
when leaving the bed space. Parents or visitors at the bedside must be shown the nearest
alcohol based hand sanitizer dispenser and sink space to utilize for hand hygiene.

                                                                                             1
  IC - 301.4 Appendix F: Contact Isolation and Infection Prevention Protocol in ASC

Cleaning and Disinfection:

ASC Operating Room

Upon completion of the procedure in the ASC OR and transport of patient out of the room
to the ASC PACU, staff with perform in between case cleaning and disinfection in
accordance with Main Operating Room protocol utilizing hospital approved disinfectant
wipes or solution with attention to high touch surfaces including but not limited to hand
rails, mattresses, and IV poles.

Anesthesia techs are responsible for cleaning anesthesia carts and machines in between
cases using hospital approved disinfectant wipes or solution.

ASC PACU

Following discharge of the patient from the ASC PACU bed space the bed space must be
stripped of all linens and disposable items then disinfected using hospital approved
disinfectant wipes or solution with attention to high touch surfaces including but not
limited to hand rails, mattresses, and IV poles

All reusable non-critical patient equipment (IV pumps, monitors, and poles) must be
cleaned in accordance with manufacturer guidelines with hospital approved disinfectant
wipes or solution before use on the next patient.

Privacy screen must be cleaned and disinfected with hospital approved disinfectant wipes
or solution before use on the next patient.

Privacy curtains must be sprayed with Clorox Hydrogen Peroxide spray after each patient.

All privacy curtains in the ASC PACU must be removed/replaced and sent for laundering
weekly.

                                                                                           2