                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Management of Infant or Child Mistakenly Fed Another Woman’s Expressed Human Milk

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    03/15/2006             10/26/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
    CHLA                            04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 235.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                 PAGE 1 of 4
 PURPOSE:

 The use of expressed human milk for nutrition of sick, premature, and recuperating neonates and infants
 in the hospital setting has become commonplace. Although rare, the potential for infection through
 human milk exists and must be examined in the context of the prevalence of HIV in women of
 childbearing age, the low incidence of breastfeeding in populations with the highest incidence of HIV
 infection, and the known general benefits of human milk.

 The present policy outlines the steps to be taken in the case of an infant or child is mistakenly fed another
 woman’s expressed human milk.

 DEFINITIONS:

     1. Source Mother: The woman whose expressed milk was fed mistakenly to the recipient infant or
          child

     2. Recipient patient: The patient who was mistakenly fed the source mother’s milk also known as the
          exposed patient

     3. Recipient Mother: The mother of the recipient infant or child

 PROCEDURE:

     A. The Healthcare provider (HCP) recognizing the situation is to immediately notify the attending
           physician of record for the exposed patient, the clinical manager of the unit, the nurse of the
           recipient infant or child, and the unit charge nurse. The recipient patient’s provider should then
           do the following:
                        1. Discuss with the attending physician of record for the exposed patient if stomach
                            contents should be aspirated. Insert a NG tube if needed to aspirate the stomach
                            contents, if there are no contraindications to a NG.
                        2. Instruct source mother to visit the Admitting department on 1st floor Gateway
                            Building to create an MRN and encounter for conducting lab tests on the source
                            mother. Use the form in IC 235.2 for instructions and to identify the information
                            needed to create the mother’s registration account.
                                 a) The hospital admitting department is available 7 days a week from 0800 to
                                      0000. If an exposure occurs between 0000 and 0800, the mother will need to
                                      wait to register until 0800 when the hospital admitting department reopens.
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Management of Infant or Child Mistakenly Fed Another Woman’s Expressed Human Milk

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   03/15/2006              10/26/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                            04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 235.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 2 of 4
                       3. Notify Infection Prevention and Control by calling ext. 15510 or by emailing at
                            InfectionPreventionAndControl@chla.usc.edu. Infection Prevention will follow up
                            on the lab results of the source mother on the next business day.
                       4. Every effort should be made to ensure testing of the source mother is done prior to
                            the discharge of the source mother’s infant from CHLA

    B. The attending physician of record for the exposed patient, unit quality physician champion,
                  and/or nurse manager of the unit will coordinate notification and testing of the source
                  mother, recipient mother, and/or recipient infant or child..The attending physician of
                  record for the exposed patient has the responsibility to:
                       1. Contact the human milk “source” mother and explain the situation. Request consent
                            to review prenatal and obstetrical laboratory test results and to test the source
                            mother’s blood for Hepatitis B and HIV as soon as possible about no later than 24
                            hours from the date of notification.
                                a) If the source mother refuses, proceed with follow up care for infants exposed
                                     to source positive human milk.
                                b) Explain to the Source mother that testing will be done free of charge at the
                                     hospital laboratory and that a special account and record number will be set
                                     up for her at the lab. The testing must be completed as soon as possible but
                                     no later than 24 hours from the date of notification.
                                c) Bloodwork should be collected for the source mother at the outpatient lab. If
                                     the human milk exposure occurred on nights, weekends, or holidays when
                                     the outpatient lab is not open, the Vascular Access Team may be contacted to
                                     draw the source mother’s blood.
                                d) Once the source mother’s account has been created, the attending physician
                                     must place the future order for HIV 1/2 Ab/Ag and Hepatitis B surface
                                     antigen testing (HBsAg) on the source mother’s blood.
                                e) v. If the lab results of the source mother are positive, the attending physician
                                     of record for the exposed patient must notify the source mother of the test
                                     results and refer the source mother to her primary care physician for follow
                                     up.
                       2. Contact the parent(s) of the exposed infant and explain the situation.                                 Do not
                            disclose the name of the source mother.
                                a) Request consent to review prenatal and obstetrical laboratory test results of
                                     the recipient mother and to test the recipient mother’s blood for Hepatitis B
                                     and HIV if needed.
                                        i.    Request information (if not already available) on the Hepatitis B
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                     HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                             TITLE: Management of Infant or Child Mistakenly Fed Another Woman’s Expressed Human Milk

                                            ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                            03/15/2006             10/26/2022              Executive Committee, Board of Directors


    CHLA
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 235.0


















                                3. Notify the recipient's mothers and the source mother of the respective lab results
                                    when they become available. Do not disclose the name of the source mother to the
                                    parent of the recipient infant, and do not note the name in the recipient’s medical
                                    record.

                                4. The exposed patient’s mother does not need to be tested initially. This testing will
                                    need to be ordered later only if the source mother’s lab tests are positive. In this
                                    case, the recipient mother should be tested for HIV and Hepatitis B. If testing of the
                                    recipient mother is needed, follow the same instructions outlined in IC 235.2 to
                                    create amedical record number for the recipient mother.
                                5. Patient/Family Services should be contacted as needed to support the family

   REVISED DATE:
   04/18/2022
   CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 3 of 4
              vaccination status of the recipient infant. If the source mother is
              positive for Hepatitis B and recipient infant has not been vaccinated
              for Hepatitis B, instruct the parent to bring the infant to the emergency
              department for administration of Hepatitis B vaccine and Hepatitis B
              immune globulin (HBIG)
b) Request permission to test the recipient infant if indicated based upon the
     source mother’s test results. Inform the family that the risk of transmission of
     HIV is very small and that transmission of HIV from a single human milk
     exposure has never been documented. The issue of HIV prophylaxis should
     be discussed at this time with the recommendation that it is not warranted
     (unless information on the donor of the human milk warrants a
     recommendation).
c) In the event that HIV prophylaxis is warranted and is agreed to by the
     parent(s), the attending physician of record must immediately contact Clinical
     Immunology and Allergy (CIA) by phone and request an urgent consultation.
     The attending physician of record must also order a referral to Clinical
     Immunology and Allergy.
                  REFERENCES:
                       1. American Academy of Pediatrics. Human Milk. In Peter G, ed. 2003 Red Book: Report of
                           the Committee on Infectious Diseases. p.118-120. 24th ed. ELK Grove Village, IL
                       2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. What to do if an infant or child is mistakenly
                           fed another woman’s expressed breast milk. October 20, 2009.
                       3. Pennsylvania Patient Safety Authority (2007). Mismanagement of Expressed Breast Milk.
                           PA-PSRS Patient Safety Advisory. June 2007. Vol4, No.2.
                    *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
                   considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                                 Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                               HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                      TITLE: Management of Infant or Child Mistakenly Fed Another Woman’s Expressed Human Milk

                                     ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                     03/15/2006               10/26/2022              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                     REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                              04/18/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 235.0            CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                       PAGE 4 of 4
          ATTACHMENTS:
               1. IC – 235.2 Process of Events for human milk source mother’s STARS Account Online

          POLICY OWNER:
          Manager, Infection Prevention and Control

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
            considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                           Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.