                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Toy Cleaning and Acceptance

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                    03/29/2004             06/26/2020

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 224.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 1 of 4
PURPOSE:

To ensure that patients and siblings have access to clean and safe play equipment, toys and other supplies
within patient care areas; To prevent the spread of infectious organisms from one patient to another; To
ensure proper procedures for cleaning and disinfecting toys and equipment; To consistently maintain
infection control practices to be followed by Child Life staff, students, interns and volunteers, and other
designated persons (i.e. Care Partners, EVS, or others depending on specific unit); To ensure that the same
cleaning procedures are followed with donated items

PROCEDURES:

Acceptance and General Care of Toys and Equipment

    1. All toys and equipment provided for patient use must be appropriate for the child's
         developmental age (information is available through the Child Life and Volunteer program)

    2. Toys will be evaluated for safety to minimize risk of sharp objects, brittle plastic, glass items, toxic
         items, pinching or choking hazards, and other safety concerns by all staff having patient care
         contact (ex. recalls). Used stuffed animals will not be accepted.

    3. Toys brought from home by a patient must not be shared with other patients.

    4. All patient care staff will screen toys for thematic content to avoid inappropriate content for the
         pediatric population (i.e. sexually provocative toys, war/weapon toys, violence, obscene language,
         movie ratings, etc.).

    5. Toys provided for patient use will be made of materials that can be easily sanitized (i.e. plastic,
         rubber, latex, vinyl, treated woods and metals). Plush toys (i.e. stuffed animals) are not
         recommended for donation to patients; any exceptions must be approved by the Infection
         Prevention & Control team. In addition, all donated toys must be new and in good condition.
              a. Battery operated and electrical toys that cannot be immersed should be avoided.

    6. Toy cleaning is the responsibility of all staff having patient care contact.

    7. The Child Life staff will provide training and supervision for toy cleaning procedures to Child Life
         students, interns, volunteers and Child Life staff.
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Toy Cleaning and Acceptance

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                    03/29/2004             06/26/2020

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 224.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                 PAGE 2 of 4
     8. Toy cleaning in-services, training and guidelines are available to hospital staff through the Child
          Life program.

     9. Toys and books used within the playrooms will be cleaned at the end of each playroom session.
          Toys and books in ambulatory clinic waiting rooms will be single patient use only or disinfected in
          between patient use per clinic protocol. Wall and floor-mounted toys in ambulatory clinic waiting
          rooms that involve patient direct contact will not be permitted.

     10. General hand washing practices will be followed according to established hospital infection
          prevention and control policies (refer to IC Policy – 212.0).

     11. The Infection Prevention and Control staff are available for consultation as needed.

     12. During infectious disease outbreaks and pandemics, any shared items in waiting rooms (toys,
          books, magazines) should be removed unless they are handsfree or do not encourage physical
          contact.

 Cleaning
 Only hospital-approved disinfectant will be used for cleaning toys (contact time per manufacturers
 recommendations)

     1. For immersible toys or accessories, use of a dishwasher with standard detergent using a full wash
          and dry cycle is acceptable. See IC -224.2 for more details.

     2. For other toys or accessories, toys will be properly wiped with disinfectant and toys that may
          possibly be mouthed will be rinsed thoroughly with water after each use. Toys should not be
          transferred between patients without proper cleaning.

     3. Toys that are dropped on the floor, found on tabletops, etc. should be cleaned before use by
          patients

     4. Toys with porous surfaces (e.g. stuffed animals) that cannot be effectively cleaned must be kept by
          the child and taken home upon discharge or discarded.

 Isolation Rooms
     1. All toys and equipment provided to patients in isolation must be made of materials that can be
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Toy Cleaning and Acceptance

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                    03/29/2004              06/26/2020

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 224.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 3 of 4
         easily sanitized (i.e. plastic, rubber, latex, vinyl, treated woods and metals).

     2. Toys must remain in isolation rooms until proper disinfecting is performed and being returned to
         the playrooms or waiting rooms. Toys will be disinfected with hospital-approved disinfectant after
         use in an isolation room and rinsed thoroughly. For patients in Contact+ or Combined-Droplet +
         Precautions, bleach solution should be used as the disinfectant for all toys used by these patients.

     3. If the patient is transferred to another room, the toys provided at the bedside must remain with the
         patient or be removed for proper cleaning then returned to playroom or waiting room. If toys with
         porous surfaces (e.g. stuffed animals, books) that cannot be effectively cleaned are given to
         children in isolation, these toys must be kept by the child and taken home upon discharge or
         discarded.

     4. At discharge or transfer to another unit, toys must be placed in the soiled toy area. Each unit will
         have a specified area and procedure for the return of soiled toys (i.e. specified bags, closed bins,
         etc.)

Electronic Game Units
     1. Electronic Game Units will be cleaned between each use when taken to patient rooms.

     2. Electronic Game Units in public areas (i.e. waiting rooms) will be cleaned daily.

     3. The units will be unplugged prior to cleaning to prevent risk of electrical shock.

     4. Cleaning of Electronic Game Units is the responsibility of the staff person initiating its use in
         patient's room.

Wagon / Riding Toys

     1. The staff person initiating use of wagons or riding toys is responsible for ensuring its cleanliness
         before and after its use.

     2. Linens shall be placed in wagons prior to patient use for comfort and infection control measures.

     3. Linens used in wagons will be placed in soiled linen bins following each use by patients

     4. Equipment must be evaluated for hazards on a regular basis
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Toy Cleaning and Acceptance

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                    03/29/2004              06/26/2020

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 224.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 4 of 4
 ATTACHMENTS:
     1. IC – 224.1 Toy Donation
     2. IC – 224.2 Playroom and OTPT Dishwasher Maintenance

 REFERENCES:
     1. Title 22, DHS Standards 1997
     2. APIC text of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Chapter 42: Pediatrics; Chapter 31 Cleaning and
          Disinfection, 2016.
     3. IC – 212.0 Hand Hygiene

 POLICY OWNER:
 Director, Infection Prevention and Control

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
            considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.