                                              HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Dental Clinic Infection Control

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                    07/01/1997              06/26/2020

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 710.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                    PAGE 1 of 3
PURPOSE:

     To provide guidelines related to infection control processes that are specific to the Dental Clinic.
     All standard precautions and general infection control measures as outlined in specific CHLA Infection
     Control Policies will be followed as applicable.

PROCEDURE:

     A. Care of general surfaces and equipment
              1. Plastic covers should be used to protect light handles, dental chair switches, light curing units,
                   digital panoramic, cephalometric and 3D x-ray bite/ear guides, Sopro intraoral camera and
                   tooth dryers that might become contaminated while delivering dental care. Between patients,
                   the covers should be removed with gloved hands and replaced with new plastic covers after
                   proper hand washing.
              2. Dental chairs, radiology chairs, x-ray unit head cones, lead aprons, diode laser, dental units,
                   and non-disposable plastic attachments will be wiped between patients with a disinfectant. All
                   disposable materials will be discarded as appropriate.
              3. All intraoral items such as impressions bite registrations, prosthetic and orthodontic appliances
                   shall be cleaned with a disinfectant before manipulation in the dental lab and before placement
                   in the patient’s mouth. Such items shall be thoroughly rinsed prior to placement in the
                   patient’s mouth.
              4. All instruments will be placed in a plastic bin, which is kept in the dirty utility room, and
                   sprayed with a hospital approved enzymatic spray to facilitate the removal of particulate
                   matter. For impression trays that have adherent cement molding, the trays will be placed in a
                   bin, also kept in the dirty utility room, and soaked in a cement removal product to facilitate the
                   removal of particulate matter. Both will then be transported in the bins to the Sterile Processing
                   Department for a final cleaning/sterilization process.
              5. All dental instruments and cassettes will be transported to the Sterile Processing Department in
                   plastic bins with the lids attached and a “Biohazard” label on them or in the enclosed cart.
                   After the removal of the contents, the staff in the Sterile Processing Department will clean the
                   bins and place the sterilized products back in the bins for the return transport to the Dental
                   Clinic.
              In the event a non-digital x-ray is taken, the x-ray packet(s) should be placed unopened on a paper
              towel in the dark room using standard precautions. The packets should then be wiped with a
              hospital approved disinfectant and placed on a separate clean paper towel. Gloves should then be
              removed and discarded, and the new ones placed after proper hand washing. After all packets
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Dental Clinic Infection Control

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                    07/01/1997              06/26/2020

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 710.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                   PAGE 2 of 3
              have been opened, the contaminated wrappers will be discarded, and the lead foil portion
              disposed of in the appropriate container. The films can then be processed without contaminating
              darkroom equipment.

     B. General Principles
              1. Rubber dams and high-speed evacuation, when appropriate, should be utilized to minimize
                   generation of droplets and splatter.
              2. Needles should be re-capped only by using the scoop method technique.

     C. Dental Unit Water Lines
              1. Dental staff will follow the outlined procedures for the “Daily” and “Weekly” handling of
                   dental water lines.
              2. Weekly Procedure:
                          a. Every Thursday evening, or a day prior in the event of a clinic closure, dental unit water
                            lines will undergo a chemical cleaning.
                          b.          Each week, either chairs 1-6 or 7-11 including the cavitron units, will be taken
                            out of use and cleaned. Those undergoing cleaning will be labeled as such and the
                            remaining chairs used for emergencies that may take place overnight.
                          c. A rotating schedule will be observed and documented to assure compliance with the
                            change in the available chair each week.
                                 1. Procedure:
                                          1) Remove all water from dental units and purge with air
                                          2) Fill dental unit water container with approved cleaning solution
                                               and place a “caution” sign on dental units
                                          3) Flush water lines until cleaning solution is emitted from each hose and
                                               outlet, leaving a small amount in the bottle.
                                          4) Leave cleaning solution for specified time as per manufacturer’s
                                               instructions and turn dental units off.
                                          5) All chairs with “caution” signs will be considered out of service during
                                               this cleaning period.
                                          6) On the first day of the work week following this cleaning process,
                                               the dental water unit containers will be removed, thoroughly rinsed,
                                               filled with fresh sterile water, and reinstalled so that all dental unit water
                                               lines are thoroughly flushed until no visible residue is left in the lines.
                                          7) Caution signs can then be removed, and the dental chairs considered
                                               “in service”.
         1.        Daily Procedure:
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                              HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Dental Clinic Infection Control

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                    07/01/1997              06/26/2020

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 710.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                    PAGE 3 of 3
                                      a.        At the beginning of each day, the dental water containers will be
                                              filled with fresh sterile water and then reinstalled in each unit.
                                      b.        Syringes, water outlets, and handpiece lines will be flushed through
                                               with the sterile water.
                                      c.        Between patients, handpiece and syringe lines will be flushed
                                              through with the sterile water for a minimum of 20 seconds.
                                    d.          At the end of each day, the dental water containers will be emptied
                                              and the water line purged with air.

          2.        Dental Unit Water Line Quality Control:
                                     a.         Although the Dental Clinic uses only sterile water during the delivery
                                               of dental care, on a bi-yearly schedule, water samples will be obtained
                                               to monitor for the development of microbes in the dental water lines.
                                     b.         Samples will be taken from each dental unit and sent to the
                                               Microbiology lab for testing.
                                     c.         Results will be communicated to the appropriate managers and
                                               Division Head as soon as they become available.

REFERENCES:1. APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology Chapter 53: Dental Services. 4th ed., 2014.
     2. California Code of Regulations, Section 1005 of Division 10 Title 16: Minimum Standards for Infection
          Control, 2017.

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Accreditation & Licensing, Infection Prevention, Emergency Management

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.