                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                  TITLE: Food Services

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                  10/01/1984              06/26/2020

                                  REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA     CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                    PAGE 1 of 8
 PURPOSE:

 The Food Service (FS) and Clinical Nutrition Services (CNS) Departments must protect patients,
 employees and visitors from the hazards of food borne illness as well as provide for their nutritional
 needs.

 Prevention of infection in a Food Service and Clinical Nutrition Departments requires healthy personnel,
 properly maintained equipment, uncontaminated supplies, and an on-going awareness of proper
 sanitation and hygiene.

 PROCEDURE:

     ACCOUNTABILITY
          1. Food Service Director
                   a. To provide clean and properly equipped storage and work areas that meet state and
                       local health department standards.
                   b. To purchase wholesome food from sources complying with regulatory agency
                       procedures and to receive and store such foods under conditions that maintain
                       wholesomeness and minimize risk of contamination by microorganisms, insects,
                       rodents, or other toxic material.
                   c. To develop written policies and work procedures for cleaning and sanitizing
                       equipment, utensils, and work areas. Submit all policies and procedures that may relate
                       to infection control to the committee for review prior to adoption.
                   d. To properly dispose of waste material according to sanitation principles and local health
                       department regulations.
                   e. To develop programs for training and supervising employees to ensure application of
                       policies and procedures established by the department and approved by the
                       administration of the facility.
                   f. Report any knowledge or suspected food-associated illness or infection to the Infection
                       Prevention and Control staff.
                   g. Perform monthly food safety audits

          2. Infection Prevention and Control personnel
                   a. Act as resource persons.
                   b. Assist in preparing and revising policies and procedures regarding infection prevention
                       and control.
                   c. Assist in preparing and presenting educational programs relevant to infection
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Food Services

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                  10/01/1984               06/26/2020

                                  REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA     CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                     PAGE 2 of 8
                        prevention and control in the FS Department.
                   d. Investigate any outbreak of foodborne disease.
                   e. Perform an annual comprehensive food safety risk assessment inspection of the HBO
                        cafeteria and protected environment kitchen.

          3. Hospital Infection Prevention and Control Committee
                   a. Review and approve all policies and practices relevant to infection control.
                   b. Review data concerning infections, practices and food safety audit results.

     INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL PRACTICES
     Precautions
          1. FS and CNS personnel may enter an isolation room if they perform hand hygiene and observe
              the required personal protective equipment instructions as indicated on the door sign.
          2. FS and CNS personnel will avoid direct contact with the soiled portion of all used dishes,
              glasses and utensils.
          3. Persons working with soiled dishes will wear gloves and plastic aprons. These will be
              removed, and the hands washed prior to handling clean items.
          4. Wearing gloves to pick up dietary carts is unnecessary.
          5. Disposable trays and dishes will be used for all emerging infectious disease patients. Reference
              the Emerging Infectious Diseases Response Plan for more information on this.

     Food Purchasing
          1. Food purchasing will be made from supply sources that comply with all laws related to food
              processing and labeling. The FS department has on file vendors that are in compliance.
          2. Fluid milk and fluid milk products must be pasteurized and must meet the Grade A quality
              standards.
          3. Only USDA or State inspected meat and meat products, USDA inspected poultry, poultry
              products, egg products and USDA inspected fishery products will be purchased.
          4. Shellfish if utilized will be purchased from a reputable dealer who complies with regulations of
              state and local agencies.
          5. Only clean whole eggs with shells intact and without cracks or pasteurized liquid, frozen, or
              dried egg products will be used.
          6. Food products that may have been contaminated by insects, rodents or foods in cans that bulge
              or are severely dented will not be accepted.
          7. All incoming food will be inspected for quality by looking for evidence of damage to cartons,
              packaging, or contamination from filth, water, insects, or rodents. Damaged or spoiled
              products or frozen foods that show evidence of thawing or refreezing will be rejected.
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Food Services

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                   10/01/1984               06/26/2020

                                   REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA      CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                      PAGE 3 of 8
     Food Storage - Dry Storage
          1. Dry storage area will be clean, cool well ventilated and adequately lighted. A temperature
               range from 50º Fahrenheit to 70º Fahrenheit (10º Celsius – 18º Celsius) will be maintained.
          2. Floor drains that might permit contamination by sewage backflow are prohibited.
          3. Food will be stored 12 inches above floor. All bottom shelves will have a plastic shelf liner.
          4. Food and containers of food will not be stored under exposed or unprotected water or sewer
               lines except for automatic fire protection sprinkler heads that is required by law.
          5. Floors, shelving, and walls of the storeroom will be kept clean and dry at all times, with
               cleaning scheduled at regular intervals.

     Food Storage – Refrigerator and Freezer Storage
          1. Walls, floors, and shelves are constructed of easily cleaned material.
          2. Walls, floors, and shelves are free of spills and debris.
          3. Properly functioning thermometers are located in each unit.
          4. Proper temperatures are maintained 40º Fahrenheit (7º Celsius) or lower in refrigerators and 0º
               Fahrenheit (-18º Celsius) or lower in freezers.
          5. Cooked foods are stored above raw foods.
          6. Foods are properly wrapped or covered.
          7. Frost build-up is kept to a minimum.
          8. Foods are dated and rotated according to standard procedures.
          9. Refrigerator and freezer temperatures are logged daily. Log records are maintained in the FS
               Director's office. All refrigerator or freezer problems are reported to maintenance immediately
               by use of the regular maintenance request procedures.

     Food Prepared by an Outside Source:
          1. Patients may be provided food prepared by an outside source unless expressly contraindicated
               by their attending physician.
                   a. In some settings (example BMT unit) specific instructions and protocols must be
                        followed for food brought from home.
                   b. Reference Appendix B: Tips for Bringing Food from Home for families bringing food
                        from an outside source.
                   c. PCS staff must follow protocol for labeling and storing food brought from home
                        outlined in Appendix A: Food Brought in from the Outside provide patient’s family
                        with the information of food handling safety
          2. All uneaten refrigerated food will be discarded after 72 hours by PCS staff.

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
            considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Food Services

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                  10/01/1984               06/26/2020

                                  REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA     CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                      PAGE 4 of 8
     Food Preparation and Service
          1. Raw, unprocessed fruits and vegetables will be thoroughly washed under running water
               before use.
          2. Food coming from broken packages or swollen cans, or food with an abnormal appearance or
               odor, will be discarded.
          3. Food will be served with clean tongs, scoops, forks, spoons, spatulas, or gloves to avoid direct
               contact with food.
          4. Individual portions of food once served will be discarded.
          5. Prepared food is transported to other areas in closed food carts or covered containers.
          6. Unwrapped foods are protected from contamination by sneeze guards.
          7. Single-service articles are discarded after one use.

     Protected Environment Kitchen
          1. A separate area is reserved for preparation of special formulas.
          2. Clinical Nutrition staff working in that areas are trained in aseptic techniques, strictly follow
               hand hygiene practices (refer to Policy IC - 212.0) and must wear bouffant caps, gowns and
               sterile gloves while preparing the formula.
          3. The Protected Environment Kitchen will be cleaned daily by Clinical Nutrition and EVS. An
               approved sanitizer solution will be used to sanitize all work surfaces.
          4. Formula Preparation:
                   a. After daily preparation, all used containers will be washed and sterilized in the
                        protected kitchen dishwasher.
                   b. Sterile water is used for formula preparation. Prepared formulas are provided to the
                        units in sterile 1-liter bottles. Prepared liquid breast milk fortifiers are provided to the
                        units in sterile 0.5-liter bottles.
                   c. Each formula bottle is labeled with the specific product name (with additives), patient
                        name, room number and formula expiration time and date. The formula will be
                        delivered to the units in a refrigerated cart and placed directly in the designated
                        refrigerator.
                   d. Old formulas and breast milk fortifiers will be removed and discarded after 24 hours by
                        the formula technician.
                   e. Blenderized formulas will only be prepared for oral consumptions, bolus feedings and
                        continuous feedings not to exceed 2 hours upon order from the physician.
                   f. Staff competency will be validated annually by the Clinical Nutrition Manager or
                        designee.       Together, Infection Prevention and Control and the Clinical Nutrition
                        Manager will conduct an annual review of the processes and procedures and interview
                        staff to ensure compliance with all aseptic techniques.
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                  TITLE: Food Services

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                  10/01/1984               06/26/2020

                                  REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA     CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                       PAGE 5 of 8
    Cleaning:
         1. All food carts will be sanitized after each meal. They are also cleaned and sanitized at the end
              of the day.
         2. Ranges and grills will be cleaned daily.
         3. All work surfaces, utensils, and equipment will be cleaned and sanitized after each use.
         4. All counters will be cleaned and sanitized after each use.
         5. The salad bar will be cleaned following every meal.
         6. All floor surfaces will be wet-mopped daily and as needed.
         7. Storage facilities for raw and cooked food will be cleaned on a fixed schedule.
         8. Rodent and pest control will be provided on a fixed schedule and as needed.
         9. Maintain ice machines in a clean and sanitary condition.
         10. There will be no culturing of ice unless authorized by the Infection Prevention and Control
              Committee.
         11. Provide for the removal and proper disposal of garbage from the kitchen.
         12. Keep carts clean and sanitary according to daily cleaning schedules.
         13. Provide for continuing preventive maintenance of equipment. Provide dietary with a copy of
              this program.
         14. Vending machines will be serviced and monitored weekly by the approved vending company.
              (refer to Policy IC – 227.0)

    Equipment
         1. Cutting boards are washed and sanitized between uses and will be made of hard rubber rather
              than wood.
         2. Plastic ware or china that has lost its glaze or is chipped or cracked will be disposed.
         3. Disposable containers and utensils will be discarded after one use.
         4. All food grinders, choppers, mixers, etc., will be cleaned, sanitized, dried, and reassembled
              after each use.
         5. Dishwashers.
                  a. Will be drained and flushed daily.
                  b. The machine will be maintained and run according to manufacturer's instructions.
                  c. The dishwasher will maintain a final sanitizing rinse of at least 180º Fahrenheit and
                       wash water of 150º Fahrenheit or more.
         6. All pots, pans, equipment will be washed in the dishwasher.
         7. Stacking and emptying of the dishwasher will be done by separate personnel to prevent
              recontamination of dishes. When only one person is available, he will wash hands thoroughly
              and put on a clean apron before handling clean dishes.
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Food Services

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                  10/01/1984               06/26/2020

                                  REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA     CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                      PAGE 6 of 8
          8. Refrigerators.
                   a. Patient refrigerators hospital-wide will be cleaned on the fourth Friday of each month
                        between 8am and 10am by Environmental Services (EVS) staff using approved
                        procedures.
                   b. Unit patient care services staff will be expected to reduce refrigerator stock on the
                        previous Thursday through disposal of expired foods and collaboration with
                        families/staff regarding any food stored.
                   c. Food items will be removed from the refrigerators by unit staff prior to the EVS
                        cleaning.
                   d. EVS staff will complete the refrigerator cleaning.
                   e. Food items will be returned to the refrigerator by unit staff once cleaning is completed
                        allowing the food to be unrefrigerated no longer than 20 minutes.
                   f. Environmental Services staff will document completion of cleaning.

     Ice Supply
          1. Ice machines are cleaned daily exteriorly and maintained in a sanitary manner (refer to Facility
               Operation P&P section 13).
          2. Maintenance will do quarterly internal maintenance and cleaning.

     Waste Disposal
          1. Waste cans with plastic liners will be used for all non-food waste.
          2. Food waste is to be disposed of in garbage disposal or waste cans which are covered when not
               in use.
          3. Non-food garbage will be removed at regular intervals. Trash carts are cleaned and sanitized
               daily by the FS.
          4. Mechanical sink garbage disposal units, which can generate bacterial aerosols, are not to be
               used in the salad preparation areas during food preparation.

     On-Campus Customer-Facing Locations Selling Food and Drinks (including but not limited to
     HBO Café and dining room, coffee vendors, marketplaces)
               1. Hand sanitizer should be readily available at all locations selling food and drinks.
               2. Public dining areas, particularly high touch surfaces, should be cleaned and disinfected
                   regularly according to defined cleaning schedules.
               3. Food should be distributed to customers in a clean manner to reduce cross-contamination.
     3.    During infectious disease outbreaks or pandemics, the following additional practices should be
     implemented:
                   •    Remove all buffet or self-serve food items
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Food Services

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                  10/01/1984               06/26/2020

                                  REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA     CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                      PAGE 7 of 8
                   •    Remove paper orders from the grill station
                   •    Implement floor markings for all queues to ensure that customers stay six feet apart
                   •    Spread out tables to ensure six feet distance between tables
                   •    High-touch surface items should be disinfected regularly or removed from public access

     PERSONNEL
     Employee Health
          1. Personnel will comply with pre-employment and annual employee health policies (refer to IPC
              policies section 600).
          2. FS employees must be free of active or communicable diseases such as skin lesions, boils,
              gastrointestinal or respiratory infection. Employees with any of the above conditions, or ill for
              five or more days, will be cleared by their personal physician before returning to work. Food
              handlers with diarrhea are removed from duty until asymptomatic.
          3. Chronic carriers of shigella or salmonella will not be permitted to work in the FS Department.
          4. Basic orientation for all new dietary personnel to include hygiene, sanitation, and hand hygiene
              techniques.
          5. Annual in-service education includes personal hygiene, sanitation, and hand hygiene
              techniques. Periodic educational programs on infection prevention and control practices must
              be presented and documented.

     Personal Hygiene
          1. Proper attire for food handlers includes a proper hair covering, freshly laundered uniform, and
              short clean fingernails. Moustaches and sideburns must be kept trimmed. Beards must be
              covered if not close-cropped.
          2. Smoking, chewing gums, drinking and eating are not permitted in food preparation or serving
              areas.

     CONTROLS ON THE SYSTEM
          1. All preventive and corrective maintenance will be documented by the Engineering department.
          2. Environmental cultures will be done as necessary. A foodborne outbreak or suspicion of such
              would be grounds for cultures of possible sources. Results will be reviewed by the Infection
              Prevention and Control Committee.
          3. Periodic prevalence walks will be conducted by the Infection Prevention and Control and
              Environmental Services and the FS Director.
          4. Records of proper temperatures for refrigeration and freezing equipment are maintained by the
              FS staff daily.
          5. All policies and procedures that may present an infection hazard must be considered by the
            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Food Services

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Emergency Pandemic Leadership
                                  10/01/1984               06/26/2020

                                  REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 717.0CHLA     CHAPTER: SUPPORT – CLINICAL CARE – INFECTION CONTROL                                      PAGE 8 of 8
              Infection Prevention and Control Committee prior to adoption.
          6. A sanitizer/disinfectant approved for use in FS Department will be available.

 ATTACHMENTS:
     1. IC – 717.1 Food Brought in from Home
     2. IC – 717.2 Attachment B Basics for Handling Food Safely (English)
     3. IC – 717.3 Attachment C Basics for Handling Food Safely (Spanish)

 REFERENCES:
     1. American Dietetic Association. Guidelines for the Preparation of Human Milk and Formula in
          Health Care Facilities, second edition, 2011.
     2. APIC Test of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Chapter 109. Nutrition Services. 2014 Ruby
          Puckett, MA, FCSI
     3. Infant formula preparation, handling, and related practices in the United States. J AmDiet Assoc
          1999 Oct;99(10):1234-40
     4. IC – 212.0 Hand Hygiene
     5. IC - 227.0 Vending Machines, Food Services

 POLICY OWNER:
 Director, Accreditation, Infection Prevention and Control, and Emergency Management

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.