                                                          HOSPITAL PROTOCOL MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Division of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine Infection Control Practices

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Infection Control Committee
                                    02/01/2000             09/20/2022

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             09/20/2022
#: IC – 732.0                       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 1 of 4
PURPOSE:

The Division of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine provides services to a variety of patients with some
degree of functional impairments. The treatment modalities and/or equipment used in these settings may
produce increased risks of infection for providers or recipients of care.

The following guidelines have been developed to prevent the transmission of infection among patient and
personnel.

SCOPE:

This policy is applicable to the Division of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine.

ACCOUNTABILITY:

         1. The occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech-language pathology & audiology
             departments will follow the hospital infection prevention and control standards and practices,
             and will base departmental policies on these standards.
         2. Personnel will be responsible for knowing the hospital infection prevention and control
              protocols, particularly those related to their job functions.
         3. Employee Health policies must be followed (refer to IC policy section 600).
         4. Staff will complete required review of infection control policy and any self-directed learning
              modules.

PROCEDURE:

General Instruction for Therapists, Assistants, and Aides
         1. Perform proper hand hygiene (refer to IC – 212.0).
         2. Staff members will observe Standard precautions at all times and Transmission-based
              precautions when appropriate (refer to IC – 220.0, and IC – 301.0).
                   a. The department will stock each treatment room with the appropriate personal
                       protective equipment. Staff will inventory and replace items on a monthly basis with the
                       exception of gowns, which are stocked daily.
                   b. Top sheets and pillowcases are changed after each treatment.
         3. If a patient wets, vomits or drools on a sheet, or has diarrhea, sheets are changed and the mat is
              cleaned and disinfected with a hospital approved disinfectant.

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                          HOSPITAL PROTOCOL MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Division of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine Infection Control Practices

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Infection Control Committee
                                   02/01/2000              09/20/2022

                                   REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                            09/20/2022
#: IC – 732.0                      CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 2 of 4
         4. Patients with communicable infections should not be in direct contact with other patients.
              If a patient is suspected of having a communicable disease, they should be treated in an
              isolated room, and a sign posted outside the room indicating the type of isolation the patient
              requires. Environmental Services (EVS) must clean the room prior to reuse.
         5. Visitors will not be routinely permitted in the hydrotherapy area. Parents and/or primary
              caretakers will be permitted in the therapy areas for the purpose of teaching and
              demonstration, and to provide support to their child during procedures.

Rotation of Sterile Supplies
         1. Inventory of sterile supplies will be done on a monthly basis as part of the department
              Environment of Care rounds by the identified staff.
         2. Disposable, one-time use items which are opened will be discarded.
         3. Feeding utensils will be cleaned using a 15-second scrub with manual friction and a disinfectant
              agent. Utensils will then be sanitized in the dishwasher, and temperature strips used to ensure
              adequate heat will be utilized per manufacturer guidelines. Sterile feeding utensils will be
              available for times when clean technique is required.

Cleaning and Maintenance of Treatment Rooms and Gym
         1. Department Responsibilities:
                  a. All mats are cleaned daily with a hospital approved disinfectant.
                  b. Soiled linen is placed in a soiled linen hamper.
                  c. Toys are cleaned in accordance with procedures outlined in IC – 224.0 Toy Cleaning and
                     Acceptance. Clean toys are then stored in cupboards or cabinets.
                  d. Counters are wiped once a shift, or whenever visibly soiled, with a hospital-approved
                      disinfectant.
         2. Toys:
                  a. Toys used in the Department will be made of plastic or a non-porous material. To the
                      extent possible, cloth and stuffed toys, or toys with electronics that may not be safely
                      cleaned will not be used.
                      1. Any equipment/materials that do have porous surfaces will be sprayed with hospital-
                      approved disinfectant spray and allowed to air dry.
                  b. All toys that have been mouthed or may have been mouthed must be cleaned with a
                      hospital approved disinfectant then rinsed with water and dried after patient's contact.

         3. The splint pan is emptied of water at the end of each day, wiped with hospital-approved
            disinfectant and allowed to air dry.

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                           HOSPITAL PROTOCOL MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Division of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine Infection Control Practices

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Infection Control Committee
                                    02/01/2000              09/20/2022

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             09/20/2022
#: IC – 732.0                       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 3 of 4
         4. The splinting equipment is covered when not in immediate use and turned off when not in use.
             The equipment is appropriately cleaned and maintained per manufacturer guidelines.
         5. Environmental Services Responsibilities:
                   a. Laundry hampers are emptied at least once a shift.
                   b. Floors and sinks are cleaned daily in the treatment rooms
Cleaning and Maintenance of Hydrotherapy Room
         1. Whirlpools and Tanks
                   a. Whirlpool tanks with their agitator will be drained and cleaned between each patient use
                      with an approved detergent/disinfectant in accordance with manufacturer
                      recommendations.
         2. Walking Tank
                   a. Identified staff will drain the tank weekly.
                   b. EVS will then scrub tank.
                   c. In the event the walking tank is compromised by bodily fluids, the tank will be drained
                     and EVS will be contacted to clean the tank prior to refilling.
                   d. Identified staff will check pH levels of water daily, log the information, and add chlorine
                     as indicated per guidelines.

Patient Selection for Hydrotherapy Room(s) and Walking Tank
         1. Patients whose suture sites are clean and dry and without evidence of infection will have the
              area dressed with a small sterile dressing covered with waterproof tape. This dressing will be
              applied immediately prior to treatment and removed immediately after.
         2. Patients with the following conditions will not be allowed in the walking tank:
                   a. Patients with open or infected skin lesions, or open or infected suture sites
                   b. Patients who are incontinent.
                   c. Patients requiring isolation for multidrug resistant organisms
                   d. Patients with airborne isolation precautions
         3. Patients who have been exposed to a communicable disease may receive treatment provided
              they are asymptomatic and following any additional pandemic-related guidelines. Patients
              with active respiratory illness may be treated at the physician's discretion in consultation with
              Infection Prevention and Control. These patients should be scheduled after all uninfected
              patients have left the room.
         4. Patients who have had lice and have been treated and completed the required isolation time
              may be allowed in the walking tank.

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                           HOSPITAL PROTOCOL MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Division of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine Infection Control Practices

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Infection Control Committee
                                    02/01/2000              09/20/2022

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             09/20/2022
#: IC – 732.0                       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 4 of 4
         5. Patients positive for bloodborne pathogens may be allowed in the walking tank. If any
              bleeding is noted during therapy the tank must be drained and cleaned before use on the next
              patient.

Care of the Isolated Patient in Inpatient areas
         1. Isolated patients are only seen for treatment in the therapy rooms in Inpatient Rehabilitation
              Unit, and/or in the Inpatient Audiology hearing booth with case-specific consultation with
              Infection Prevention and Control, as indicated.
         2. Therapists will review the posted signage prior to entering the room of an inpatient who is
              isolated or has specific precautions and will follow hospital policy regarding use of personal
              protective equipment.
         3. Toys/equipment that are used in the treatment of isolated patients must be cleaned prior to
              taking them into a patient's room. After the treatment and before leaving the room,
              toys/equipment must be cleaned and disinfected per CHLA Policy IC – 224.0 Toy Cleaning
              and Acceptance.
         4. Electronic equipment will be cleaned with a hospital approved disinfectant prior to removing
              from the patient's room. Screens must be wiped with a soft damp cloth after the disinfectant
              contact time is observed to remove excess disinfectant from the screen. This prevents damage
              and deterioration of the screen. Reference CHLA Policy IC 716 Cleaning and Disinfection for
              additional information.
         5. When treating a patient in Protective Isolation or Mask Isolation, all objects must be thoroughly
              cleaned and disinfected with a hospital approved disinfectant before being taken into the room.

REFERENCES:
     1. APIC Text of Infection Control of Epidemiology. Chapter 66: Rehabilitation Services, 2014.
     2. CHLA Policies
              a. IC – 212.0 Hand Hygiene
              b. IC – 220.0 Standard Precautions
              c. IC - 224.0 Toy Cleaning and Acceptance
              d. IC - 301.0 Isolation Precautions.
              e. IC - 716.0 Cleaning and Disinfection

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Infection Prevention and Control

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.