                                  IC – 312.1 Appendix A:
       Isolation and Environmental Control for Patients with Scabies

Typical Scabies

1.       Place patients with typical scabies in contact isolation during the
         treatment period, 24 hours after application of 5% permethrin cream or 24
         hours after last application of scabicide requiring more than one
         application.

2.       HCWs must wear gloves and a long-sleeved gown for hands-on contact
         and handling patients items, including linen. Perform hand hygiene
         according to the WHO 5 Moments of Hand Hygiene

3.       Bag and send home all personal clothes and items. Provide parents
         instructions on washing or cleaning these items (same as for lice).

4.       Initiate daily change of all bed linens, towels and clothes.

5.       Disinfect multiple patient-use items (i.e.: walking belts, stethoscopes,
         blood pressure cuffs, wheelchairs) before using on other patients. Discard
         all creams, lotions or ointments used prior to effective treatment.

6.       Routine disinfection procedures for patient room are adequate.

7.       Symptomatic employees should be allowed back to work the morning
         following overnight treatment with 5% permethrin cream. Disposable
         gloves should be worn 2-3 days by symptomatic staff who must provide
         extensive hands-on care to their patients.

Crusted Scabies and Atypical Scabies

Atypical scabies require additional precautions. These measures must remain in
effect until skin scrapings are negative on 3 consecutive occasions and a
dermatologist or other qualified consultant determines the patient is no longer
infectious.

1.       Assign patient to a private room. Restrict visitors until treatment regimen
         completed; alternatively, required visitors to gown and glove as required
         for contact isolation precautions. If resources permit, cohort employees to
         care for this patient only (no other direct care responsibilities) until
         effective treatment is completed.

   *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures
 Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this
    policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
 2.       HCWs must wear gloves and a long-sleeved gown with the wrist area
          covered to attend to patient needs, for housekeeping duties, and handling
          of laundry. Remove before leaving the room. Perform hand hygiene.

 3.       Upholstered furniture containing any cloth fabric should be removed
          from the room and, if necessary, replaced with plastic or vinyl furniture.
          Mattresses must be covered with plastic or vinyl.

 4.       The room should be terminally cleaned upon discharge or upon transfer
          of the patient from the room.

 Directions for Scabies Treatment or Prophylaxis

 Clothing, towels, and bed linen that have been used within the last four days
 should be machine washed and dried using the hot cycle (240 degrees F).
 Articles that cannot be washed can be dry cleaned or tied in a plastic bag for a
 week. .

1. Scabicides

          a.       While 5% permethrin cream (Elimite®) is currently considered the
                   drug of choice, other scabicide medications are available.
          b.       10% crotamiton cream or lotion (Eurax®) can be used on young
                   children. It should be applied for 2-5 days and removed by bathing
                   48 hours after last application. The success rate of a full five-day
                   course is usually 60%.
          c.       Ivermectin (Mectizan®) is an oral antiparasite that is primary used
                   for cases that do not respond to topical therapy and is administered
                   using two oral doses (200 μg/kg) given 10 days apart.

 Directions for the use of Elimite®

 1.       Take a bath, soaping the body completely, rinse well, and a then dry
          thoroughly. Allow your body to cool.
 2.       Massage Elimite® into the skin from the chin to the soles of the feet.
          Scabies rarely infests the scalp of adults, although the hairline, neck,
          temple, and forehead may be infested in infants and geriatric patients.
          Pay particular attention to skin folds and creases. Avoid contact with the
          eyes. Reapply if washed off following use of the toilet, hand washing, etc.

 3.       Put on clean clothing. Use freshly laundered bed linens and towels.

    *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures
  Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this
     policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
4.       Leave cream on for at least 8 hours but no more than 14 hours, than take a
         warm
         shower or bath, soaping the body completely, rinsing and drying well.

5.       Put on clean clothing. Relaunder towels and bed linens used during
  treatment.

6.       Itching may continue for days or weeks.

7.       A single treatment is generally adequate.

CAUTION

1.         If pregnant or a nursing mother, consult your private physician.

2.        Elimite® is approved for use in children two months of age and older.

   *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures
 Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this
    policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.