                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Scabies Infestation and Exposure, Management

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    06/01/1998             04/26/2021              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 312.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 1 of 4
PURPOSE:
     Scabies is an ectoparasitic infestation of the skin caused by the human itch mite, Sarcoptes scabiei var.
     hominis. Secondary bacterial skin infection is a common complication of scabies infestation that, in
     elderly or immunocompromised individuals, can lead to sepsis and even death (refer to Attachment A
     and B for fact sheet)

     A number of factors influence the extent of scabies transmission within a facility, including the mite
     load and the required level of care of the source case, as well as the duration of the exposure period.
     Each scabies outbreak is unique and requires an individualized approach.                                   The purpose of the
     following policy is to prevent transmission of scabies, define exposure, and establish guidelines for
     patient placement and management.

DEFINITIONS:
     Typical Scabies
     Scabies infestation occurs when the adult female Sarcoptes scabies enters and burrows under the upper
     layers of the skin. The eggs are laid in the tunnels created by the burrowing mites. A papular rash
     with or without burrows occurs following an asymptomatic period of 4-6 weeks; areas of the body
     commonly involved are wrists, finger webs, antecubital fossae, anterior axillary folds, breasts,
     waistline, lower abdomen, genitals, and buttocks. In infants and young children, infestation involves
     the head, neck, palms and soles, areas usually spared in older individuals.

     Itching is intense, especially at night, but complications are limited to lesions secondarily infected with
     scratching. The risk of acute glomerulonephritis is present of scabies is complicated by beta-hemolytic
     streptococcal infection.             The rash and pruritus result from an immune- mediated delayed
     hypersensitivity reaction to the mite, its eggs, and fecal material.

     Atypical Scabies
     When diagnosis and treatment are delayed, scabies can have an unusual or atypical presentation,
     involving heavy infestation with hundreds to thousands of mites. Atypical clinical presentations are
     more prevalent in institutionalized or debilitated patients, or those who are immunosuppressed from
     underlying disease or drug therapy.

     When extensive hyperkeratotic skin lesions with crusting and scaling develop, the infestation is called
     crusted scabies or hyperkeratotic (formerly Norwegian") scabies. Crusted scabies is highly contagious
     because thousands of mites are imbedded in the thick crusts and easily shed in scales and flakes from
     affected skin.        Crusted scabies is commonly misdiagnosed by dermatologists and primary care
     physicians as psoriasis, drug reaction, or eczema; treatment with topical steroids intensifies the scabies
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Scabies Infestation and Exposure, Management

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    06/01/1998             04/26/2021             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 312.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                 PAGE 2 of 4
     infestation.      Even non-sensitized persons exposed to patients with crusted scabies may develop
     symptoms of typical scabies in as little as a few days.

     General Information
     Transmission of the mite is usually by direct skin-to-skin contact. Procedures such as bathing a
     patient, applying body lotions, back rubs, or any extensive hands-on contact can provide an
     opportunity for mite transmission. Mites may also be transmitted via clothing, bed linen or other
     fomites. Fomites play a minor role in situations where the infestation in the source case is typical
     scabies. The inanimate environment of patients with crusted scabies, however, has been shown to be
     heavily contaminated with infectious mature and immature mites.

     The incubation period in a previously unexposed individual is usually 4-6 weeks. In persons who
     have been sensitized to the mite by a previous infestation, re-exposure may produce symptoms in 48
     hours or less. Following exposure to a course case with crusted scabies involving extremely large
     numbers of mites, the incubation period may be reduced from the usual time of 4-6 weeks to as little
     as a few days.          Since the scabies mite is an ectoparasite, an exposed individual is potentially
     immediately infectious to others, even in the absence of symptoms. Cases are communicable from
     the time of infestation until mites and eggs are destroyed by treatment.
     Definitive diagnosis requires microscopic identification of the mite and/or its eggs or fecal pellets on
     specimens collected by skin scraping, biopsy or other means. A negative skin scraping from a person
     with typical scabies does not conclusively rule out scabies infestation; mites are easily recovered,
     however, in skin scrapings from persons with crusted scabies.

 PROCEDURES:
      Management of Isolated Case
          1. Immediately place any patient in whom scabies infestation is suspected in contact isolation and
               maintain isolation until treatment is completed and/or case is determined to be non-infectious.
          2. Treat with an approved scabicide.
          3. Perform environmental cleaning of case-patient's room/area.

     Scabies Outbreak Management
     Often the first indications of a scabies outbreak are complaints of itching and rash in two or more
     health care workers or patients. Properly performed skin scrapings will almost always be positive in
     persons with crusted scabies but are generally negative in cases of typical scabies, even when
     performed by experienced operators. Nonetheless, it is recommended that efforts be made to confirm
     the diagnosis of scabies in at least one symptomatic individual.

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Scabies Infestation and Exposure, Management

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   06/01/1998              04/26/2021             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 312.0CHLA      CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 3 of 4
         1. Any health care worker with signs and symptoms of scabies should refer to Employee Health
              Services (EHS) and not report to work.
         2. Evaluate patients on affected unit and immediately place patients with suspected scabies in
              contact isolation.
         3. Prepare a line listing of symptomatic patients and health care workers and a separate line
              listing of their contacts. Evaluate contacts for scabies.
         4. Inform EHS and Infection Prevention and Control. Nosocomial scabies outbreaks and single
              cases of atypical (crusted) scabies infestation are reportable to the the LA Department of Public
              Health.
         5. Treat symptomatic patients and health care workers with an approved scabicide, provide
              prophylactic scabicide to all contacts of symptomatic cases, and perform environmental
              cleaning of affected units. Ideally, these steps (treatment, prophylaxis, and environmental
              cleaning) should all be accomplished within the same 24 hour period to prevent re-infestation
              of treated or prophylaxed individuals.
         6. Arrange for follow-up evaluation and prophylactic treatment of discharged patients who were
              contacts to scabies.

    Management of Contacts
    A contact is any personnel who had direct, skin-to-skin contact, (without wearing gloves) with a
    patient infested with scabies. In a heavily infested patient, transfer from undergarments or bed cloth
    may occur if the articles were contaminated by the patient immediately beforehand.

         1. HCW contacts to scabies will be closely monitored for signs/symptoms.
         2. Examine in-house patient contacts (those who had direct contact to a HCW or other patient
              with scabies or who resided on the same ward as a crusted scabies case during the exposure
              period) to determine presence of signs and symptoms of scabies. If symptomatic, manage as a
              case and apply prophylactic scabicide to in-house patient contacts as described.
         3. Notify discharged patient contacts of their potential exposure to scabies. Screen discharged
              patients for symptoms of scabies. Symptomatic patients should receive treatment and their
              family contacts should receive prophylaxis.                          Asymptomatic patients should receive
              prophylactic treatment if 6 weeks or less have elapsed since date of last potential exposure.
         4. Notify facilities to which patient contacts have been transferred of their potential exposure.
         5. Facility-wide (mass) prophylaxis of all patients and at-risk employees (employees involved in
              direct patient care or exposed to patient care environment) should be considered if positive
              scrapings are found in patients or employees assigned to 2 or more areas of the facility where
              no direct link with an infested case-patient or HCW can be established.

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                              HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Scabies Infestation and Exposure, Management

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:          EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    06/01/1998              04/26/2021              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 312.0CHLA       CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                     PAGE 4 of 4
REFERENCES:
     1. LACDPH Acute Communicable Disease Program. Scabies Prevention and Control Guidelines
          Acute and Long-term Care Facilities, 2015.
     2. APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. Chapter 99: Parasites, 2014.

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Accreditation & Licensing, Infection Prevention, and Emergency Management

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.