                                                              HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Outbreak Investigation

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:            EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   02/01/2009                06/28/2022              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
  CHLA                             04/15/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 110.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                      PAGE 1 of 4
PURPOSE:

Outbreaks can occur in healthcare settings, communities, regions, or even on a global scale. Regardless of
scope, investigation of a potential outbreak follows certain epidemiological components. The ultimate
goal of an outbreak investigation is to identify probable contributing factors and to stop or reduce the risk
of future occurrences. The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines to follow when the occurrence
of a nosocomial outbreak is suspected.

PROCEDURES:

 I. Investigation Procedures
     The importance and sequence of the various steps will vary depending on the nature of the problem.
     Steps often occur simultaneously. Elements of an outbreak investigation include the following:
           1. Prepare for the investigation:
                       A. Advise microbiology to save specimens and isolates from antimicrobial susceptibility
                           testing, molecular and non-molecular typing for duration of outbreak
           2. Confirm existence of outbreak:
                       A. Confirm identification of affected patients;
                       B.    Review case characteristics (time, place, person)
                               i. Develop a case definition and use it to estimate the magnitude of the problem.
                                   The case definition may change as new information is gathered.
                             ii. Determine if the cases identified represent a significant increase in infections
                                   over the baseline rate for that unit or work area.
                       C.    Develop a linelist of affected patients with important indicators (depending on the
                              exposure) and case demographics. Infection Prevention & Control team to confer
                              with Medical Director of Infection Prevention & Control to determine whether the
                              cluster of cases represents an outbreak and whether a report to Los Angeles County
                              Health Department and California Department of Public Health is warranted.

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                             HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Outbreak Investigation

                                  ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                  02/01/2009               06/28/2022              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                  REVISED DATE:
  CHLA                            04/15/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 110.0         CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                    PAGE 2 of 4
          3. Communication following the confirmation of outbreak:
                      A. Communicate findings with microbiology managers/staff, CS directors/managers,
                             medical staff, and other department managers as needed.
                      B.    Infection Prevention will be responsible for communication to leadership both in
                             and out of the unit or patient care area on a regular basis during the outbreak
                             investigation. Depending on the nature of the outbreak, communication could
                             include daily calls or weekly emails.
          4. Institute appropriate infection control measures and monitor their effectiveness:
                      A. Measures may include increased attention to hand hygiene, additional use of barrier
                        precautions, and other measures as indicated.
          5. Depending on the severity of the outbreak, activation of the Hospital Incident Command
               System may be warranted.
          6.    Search for additional cases; collect critical data; develop a line listing.
                      A. Encourage immediate reporting of new cases by laboratory, physicians, nursing staff
                            and others as appropriate.
                      B.    Continue to communicate with stakeholders.
          7. Characterize cases of disease by person, place and time.
                      A. Create an epidemiologic curve and calculate rates as needed.
          8. Formulate tentative hypothesis
                      A. Review data collected to summarize common host factors and exposures
                      B.    Based on hypothesis of how the outbreak occurred, modify infection control
                            measures in response.
          9. Communicate findings, summarize investigation, and prepare written reports as needed.

 II. Responsibilities of CHLA Staff and Departments
          1. All CHLA Staff
                      A. Any cluster of infections among patients or staff, observed by physicians, clinical
                            microbiology staff, CS or ancillary personnel, MUST BE REPORTED
                            IMMEDIATELY to Infection Prevention and Control, who will notify the Medical
                            Director of Infection Prevention & Control. The Medical Director will conduct a

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                             HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Outbreak Investigation

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   02/01/2009               06/28/2022             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
  CHLA                             04/15/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 110.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                    PAGE 3 of 4
                            preliminary case review, confirm the diagnosis, evaluate the severity of the problem
                            and advise Infection Prevention and Control personnel as necessary. This applies to
                            any patient care area, inpatient, on-site ambulatory clinic, or offsite Ambulatory
                            Care Center. For team members, clusters should be reported for any department,
                            both clinical and non-clinical.
          2. Infection Prevention and Control
                      A. Follow procedures outlined above.
                      B.    Communicate with leadership in any potentially impacted department to develop
                         control measures and action plans.
                      C. Communicate with Microbiology & Virology, CS directors/managers, and key
                            leadership of the impacted work area.
                      D. Institute temporary control measures and monitor their effectiveness.
          3. Microbiology & Virology Laboratory
                      A. Report the suspected cluster to laboratory leadership and to the Infection Prevention
                            & Control team
                      B.    Immediately store, as appropriate, all isolates of the suspected organism(s);
                      C. Provide laboratory support for the investigation.
                      D. Assist the Infection Prevention and Control staff in compiling pertinent information
          4. Clinical Teams
                      A. Patient care personnel will cooperate with Infection Prevention and Control by
                            saving isolates from patients and suspected sources or vehicles.
                      B.    Comply with control measures instituted.
                      C. Report violations of Infection Prevention and Control policies and breaches in
                            techniques potentially relevant to the investigation.
          5. Employee Health Services
                      A. For any outbreaks involving team members, Employee Health Services will
                         collaborate with the Infection Prevention team on the outbreak investigation.
                      B.    EHS will be responsible for pulling immunization and/or other key employee
                         medical records.

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                                              HOSPITAL POLICY MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Outbreak Investigation

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:           EFFECTIVE DATE:         APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   02/01/2009               06/28/2022              Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
  CHLA                             04/15/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 110.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                     PAGE 4 of 4
                      C.    EHS will also offer prophylaxis or treatment as appropriate to team members.

 III. Communication procedure for community outbreaks with potential impact on CHLA
           1. CHLA Infection Prevention receives notifications from Public Health agencies, including the
               California Health Alert Network (CAHAN) and the Los Angeles Health Alert Network
               (LAHAN) about community or national outbreaks.
           2. Infection Prevention is responsible for communication, as needed, to hospital leadership and
               at-risk patient care areas (inpatient, on-site ambulatory clinics, and/or offsite Ambulatory
               Care Centers) about outbreaks and steps the patient care areas may need to take to screen,
               identify, isolate, and report cases related to the community outbreak.

REFERENCES:
         1. APIC text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. Chapter 4: Outbreak Investigation, 2016.
         2. Prevention and Control of Nosocomial Infections. R.P. Wenzel, Editor, 3rd ed. Chapter 7.
              Williams and Wilkins. 2004

POLICY OWNER:
Director, Infection Prevention and Control

            *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                          Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.