                                            HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                   TITLE: Hand Hygiene

                                   ORIGINAL DATE:        EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                   10/01/2008            04/27/2023             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                   REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                            12/20/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 212.0          CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                               PAGE 1 of 3
PURPOSE:

   The purpose of this policy is to outline indications for and methods of hand hygiene for CHLA team
   members in a patient care setting. Hand hygiene measures are the single most important prevention
   strategy for avoiding Healthcare Acquired Infections (HAI). The hands of team members serve as a
   critical reservoir of infectious agents.

SCOPE:

This policy is applicable to all CHLA team members.

DEFINITIONS:

       Hand hygiene              A general term that applies to hand washing, waterless hand sanitizing,
                                 or surgical hand scrub.
       Handwashing               Washing hands with soap and water
       Waterless hand            Cleaning hands with a waterless hand sanitizer
       sanitizing
       Visibly soiled            Hands showing visible dirt or contaminated with proteinaceous material,
       hands                     blood, or other body fluids

PROCEDURES:

    1. Hand hygiene indications per the World Health Organization’s (WHO) 5 Moments of Hand
         Hygiene
             a. Before touching a patient
             b. Before any clean or aseptic procedure
             c. After body fluid exposure risk
             d. After touching a patient
             e. After touching patient surroundings/environment
    2. Soap and water required:
             a. Before eating
             b. After using the rest room
             c. Any time hands are visibly soiled
             d. Hand hygiene with soap and water, consistent with the WHO 5 moments, is needed while
                      caring for a patient with C. difficile or Norovirus.
                 i.      These patients will be placed in Contact + or Combined-Droplet + Precautions.
           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
          considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                       Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                    TITLE: Hand Hygiene

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    10/01/2008             04/27/2023             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             12/20/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 212.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                PAGE 2 of 3
                  ii.     Alcohol based hand sanitizer may be used for the first moment, prior to applying gloves.
                          For all subsequent moments, soap and water wash is required.
    3. Hand hygiene technique:
             a. Hand washing with soap and water:
                         i.       Wet hands first with running water
                         ii.    Apply a sufficient amount of hospital-approved soap
                         iii.   Rub hands together vigorously for at least twenty (20) seconds. Cover all
                                surfaces of the hands and fingers, paying particular attention to wrists, nail
                                beds, underside of nails and interdigital spaces.
                         iv.    Rinse hands thoroughly under running water
                         v.     Dry thoroughly with a disposable towel. Turn off faucet with paper towel and
                                discard.
             b. Hand sanitizer:
                         i. Apply product to palm of one hand
                         ii. Rub hands together vigorously for at least twenty (20) seconds. Cover all surfaces
                                  of the hands and fingers, paying particular attention to wrists, nail beds,
                                  underside of nails and interdigital spaces.
                         iii.     Let hands completely dry before touching anything or anyone. Follow the
                                  manufacturer’s recommendations regarding the volume of product to use.
    4. Hand hygiene products:
             a. The Infection Control Committee must approve all hand hygiene and hand moisturizing
                       agents. Agents that have not received committee approval may not be used in patient care
                       areas. All hand hygiene agents must be compatible with chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG).
             b. Healthcare workers who report allergies to the hospital approved hand hygiene agents shall be
                       evaluated by Employee Health Services (EHS).
    5. Hand Hygiene guidelines specifically for the NICCU:
             a. All personnel who enter the NICCU should wash their hands with soap and water upon
                       entry to the unit if their hands are visibly soiled paying particular attention to forearms,
                       wrists, nail beds, underside of nails and interdigital spaces.
             b. All personnel who provide patient care to patients in the NICCU should have their arms
                       bare below the elbow (e.g. sleeves rolled up to the elbows) and should remove all
                       rings, bracelets, and watches from their arms. The only exception is flat, unadorned
                       rings.
    6. Hospital-Approved Skin Repair Cream:
             a. To be applied to clean dry hands for preventing skin breakdown and dryness.
             Use approximately twice per shift or as needed
             b. Will not interfere with the antimicrobial properties of chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) or

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                        Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
                                             HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL
                                     TITLE: Hand Hygiene

                                    ORIGINAL DATE:         EFFECTIVE DATE:        APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical
                                    10/01/2008             04/27/2023             Executive Committee, Board of Directors

                                    REVISED DATE:
   CHLA                             12/20/2022
POLICY NUMBER: IC – 212.0           CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL                                                  PAGE 3 of 3
                       latex.
    7. Nails: The following policy statements apply to staff who engage in patient care, food service staff,
         clean patient rooms, handle sterile supplies, or restock supplies in patient rooms:
              a. Natural nail tips should be kept short and no longer than ¼ inch in length.
              b. Nail polish (including gel nail polish) may be worn only as long as it is not chipped. The only
                       exception is food service staff and pharmacists working in sterile compounding
                       pharmacies who may not wear nail polish.
              c. Artificial nails (including overlays, wraps, tips, or attached decorations) are NOT permitted
                         i. Artificial nails have been associated with documented outbreaks of infection due to
                                   Gram-negative bacteria and fungi that persist even after the appropriate use of
                                   hand hygiene cleansing/sanitization procedures.
              d. Compliance with the policy is a Condition of Employment and has been reviewed by
                       Human Resources, and Legal (refer to Policy HR – 049.0 Disciplinary Counseling
                       Procedures).

REFERENCES:
    1. Guideline for Hand Hygiene in Health – Care Settings. Centers for Disease Control. MMWR
         October 25,2002 Vol.51 No. RR-16
    2. APIC text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. Chapter 27: Hand Hygiene, 2021.
    3. Pittett, Didier. Improving Compliance with Hand Hygiene. Prevention and Control of Nosocomial
         Infections Richard Wenzel Ed 4th Edition. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins Chapter 32 524-541
    4. Hedderwick, S., McNeil, S., Lyons, M., & Kauffman, C. (2000). Pathogenic organisms associated
         with artificial fingernails worn by healthcare workers. Infection Control and Hospital
         Epidemiology, 21(8).
    5. McNeil, S., Foster, C., Hedderwick, S., & Kauffman, C. (2001). Effect of hand cleaning with
         antimicrobial soap or alcohol-based gel on microbial colonization of artificial fingernails worn by
         health care workers. Clinical Infections Disease, 32, 367-72.
    6. Moolenaar, R., Crutcher, M., San Joaquin, S., Sewell, L., Hutwagner, L., Carson, L., et al. (2000). A
         prolonged outbreak of pseudomonas aeruginosa in a neonatal intensive care unit: Did staff
         fingernails play a role in disease transmission? Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology, 21(2).
    7. Saiman, L., Lerner, A., Saal, L.., Todd, E., Fracaro, M., Schneider, N., et al. (2002). Banning artificial
         nails from health care settings. American Journal of Infection Control, June, 30(4), 252-254.
    8. Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Healthcare. World Health Organization (WHO), 2009.
    9. CHLA Policy HR – 049.0 Disciplinary Counseling

POLICY OWNER:
Manager, Infection Prevention and Control

           *Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not
           considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and
                                         Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.