PURPOSE:

To reduce the risk of surgical site infections through the implementation of prevention bundles for patients undergoing identified high risk surgical procedures at Children’s Hospital Los Angeles (CHLA).

SCOPE:

This policy is applicable to Neurosurgery, Cardiothoracic, and Orthopedics, Operating Room (OR) , 6 East (6E), Cardiothoracic Intensive Care Unit (CTICU), Cardiovascular Acute (CVA), Emergency Department (ED).

PROCEDURES:

For the surgical procedures identified as high risk by the  Infection Control Committee’s annual risk assessment (i.e. Cardiothoracic, Ventricular Shunt, and Spinal Fusion surgeries), a bundle of prevention practices consisting of the following standard elements shall be followed:
Pre-operative education for patients and their families
Pre-operative bathing and skin prophylaxis protocol
Pre-operative antimicrobial administration protocol
Surgical site skin preparation protocol
Post-operative education with emphasis on reporting signs and symptoms of infection
Changes to bundles must be approved by the Infection Control Committee.
Patients who are admitted prior to the identified high-risk surgeries (See appendices) will receive pre-operative education and Chlorohexidine (CHG) bathing prior to surgery.
Chlorohexidine (CHG) wipes may be used for all patients outside of the NICCU. For NICCU patients, please refer to NICCU’s current recommendations and guidelines.

REFERENCES:
HICPAC Guidelines for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 1999. ICHE Vol.20, No 4, page 247.
APIC text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. Chapter 37: Surgical Site Infection, 2018.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Guideline for the Prevention of Surgical Site Infection, 2017. JAMA, Vol. 152, No. 8, pages 784-791.
2017 HICPAC-CDC Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection: What the infection preventionist needs to know. APIC, Prevention Strategist, 2017.

ATTACHMENTS:
IC – 229.1 Appendix A Cardiac SSI Bundle
IC – 229.2 Appendix B Neuro SSI Bundle
IC – 229.3 Appendix C Ortho Spine SSI Bundle
IC – 229.4 Appendix D High Risk Pre-Operative Bathing Parent Education (English)
IC – 229.5 Appendix E High Risk Pre-Operative Bathing Parent Education (Spanish)

POLICY OWNER:
Manager, Infection Prevention and Control



